                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            THE 2004 GLOBAL LABOR SURVEY:
                         WORKPLACE INSTITUTIONS AND PRACTICES
                                  AROUND THE WORLD

                                                Davin Chor
                                            Richard B. Freeman

                                           Working Paper 11598
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w11598


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       August 2005




The Global Labor Survey (GLS) was conducted under the auspices of the Labor and Worklife Program at
the Harvard Law School (LWP). The data will be made available at www.law.harvard.edu/programs/lwp/.
We thank Elaine Bernard at the LWP for project support; Jean Roth (NBER), Brian Wong and Kah Keng
Tay for technical assistance related to the GLS website; the staff of the Berkman Center for Internet and
Society at the Harvard Law School for hosting the web server; Lorette Baptiste and Alida Castillo for survey
translations; Eric Lee of www.labourstart.org for Internet publicity; and the International Industrial Relations
Organization (IIRO) for sharing their e-mail contact list with us. Alisa Di Caprio assisted in the initial
drafting of the survey questions. Chor also thanks several classmates for their thoughtful comments and
linguistic abilities: Filipe Campante, Quoc-Anh Do, Kate Emans and Han Li. All errors are our own. Last
but certainly not least, we thank all respondents and contacts in labor communities around the world for their
time and patience. Comments can be directed to chor@post.harvard.edu or freeman@nber.org. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

©2005 by Davin Chor and Richard B. Freeman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
The 2004 Global Labor Survey: Workplace Institutions and Practices Around the World
Davin Chor and Richard B. Freeman
NBER Working Paper No. 11598
August 2005
JEL No.

                                            ABSTRACT



The 2004 Global Labor Survey (GLS) is an Internet-based survey that seeks to measure de facto
labor practices in countries around the world, covering issues such as freedom of association, the
regulation of work contracts, employee benefits and the prevalence of collective bargaining. To find
out about de facto practices, the GLS invited labor practitioners, ranging from union officials and
activists to professors of labor law and industrial relations, to report on conditions in their country.
Over 1,500 persons responded, which allowed us to create indices of practices in ten broad areas for
33 countries. The GLS' focus on de facto labor practices contrasts with recent studies of de jure labor
regulations (Botero et al., 2004) and with more limited efforts to measure labor practices as part of
surveys of economic freedom (Fraser Institute) and competitiveness (World Economic Forum).
Although our pool of respondents differs greatly from the conservative foundations and business
leaders who contribute respectively to the Fraser Institute and World Economic Forum reports, the
GLS and the labor market components of the economic freedom and competitiveness measures give
similar pictures of labor practices across countries. This similarity across respondents with different
economic interests and ideological perspectives suggests that they are all reporting on labor market
realities in a relatively unbiased way. As a broad summary statement, the GLS shows that practices
favorable to workers are more prevalent in countries with high levels of income per capita; are
associated with less income inequality; are unrelated to aggregate growth rates; but are modestly
positively associated with unemployment.


Davin Chor                                             Richard B. Freeman
Department of Economics                                NBER
Harvard University                                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138                                    Cambridge, MA 02138-5398
chor@fas.harvard.edu                                   freeman@nber.org
1.       INTRODUCTION

         This paper reports on an Internet-based survey designed to collect information on the

state of workplace practices from labor experts and practitioners around the world -- the 2004

Global Labor Survey (GLS). This effort comes at a time of intense debate over the impact of

labor market institutions on economic outcomes, in which analysts use diverse indices of

practices and/or measures of de jure labor regulations to examine the link between the labor

market and general economic success. On one side of the debate are economists and policy-

makers who attribute some of the economic problems in advanced countries and failures of

developing countries to labor market rigidities that result from government regulations or union

activities. On the other side are economists and policy-makers who argue that the redistributive

and other benefits from regulations and unionism exceed whatever costs they create in the form

of less flexible markets, and that absent institutions, labor markets do not function as perfect

invisible hand mechanisms.

         For the advanced countries, the OECD Jobs Study (1994) argued that substantial labor

market reforms were required to cure the European Union’s economic problems. This view

found support in some empirical studies, but also led to further work that stressed the frailty of

many cross-country empirical studies (see Freeman, 2005, for a review of this debate). For

developing countries, there has been a similar debate. Economists at the World Bank and IMF

have worried that labor regulations impede the success of economic reforms (Forteza and Rama,

2002), and often call for greater labor market flexibility to ease adjustment problems; on the

other hand, those associated with the ILO take the opposite perspective.1 Evidence that Indian

states with more pro-labor regulations have performed less well in output and employment in the


1
  For example, Baccaro et al. (2003) present a research proposal to try to understand and quantify how labor
institutions, such as unions and collective bargaining, fit within the larger fabric of social dialogue in an economy.


                                                                                                                    3
formal manufacturing sector than other Indian states without improving the well-being of

workers raises questions about the value of such regulations within developing countries (Besley

and Burgess, 2004). But evidence from other studies has moved the World Bank, the Inter-

American Development Bank, and the Asian Development Bank, among others, toward nuanced

views about the contribution of labor institutions in development (World Bank, 1995; Inter-

American Development Bank, 2005).

       By developing new and potentially more accurate measures of labor practices, the GLS

should improve the quality of analysis, and help economists and others reach firmer conclusions

about the positive or negative effects of given practices on aggregate economic performance.

       Overview

       The GLS assesses the current state of workplace practices and institutions by surveying

practitioners and labor relations experts who have firsthand knowledge and experience of de

facto practices, as opposed to de jure laws or regulations. The GLS was run as an Internet survey

in 2004 under the auspices of the Labor and Worklife Program (LWP) at the Harvard Law

School. The survey covered many aspects of labor institutions, including employment

regulations, the freedom of association, and employee benefits. The question format used a

seven-point scale that has worked well in surveys of business leaders in the World Economic

Forum’s Global Competitiveness Report (GCR). We invited members of the International

Industrial Relations Organization (IIRO), and subscribers and users of www.labourstart.org, the

news portal dedicated to labor and union affairs, to the GLS website to answer the survey. In

addition, we contacted persons connected with the LWP and the Harvard Trade Union Program

to boost responses in countries where we otherwise had trouble getting sufficient respondents.




                                                                                                  4
       These efforts produced nearly 1,600 completed surveys from 77 states/territories.

However, a disproportionate number of responses came from advanced English-speaking

countries and only a few came from developing countries. If respondents from the same country

had given widely different answers, the small numbers would have created problems for the

GLS, but statistical analyses shows that the responses to questions were relatively similar within

countries, while varying greatly across countries. Thus, only a few respondents per country are

needed to give a consistent picture of labor practices. In this report, we focus on a subset of 33

countries in which we had at least 4 responses. We amalgamated questions to construct

indicators of conditions in the 33 countries under seven headings: General Economic Situation;

Role of World Bank & IMF; Labor Market Conditions; Freedom of Association & Collective

Bargaining; Labor Disputes; Employment Regulations & Working Conditions; and Employee

Benefits. In addition, we report the respondents’ estimates of the percentage of workers in the

informal sector, the percentage of workers in unions, and the percentage covered by a collective

bargaining agreement.

       Over 60% of the respondents to the GLS were union officials or labor activists, most

holding pro-labor positions on issues. This raises questions about potential bias in answers about

labor market practices. To examine whether the orientation of respondents affected their reports,

we analyzed the relationship between respondents’ views on some political and economic issues

and their responses to the GLS questions. We found only a modest relation, implying that any

such effect was small. Still, we calibrated answers to adjust for the attitudes of respondents.

Finally, we compared the calibrated country indices from the GLS with other measures from

surveys whose respondents were likely to have a pro-business or conservative bias: the World

Economic Forum’s Global Competitiveness Report (GCR), which surveys business executives in




                                                                                                     5
their country of operation, and the Fraser Institute’s Economic Freedom of the World (EFW)

study. The respondents on the GLS and those on these surveys gave similar pictures of labor

practices. This reflects well on the validity of all of the studies, suggesting that they tap a

common component of information on labor market conditions rather than hinge on the right-left

or labor-management views of respondents. The only difference we detected among the surveys

was the opposite of what we anticipated: GLS respondents had a modestly more positive view of

the labor friendliness of practices than business executives.

        We also compared the GLS indicators with the de jure measures of labor market

regulation compiled by Botero et al. (2004), and subsequently updated by the World Bank’s

Doing Business database. The correlation between the GLS and the Botero et al. (2004) data is

lower than that between the GLS and the EFW and GCR indicators, presumably reflecting the

divergence between regulations and implementation.

        Finally, we examined how the GLS measures of labor practices varied with the economic

performance of these countries. We found that countries whose practices are more favorable to

workers had relatively higher levels of income per capita and lower Gini coefficients. In

addition, pro-labor practices were unrelated to aggregate growth rates, but were modestly

associated with higher rates of unemployment. These patterns fit reasonably well with the bulk

of studies that relate economic outcomes to measures of labor market institutions.

        In sum, the inaugural GLS demonstrates that it is possible to gather detailed, valid

information on labor practices from labor experts and practitioners in different countries at low

cost through the Internet. The major weakness of the 2004 survey was the shortfall of responses

from many developing countries. This can be attributed to the fact that our e-mail contact lists

included fewer practitioners from developing countries, and to weak Internet connections in




                                                                                                    6
some countries that made it difficult for persons to respond. This suggests the need for expanding

the reach of the GLS, possibly by supplementing the sample through non-Internet-based

surveying with the assistance of country-based organizations, who could invite practitioners and

experts to fill out the surveys as part of a conference or at some venue with broadband or other

fast links. In addition, we would have liked more responses from personnel and labor relations

practitioners in the business community. Despite these shortcomings, the diagnostics and the

crosschecks with other data sources showed that the GLS did indeed capture useful systematic

information for the purposes of cross-country comparisons of labor market institutions.

         Since measures of actual conditions and practices are necessary to monitor the progress

of countries towards meeting difficult-to-measure human development objectives, such as

abolishing child labor, improving safety standards in the workplace (for example, Bohning,

2003), and raising labor standards more broadly, the GLS’s “ask the practitioners and experts”

design offers a distinct way to improve monitoring at the country level.2 The design also offers a

way to obtain objective measures of labor practices in place of subjective categorizations that

could help resolve open issues in the on-going debate about labor institutions.



2.      SURVEY METHODOLOGY

        The GLS begins by asking respondents their country of expertise, years of involvement

with labor affairs in this country, and occupation (options included academic, government

official, union activist, among others).3 The survey then moves to six modules of questions

about economic and labor issues, as summarized in Table 1: General Economic Situation; The


2
  Such assessments of the protection of workers’ rights and dignity can have operational consequences. For example,
the California Public Employees Retirement System (CalPERS) commissioned Verité (2003) to draft a report on
labor conditions around the world, on which it reportedly based some of its emerging market investment decisions.
3
  In addition, 205 respondents identified themselves as Labourstart correspondents on Question 0.04 of the survey.


                                                                                                                 7
Labor Market; Freedom of Association & Collective Bargaining; Labor Disputes; Employment

Regulations & Working Conditions; and Employee Benefits. Several of the question categories

and some questions were adapted from the GCR or from Botero et al. (2004) to facilitate

comparisons. The last module asks respondents about their political and policy leanings: whether

they identify themselves as more left-wing or right-wing; their views on government

involvement in economic policy; whether the state or workers should bear most of the

responsibility for ensuring a basic standard of living; and whether international trade agreements

should contain labor clauses. These questions allow us to identify the orientation of respondents

and examine whether that affected their answers. (The GLS questions are reproduced in their

entirety in Appendix Table 1.)

       The survey instrument uses the question design that has worked successfully in the GCR

survey of business executives. Respondents are asked to register their assessments on a scale

from 1 to 7, with the following being a sample question:



 Protection of the right to form a union in your country is
Weak or non-existent               1    2   3    4   5     6   7        Equal to the worlds’ most
                                                                        stringent


Selecting 1:   means you agree completely with the answer on the left-hand side
Selecting 7:   means you agree completely with the answer on the right-hand side

Selecting 2:   means you largely agree with the left-hand side answer
Selecting 3:   means you somewhat agree with the left-hand side answer
Selecting 4:   means your opinion is indifferent between the two answers
Selecting 5:   means you somewhat agree with the right-hand side answer
Selecting 6:   means you largely agree with the right-hand side answer



We designed the GLS questions so that the left side answer (a response of 1) could be broadly

identified with a pro-business set of institutions or workplace conditions, while the right side


                                                                                                    8
answer (a response of 7) corresponded to pro-labor conditions. This question format helped to

minimize the time to complete the survey.4 In addition, three questions asked for quantitative

estimates, for example, on the percentage of workers in the informal sector. The survey

instructions encouraged respondents to skip questions that they were not in a position to answer.

The default answer for all questions was set at “N/A” (for no response).

        Survey Implementation

        The GLS was hosted at: http://gls.law.harvard.edu, with the assistance of the Berkman

Center for Internet and Society at the Harvard Law School. The survey was launched in February

2004 with an announcement on http://www.labourstart.org, an online news service on trade

unionism around the world.5 We also sent e-mail invitations to take the survey to members of the

International Industrial Relations Organization (IIRO) and the European Industrial Relations

Observatory (EIRO).6 Subsequently, we contacted labor activists and academics in specific

countries through the Harvard Law School Labor and Worklife Program. At its launch, the GLS

was available in three languages, English, French and Spanish; a Portuguese version was added

in November 2004.



3.      SUMMARY STATISTICS, DIAGNOSTICS AND CALIBRATION

        The GLS received 1,582 responses by late November 2004, with respondents from 77

states/territories around the world. Table 2 lists these countries and the number of responses from

each. The vast majority of responses were from English-speaking OCED countries (Australia,


4
  For the sample of 33 countries with more than 4 responses, the mean time to complete the survey was
approximately 20 minutes, while the median time was just over 14 minutes. This appears to be a reasonable amount
of time to complete the 82 questions in the survey conscientiously, an important consideration especially for
developing countries where Internet access might be relatively expensive.
5
  Labourstart has over 15,000 subscribers and over 230 volunteer correspondents.
6
  The ILO provided us with the relevant e-mail information for the IIRO, while the contact information for the EIRO
was obtained from: http://www.eiro.eurofound.eu.int/contact.html.


                                                                                                                 9
Canada, the United Kingdom and the United States), but there were also responses from

developing countries such as China (7), India (15), Mexico (7), Peru (14), and South Africa (10).

As noted, the bulk of our analysis concentrates on the 33 states that had 4 or more responses, as

listed at the bottom of Table 2. These 33 states made up 1,514 of the 1,582 responses received.

            Table 3 shows that the typical respondent (for the full sample of 1,582 responses) was a

labor activist or union official with substantial experience in labor affairs.7 Almost two-thirds of

respondents reported that they had more than 10 years of experience monitoring or participating

in labor issues in their country; and an additional 15.6% said that they had between 5-10 years of

experience (Table 3A). In addition, Table 3B shows that labor union officials and activists made

up just over three-fifths (60.8%) of the respondents, followed by academics (18.3%) and

government officials (4.4%). Consistent with this background, most respondents gave pro-labor

and left-oriented assessments on questions about their personal views on economic and political

issues (Table 3C). On a 1 to 7 scale, where 1 was the most conservative and 7 the most left-wing

orientation, scores averaged 5.2 to 6.4, across Questions 7.01 to 7.04.

           Statistical Diagnostics

           For the GLS to provide useful information about differences in labor practices across

countries, responses to survey questions must vary significantly across countries while showing

consistency within countries. As a first test of whether GLS respondents agreed about their

country’s conditions, we calculated the rWG statistic for inter-rater reliability based on James,

Demaree and Wolf (1984). This statistic measures the extent of agreement in the answers among

respondents from the same country compared to a specified null hypothesis. We calculated this




7
    The percentages in Table 3 are similar when the sample is restricted to the 33 countries with at least 4 responses.


                                                                                                                      10
statistic for clusters of questions in our labor market indices separately for each country.

Specifically, for a given module of J questions, the rWG statistic was calculated as:

                                                  J [ 1 - (sx2 / σ N2)]
                                 rWG      ----------------------------------------
                                           J [ 1 - (sx2 / σ N2)] + (sx2 / σ N2)

where sx2 denotes the mean variance of observed responses across the J questions in the module,

and σN2 is the variance of the null distribution against which we are comparing the observed

distribution of responses. For the null, we adopt a discrete uniform distribution, so that σN2 is the

variance we would observe if the respondents had picked their answers randomly by giving each

possible response equal probability.8

        The test statistics reported in Table 4A show a high degree of agreement among

respondents for most countries. The rWG statistic fell below the critical value of 0.7 for only the

handful of countries listed in the rightmost column of the table. The values were lower for

Module 7, which asked for personal views on issues rather than factual matters.9

        Did the GLS respondents agree more or less on labor practices in their country compared

to respondents on the widely used Global Competitiveness Report (GCR), which uses the same

1-to-7 scoring system? To answer this question, we calculated rWG statistics using data on

individual respondents from the 2002 GCR.10 The rWG values ranged from 0.81 to 0.96 for the

GCR “Human Resources” modules, which had nine questions on labor-related issues --

reassuringly in the same ballpark as most of our rWG statistics for the GLS. The high GLS rWG

8
  For the questions on the seven-point scale, this means picking each response with probability 1/7, which gives σN2
= 4. For the three questions that seek percentage estimates, this means picking each of the 5 options (0-20%, 21-
40%,…, 81-100%) with probably 1/5 each; in this case, σN2 = 2. For these quantitative questions, we set J = 1 in the
expression for the rWG statistic.
9
  It should be acknowledged, however, that the agreement statistics were much poorer for the GLS questions that
sought quantitative estimates, namely questions 2.10, 3.01 and 3.08. This suggests that it is not easy to get a good
consensus gauge of these percentages even from labor market insiders.
10
   Andrew Warner made the raw data for the 2002 GCR available to us. There were 97 countries in the GCR sample,
where the response count ranged from 10 (Israel) to 250 (Russia).


                                                                                                                 11
statistics and their similarity to the GCR rWG statistics give us confidence that the GLS accurately

identified country workplace practices and institutions.11

         As a second test diagnostic, we computed the Intra-class Correlation Coefficient (ICC):

                                                 σB2               MSB - MSW
                                    ICC      --------------- = -------------------------
                                             σB2 + σW2          MSB + (k-1)MSW

where σW2 is the within-country variance and σB2 is the between-country variance in responses to

questions. The ICC thus measures the share of total variability accounted for by the between-

country component. Thus, the higher the ICC, the more the variation in individual responses

reflects differences in assessments across countries rather than disagreements among individuals

within country. As the equation shows, the ICC can be re-written in terms of MSB and MSW, the

between-country and within-country mean sum of squares from a standard ANOVA table, and k,

which depends on the mean number of respondents per country (Shrout and Fleiss 1979).12

Based on the ICC, we also computed the following Spearman-Brown (SB) prediction formula:

                                                               k*ICC
                                                 SB      ---------------------
                                                          1 + (k-1)*ICC

which measures the estimated reliability of the country-averaged scores.13

         We calculated the ICC and SB statistics for each individual question. Table 4B gives

summary values of these statistics for each part of the GLS. The ICC values for the first six

modules of the survey ranged between 0.06 and 0.57, with the corresponding SB reliability

statistic ranging between 0.69 and 0.98. By way of comparison, the ICC values for the 2002

GCR questions on “Human Resources” were between 0.22 and 0.52, with the SB reliability

11
   In computing the rWG, we excluded responses that were only partially filled in. We also checked the data to ensure
that no consecutive sets of survey responses were carbon copies of one another.
12
   Here k = (N - Σ i ni2/ N) / (m-1), where N is the total number of individual observations, ni is the number of
observations from country i, and m is the total number of countries in the sample.
13
   See Winer, Brown and Michels (1991). The ICC and SB are computed using the “loneway” function in STATA.


                                                                                                                  12
statistic ranging between 0.94 and 0.98. This contrast shows greater dispersion in the within-

country reliability in the GLS than in the GCR, due in large part to the smaller sample and more

unbalanced observation counts across countries in the GLS. Still, about one half of the GLS

questions yielded ICC values comparable to those from the 2002 GCR (falling between 0.22 and

0.52). Not surprisingly, the ICC and SB statistics of relative variability are low for Module 7 of

the GLS, which asked for personal views rather than facts about labor conditions.

         Calibration for Modal Respondent

         As noted, the sample of respondents to the GLS consists disproportionately of union

officials and activists, and of persons with a left orientation. If respondents with particular

attributes gave strikingly different answers to questions for the same country, the particularities

of respondents could be biasing the patterns among countries. To control for this possibility, we

ran a multivariate regression linking responses on the GLS to the characteristics and attitudes of

respondents for the 33 countries with at least 4 respondents:

         yci (Q) = Dcountryc + Doccupation + Dexperience + Dlabourstart + …

                           ... + β1 × q701 + β2 × q702 + β3 × q703 + β4 × q704 + υc + εci

Here, yci (Q) is the response given by respondent i from country c for question Q; the D variables

are dummy variables for countries, Dcountryc; occupation, Doccupation;14 years of experience

with labor affairs, Dexperience;15 and whether the respondent is a Labourstart correspondent,

Dlabourstart.16 The measures of left-right orientation are responses on q701 through q704,

which asked for individual’s personal positions on political and economic issues. The regressions

were estimated to allow for standard errors clustered by country (υc).

14
   The dummies are for the eight occupational categories listed in Question 0.03, plus an additional category for no
response. All responses “Other” were lumped as one category.
15
   The dummies are for: Less than 1 year of experience; 1 to 5 years of experience; 5-10 years of experience; more
than 10 years of experience; plus a category for “NA” (no response).
16
   This included an additional dummy for the category “NA” (no response).


                                                                                                                   13
         To correct for differences in respondents’ attitudes, we used the above regressions to

estimate for each question the response that would have been given by a hypothetical modal

respondent with neutral political and economic views. The modal profile corresponded to that of

a “Labor union official” with “More than 10 years” of experience, who was not a Labourstart

correspondent. Neutral views corresponded to those of someone who gave the midpoint answer

(4 on the seven-point scale) for each of the Module 7 questions. These calculations gave us

estimated scores (as well as standard errors) for each question, which we then averaged by

module to obtain country aggregates. In this manner, we constructed 10 summary indices of

labor conditions. Table 5 gives these indices by country, sorted in descending order of score.17

We mark the indices for which the rWG statistic was smaller than the critical value of 0.7 in Table

4A by an asterisk to indicate that the score was based on a low level of inter-rater agreement.

         How did these calibrated indices compare with a simpler uncalibrated within-country

mean of respondent scores? Looking across the 75 questions in Modules 1-6 of the GLS, the

minimum cross-country correlation between the calibrated and uncalibrated scores was 0.840,

while the mean correlation was a very high 0.963. This high correlation implies that the ordering

of country scores is largely preserved under different ways of aggregating the raw survey data.18

The rest of this paper uses the indices calibrated to account for respondent characteristics.

         Effect of Respondent Orientation

         We assess in Table 6 how much the political orientation and attitudes of individual

respondents affected the overall assessments of labor practices. This table reports the results



17
  Values for each individual question are available upon request.
18
  The country rankings for all the labor market indicators were virtually identical if the calibration regressions were
run by weighting observation yci (Q) by the number of responses from country c. For the 75 questions in Modules 1-
6 of the GLS, the minimum cross-country correlation between the scores calibrated with weights and that calibrated
without weights was 0.993, while the mean correlation was 0.998. Tables based on the weighted calibration
procedure or on the uncalibrated procedure are available upon request.


                                                                                                                    14
from regressions of our calibrated indices on various measures of individual respondent

characteristics, including the questions on political attitudes. The regression coefficients on the

Module 7 variables show little relation to how the respondents reported conditions: Only 3 of

these 28 regression coefficients are significant at a 10% level, while the vast majority of the

occupational coefficients are also statistically insignificant. In short, the impact of personal

biases on the labor market indicators is modest at best, providing further reassurance of the

reasonably high level of objectivity in the assessments contained in the GLS. It is because

responses are only modestly affected by attitudes that the calibrated indices and the un-calibrated

indices are so highly correlated.



4.     THE GLS LABOR MARKET INDICES

       The GLS indices in Table 5 capture several familiar patterns of cross-country differences

in labor conditions, for instance between the United States and advanced Europe.

       General Economic Situation: This index averaged the responses for questions 1.01-1.09

(Module 1a) regarding the level of the economy and the level of disparities in living standards

within a country. The scores from developed countries were higher than those reported from

developing countries, implying better economic performance and lower inequality. Still, the

United States had a score of 3.762 that placed it in the lower half of countries, reflecting its high

level of inequality among advanced countries. By contrast, Japan ranked 9th despite the

prolonged recession that it experienced, which reflects the fact that the provision of public

services such as education and healthcare remain widely accessible.

       Role of World Bank and IMF: This measure took the mean response for questions 1.10-

1.12 (Module 1b) about the extent of World Bank and IMF influence on domestic economic




                                                                                                      15
policy. Overall, the low scores indicate that respondents assessed the World Bank and the IMF to

have favored the interests of business over that of workers. Several countries that received IMF

rescue packages during recent financial crises, in particular Brazil, Mexico and South Korea,

reported relatively high scores, consistent with the perception that these international

organizations wield a large influence on domestic policies.

       Labor Market Conditions: This index was the mean response for all the Module 2

questions, except question 2.10. The issues captured included how wages are set, the frequency

of wage arrears, and the incidence of child labor and gender discrimination (both key targets of

the ILO’s fundamental conventions). Table 5 indicates that developed countries scored high on

this index, with the United States being the major exception. Developing countries, including

India and China, ranked among the bottom 10 countries.

       Freedom of Association & Collective Bargaining: This indicator averaged the responses

from Module 3, excluding questions 3.01 and 3.08. Developing countries ranked low on labor

union strength, while the Western European countries had much higher rankings. The United

States and the United Kingdom had the lowest scores from the developed countries, ranking 20th

and 22nd respectively.

       Labor Disputes: This index averaged responses for Module 4 of the GLS. According to

the index, the frequency of labor unrest and employer-employee conflict was lowest in countries

such as Turkey, Singapore, and the United States. In contrast, France, Belgium and Italy had the

highest scores, reflecting the strength of labor movements in these Western Europe countries.

       Employment Regulations & Working Conditions: This index gave the average of

responses to Module 5, which deals with the extent of regulation of the labor market, such as the

ease of hiring and firing. Low scores indicate a higher propensity towards employer discretion,




                                                                                                  16
whereas higher scores indicate a greater use of labor regulations or collective bargaining

agreements to determine the terms of work contracts. The United States ranked 2nd lowest among

all countries, with a score virtually indistinguishable from China; this is indicative of the large

scope and bargaining power of employers in the negotiation of contract terms with workers. The

United Kingdom placed 10th from the bottom. Labor regulation and collective bargaining were

most influential in Western Europe, particularly in Scandinavian countries.

        Employee Benefits: This index was the mean of responses in Module 6, covering pension

schemes, sickness benefits and unemployment insurance. The trends and ranking mirrored

closely those in the “Employment Regulations & Working Conditions” index: Relatively low

levels of benefits in developing countries, and higher levels in developed countries. Once again,

the United States and the United Kingdom had significantly lower benefit levels compared to the

rest of the developed world.

        Quantitative Estimates

        The GLS asked respondents to estimate the percentage of workers in the informal sector;

the percentage who are labor union members; and the percentage covered by a collective

bargaining agreement. These were coded on a 1-to-5 scale, with 1 representing 0-20% and 5

representing 80-100%. There was greater variability in the responses to these questions than in

many other questions, but even so, the estimates from the GLS were highly correlated with the

percentage unionized, as well as the percentage employment in the unofficial economy reported

in Botero et al. (2004), as illustrated in Figure 1.

        % of workers in informal sector (Question 2.10): Developed countries yielded low

estimates for this index, ranging between a response of 1 and 2. The informal sector was large in

developing countries, where the Philippines, Peru and India had scores near 4.




                                                                                                      17
       % of workers who are labor union members (Question 3.01): Unionization rates were

higher among the developed countries, with Denmark and Sweden approaching a score of 5.

Several developing countries reported moderate levels of unionization, including Brazil, Mexico,

Sri Lanka and India. The GLS accurately captured the low rates of union membership in France

and the United States.

       % of labor force covered by a collective bargaining agreement (Question 3.08): The

trends in collective bargaining coverage mirrored closely that of the labor union membership

estimates. The main exceptions were several European countries, such as France, Italy and the

Netherlands, where such agreements extend collective bargaining to workers broadly in the

economy, so that the coverage rates exceed union membership rates.

       Do Workplace Institutions Form Systems?

       To see whether workplace institutions and practices come together as a bundle, we

calculated a correlation matrix for all of the summary indices (Table 7). The correlation matrix

suggests that workplace institutions broadly fit together into labor relations systems that can be

classified as more or less favorable to workers. For example, looking at the third row, economies

with more pro-worker “Labor Market Conditions” in terms of wage-setting institutions also tend

to have greater “Freedom of Association & Collective Bargaining” and higher levels of

“Employee Benefits”. They also have a low “% informal sector”, as well as high unionization

and collective bargaining coverage rates.

       The rightmost column in the table on “Personal Views & Positions” shows how the mean

across responses to the Module 7 questions are correlated with the other measures. Consistent

with the regression coefficients in Table 6, this indicator is only weakly correlated with the labor




                                                                                                   18
market indices. There is some evidence suggesting that countries where respondents were more

leftwing tended to give lower marks in assessing the impact of the IMF & World Bank.

       In sum, the indices show that developed countries have a more pro-worker orientation,

with more regulation of markets and greater union activity. The exceptions to this pattern are the

United States, and to a lesser extent the United Kingdom, where labor unions are systematically

weaker and labor markets are subject to less regulation than in the rest of the OECD.



5.     COMPARISON WITH OTHER MEASURES

       To see how the cross-country variation in labor market institutions and regulations in the

GLS compares to the picture from other sources, we have gathered measures of labor conditions

from: the Global Competitiveness Report survey of business executives; the Botero et al. (2004)

measures on formal labor regulations; and the Fraser Institute’s Economic Freedom around the

World index. We proceed to discuss the correlation between these and the GLS measures.

       Global Competitiveness Report (GCR)

       The World Economic Forum’s Global Competitiveness Report offers the best comparison

with the GLS, since we adopted the same seven-point scale and question format from the GCR,

while adapting some questions for the GLS to facilitate direct comparisons. The GCR asks

managers about economic conditions in their country of operation, which should produce

responses favorable to employer interests, in contrast to the pro-labor orientation of the GLS

sample. Agreement between the two surveys on factual issues would thus go a long way towards

validating both surveys.




                                                                                                 19
        For our analysis, we matched 14 GLS questions with their counterparts in the 2004 GCR,

as listed in Appendix Table 2.19 The correlation between the GCR and GLS country scores for

these questions was statistically significant at the 1% level for all but two pairs, and even on

those questions, there was a high correlation with closely related questions.20 The correlation

coefficient ranged from a low of 0.44 to a high of 0.93 for the 12 significantly correlated pairs.

        Similar results were obtained when we matched the GLS to the 2002 GCR.21 Excluding

the questions pertaining to the World Bank and IMF, there were 11 question pairs, all of which

were significantly correlated at least at the 5% level. For the questions assessing the role of the

World Bank and IMF, the correlation with the corresponding GLS questions was generally

insignificant, except for one match: Greater World Bank and IMF influence on the domestic

economy (GLS Question 1.10) was associated with lower ratings on the IMF’s effectiveness in

promoting high levels of employment and real income (2002 GCR Question 12.02B). On the

whole, there is greater divergence between the business community and labor practitioners in

their assessments on the impact of the World Bank and IMF than in their assessments of

workplace practices.



        The Regulation of Labor: Botero et al. (2004) and the Doing Business Database

        We also compared the GLS measures with data on the regulation of labor from Botero et

al. (2004), which is based on de jure government regulations and legal provisions, benchmarked


19
   The GCR scores for each question are based on a simple mean of the responses for a country. The GCR has a
reverse coding of answering options, so that 7 is the most “pro-business” response and 1 the most “pro-labor”. For
consistency with the GLS, we transformed the GCR data by taking 8 minus the GCR scores.
20
   The insignificant correlations were for: GLS question 5.01 on the determination of contract terms for hiring full-
time workers and GCR question 7.02 on the hiring and firing of workers; and GLS question 2.14 on gender
discrimination and GCR question 7.17 on how wages for women compare to that for men for similar work. But
GCR question 7.02 displays a highly significant correlation with GLS question 5.10 on the ease of firing, while
GCR question 7.16 on employment opportunities for women was significantly correlated with GLS question 2.14.
21
   The number of countries in the sample drops to 32 with the 2002 GCR, which does not include Cyprus.


                                                                                                                 20
to 1997. The regulation data was aggregated into indices on: Employment laws, Collective

relations laws, and Social security laws, with higher values indicating a greater extent of labor

regulation.22 Again, we have natural comparisons because we designed the GLS to cover many

of the same labor institutions.23

        The top part of Table 8 records the correlation between the ten GLS indices and the

Botero et al. (2004) labor regulation measures. The Employment laws index and the Social

security laws index are significantly correlated with the GLS indices on workplace conditions

from Modules 2-6 (“Labor Market Conditions” through “Employee Benefits”). In addition, the

Social security laws index was highly correlated with the “General Economic Situation” index

and negatively correlated with the “% informal sector” variable. As for the Collective relations

laws index, this had a significant correlation with the “Labor Disputes” module which covers the

same set of issues, but was in general uncorrelated with most of the other GLS variables.

        Although the GLS indices were consistent with the rankings by Botero et al. (2004), the

correlations between the GLS and Botero et al. are much smaller than the correlations between

the GLS and the GCR. We attribute part of this to the fact that Botero et al. measure de jure labor

regulations, which will inevitably diverge from de facto workplace practices.24 In addition, there




22
   Each index comes from component indices, most coded on a 0-1 scale. For example, one of the sub-indices under
the Collective relations index concerns the “Right to Unionization”. This was coded 1 if the right to form a labor
union was in the constitution, and coded 0 if the constitution did not refer to unions. Values of 0.33 or 0.67 were
assigned for intermediate cases (for example, the constitution mentions unions, but not the right to form one.)
23
   Module 4 of the GLS on “Labor Disputes” parallels the Collective relations index, Module 5 on “Employment
Regulations & Working Conditions” parallels the component indices of their Employment laws index; Module 6 on
“Employee Benefits” mirrors their Social security laws index.
24
   This de jure-de facto distinction is illustrated by the range of correlations found between some indices from
Botero et al. and questions in the GLS. For example, the correlation between the “Right to Unionization” variable
from Botero et al. and GLS question 3.03 on the protection of the right to form a union was a mere 0.02. By
contrast, the Botero et al. dummy variable for whether the social security system protected against the risk of
unemployment had a correlation of 0.77 with GLS question 6.06 on the extent to which unemployment benefits
were determined by regulations or collective bargaining as opposed to by employers.


                                                                                                                21
are differences in the component questions that underlie the two measures.25 Table 8 also gives

the correlations between the GLS and Botero et al. estimates of “% informal sector” and “%

labor union” that are graphed in Figure 1. The insignificant correlation between the “% collective

bargaining” index and the “Right to Collective Bargaining” dummy variable from Botero et al.

likely stems once again from the distinction between the de jure constitutional right and the

actual de facto extension of collective bargaining agreements.

        The World Bank’s Doing Business database, set up to update measures of formal

regulation per Botero et al. (2004), offers a further comparison between de jure and de facto

labor practices. The most recent edition of the Doing Business database contains a Rigidity of

Employment Index benchmarked to January 2004, based on laws relating to the hiring and firing

workers, and the rigidity of work hours. The row labeled “Doing Business” in Table 8 shows that

this index was uncorrelated with any GLS measures of workplace conditions, including the GLS

index on “Employment Regulations and Working Conditions”. Again, this is a warning that legal

regulations need not tell what actually happens in work places.

        Economic Freedom of the World (EFW)

        Our third cross-check comes from the index of labor regulation compiled in the 2004

Economic Freedom of the World Report, sponsored by the Fraser Institute, whose assessment of

labor regulations is predicated on a position advocating laissez-faire institutions. The labor

regulation index (Area 5B of the EFW, Gwartney and Lawson, 2004) consisted of five

components: Impact of the minimum wage; Hiring and firing practices; Labor force share with

wages set by centralized bargaining; Unemployment insurance; and Use of conscripts. The first

four components incorporated information from recent editions (2001-2003) of the GCR, but we


25
  For example, the GLS asked (in question 6.03) about the prevalence of private pension programs, an area that is
not covered by Botero et al.


                                                                                                              22
still treated the overall index as a valid assessment of the extent of labor regulation. As shown in

the final row of Table 8, the EFW index was negatively correlated with most of the GLS indices

of workplace conditions, as it should since the EFW codes pro-labor regulation as undesirable.

       In sum, our cross-checks show that most sources are in broad agreement on the

approximate ranking of countries regarding the degree to which their institutions favor labor

versus business interests. The union leaders and activists on the GLS, the business executives on

the GCR, and the conservative analysts for the Fraser Institute’s economic freedom measures are

in broad agreement about actual practices, though they presumably differ greatly in the value

judgments that they attach to the practices.



6.     CORRELATION WITH ECONOMIC OUTCOMES

       Is the GLS ranking of countries by labor practices connected with broad economic

conditions? As a first step towards answering this question, we sorted the 33 countries into

quartiles based on the mean real GDP per capita from 2001-2003, as reported in the World

Development Indicators (WDI). Table 9 shows one dominant fact from this analysis: Countries

that are more developed tend to have more pro-labor workplace institutions and practices. The

mean (and median) scores on “Labor Market Conditions” through “Employee Benefits” (based

on Parts 2-6 of the GLS), as well as “% labor union” and “% collective bargaining” are higher as

we move towards higher income quartiles, although there is some tapering off between the 3rd

and 4th highest quartiles. In addition, richer countries had higher scores on the “General

Economic Situation” index, as well as a smaller “% informal sector”. These patterns are very

robust to an alternative sorting into income brackets, as given by the World Bank’s classification

of Developing, High-income non-OECD and OECD countries.




                                                                                                 23
         This systematic variation of workplace conditions with income levels is further

confirmed by Table10, which displays the results from a series of least-squares regressions of

various economic outcome variables on each GLS index in turn. The bivariate regressions on the

2001-2003 mean level of real GDP per capita point once again to more pro-labor conditions been

associated with higher country income levels.26

         Column 2 of Table 10 examines the relation between the indices of labor institutions and

inequality of incomes, as measured by the Gini coefficients from Deininger and Squire (1996),

restricting the data to points they label as “high quality”. The consistently negative coefficients

on the various labor market indicators, as well as on “% labor union” and “% collective

bargaining” suggest that pro-labor institutions redistribute income towards employees.

         The next column of Table 10 shows that the growth rate of real GDP per capita

(computed as an average over a three-year period, 2000-2003) is unrelated to labor practices.

With regards to the unemployment rate (also taken from the WDI),27 the “Freedom of

Association & Collective Bargaining”, “Labor Disputes” and “Employment Regulations &

Working Conditions” indices had positive coefficients that were significant at the 10% level,

suggesting a moderate correlation between pro-labor institutions and unemployment.28 Finally,

we explored the possible causal links in these relations, using a set of legal origin dummies as

instrumental variables for the GLS indices.29 In the IV estimates labor institutions remained

correlated to GDP per capita and inequality, but not to the growth rate and the unemployment

rate (regressions not shown).



26
   We obtained similar results with a 5-year log average of real GDP per capita as dependent variable.
27
   The unemployment rate for 2001 was used, as it was the most recent year in the WDI for which data was available
for almost all countries in our sample (31 out of 33 countries).
28
   However, these coefficients are not significant if we remove the level of real GDP per capita from the regression.
29
   The instrumental variables were dummies for British, French, German, Scandinavian and socialist legal origin.


                                                                                                                  24
7.     CONCLUSION

       This study has demonstrated the feasibility of asking labor practitioners and experts over

the Internet about actual labor practices in their country. The GLS obtained responses from

nearly 1,600 respondents in a large number of countries. The responses tended to agree on

practices within country while showing considerable cross-country variation. Based on the

survey, we constructed labor market indices for 33 countries and found that our measures

correlated well with the estimates of labor market conditions and regulations from the

comparable GCR and Fraser EFW measures of labor markets around the world. The data

suggests further that workplace conditions that offer workers more safeguards and benefits tend

to be associated with countries with higher levels of income per capita and less inequality, are

unrelated to growth rates, and weakly positively correlated with unemployment rates.

       The major weakness of the 2004 survey was the small sample of respondents from many

developing countries. In part, this was because e-mail lists included only a few practitioners in

those countries, and because weak Internet connections might have made it difficult for them to

respond. This suggests the need for expanding the reach of the survey by obtaining assistance

from country-based organizations to supplement the Internet sample through non-Internet-based

surveying, for example by inviting country practitioners and experts to fill out the surveys as part

of a conference. Translating the survey into more languages and having it available on a widely

used web site rather than as a stand-alone URL might also have increased the responses. In

addition, the survey would have benefited from more responses from personnel and labor

relations practitioners from the business community. Despite these shortcomings, the diagnostics




                                                                                                    25
and the crosschecks with other data sources showed that the GLS captured useful information for

comparing actual labor market practices across countries.




                                                                                            26
REFERENCES


Baccaro, Lucio, Jean-Michel Bonvin, Jean-Pierre Laviec, Patricia O’Donovan, Gilbert Ritschard,
      and Djamel A. Zighed, (2003), “Social Dialogue Regimes: An Investigation in the
      Structural Determinants and Socioeconomic Outcomes of Negotiated Regulation,”
      research proposal.

Besley, Timothy, and Robin Burgess, (2004), “Can Labor Regulation Hinder Economic
       Performance? Evidence from India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118: 91-134.

Bohning, W.R., (2003), “Gaps in Basic Workers’ Rights: Measuring International Adherence To
      and Implementation of the Organization’s Values with Public ILO Data,” ILO
      International Labor Office Working Paper.

Botero, Juan, Simeon Djankov, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei
       Shleifer, (2004), “The Regulation of Labor,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119: 1339-
       1382.

Deininger, Klaus and Lyn Squire, (1996), “A New Data Set Measuring Income Inequality”,
       World Bank Economic Review 10: 565-91.

Forteza, Alvaro, and Martin Rama, (2002), “Labor Market ‘Rigidity’ and the Success of
       Economic Reforms across more than One Hundred Countries,” World Bank, mimeo.

Freeman, Richard B., (2005), “Labour Market Institutions Without Blinders: The Debate over
      Flexibility and Labour Market Performance,” NBER Working Paper No. 11286.

Gwartney, James, and Robert Lawson, (2004), Economic Freedom of the World: 2004 Annual
      Report, Vancouver: The Fraser Institute. Data from: www.freetheworld.com.

James, Lawrence, Robert Demaree, and Gerrit Wolf, (1984), “Estimating Within-Group
      Interrater Reliability With and Without Response Bias,” Journal of Applied Psychology,
      69: 85-98.

Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), (1994), OECD Jobs Study,
       Evidence and Explanations, Part I: Labor Market Trends and Underlying Forces of
       Change. Paris: OECD.

Shrout, P.E., and J.L. Fleiss, (1979), “Intraclass correlations: Uses in Assessing Rater
       Reliability,” Psychological Bulletin, 86: 420-428.

Verité, (2003), “Emerging Markets Research Project: Year-End Report,” prepared for the
       California Public Employees Retirement System (CalPERS).




                                                                                           27
Winer, B.J., D.R. Brown, and K.M. Michels, (1991), Statistical Principles in Experimental
       Design,” 3rd edition. New York: McGraw Hill.

World Bank, various years, World Development Indicators. Washington DC: World Bank.
      Online resource.

World Bank, (1995), World Development Report. Washington, DC: The World Bank.

World Bank, (2005), Doing Business: Benchmarking Business Regulations. Database at:
      http://rru.worldbank.org/DoingBusiness/

World Economic Forum, various years, The Global Competitiveness Report. Geneva: World
      Economic Forum.




                                                                                      28
          TABLE 1: Module Structure of the Global Labor Survey (GLS)


 Number and Name of Module      Issues Covered

1. General Economic Situation   Economic growth; Unemployment and poverty;
                                Influence of IMF and World Bank on country policies.

2. The Labor Market             Wage-setting; Enforcement of minimum wage policies;
                                Wage arrears; Prevalence of child labor; Gender
                                discrimination.

3. Freedom of Association &     Legal and economic position of unions.
   Collective Bargaining

4. Labor Disputes               Nature and frequency of industrial disputes; Institutions
                                for resolving labor conflicts.

5. Employment Regulations &     Effect of regulations and collective bargaining on labor
   Working Conditions           contracts, work hours, hiring and firing decisions.

6. Employee Benefits            Pension schemes; Sickness benefits; Unemployment
                                insurance.

7. Concluding Questions         Respondents’ views on several economic and political
                                issues.




                                                                                            30
                          TABLE 2: Response Counts by Country

 Country              ISO code      Count              Country                 ISO code   Count

 Argentina               ARG           3               Latvia                    LVA          2
 Australia               AUS         203               Lebanon                   LBN          1
 Austria                 AUT          4                Libya                     LBY          1
 Barbados                BRB           3               Malaysia                  MYS          5
 Belgium                 BEL           9               Mexico                    MEX          7
 Benin                   BEN          1                Nepal                     NPL          1
 Bhutan                  BTN          1                Netherlands               NLD         14
 Botswana                BWA          1                New Zealand               NZL         40
 Brazil                  BRA          32               Nigeria                   NGA          3
 Bulgaria                BGR           1               Norway                    NOR         32
 Burkina Faso            BFA          1                Oman                      OMN          1
 Canada                  CAN         457               Pakistan                  PAK          2
 Cape Verde              CPV           1               Palestinian Territory     PSE          1
 Chile                   CHL          3                Peru                      PER         14
 China                   CHN           7               Philippines               PHL          8
 Cyprus                  CYP          11               Portugal                  PRT          2
 Czech Republic          CZE          1                Puerto Rico                PRI         1
 Denmark                 DNK           8               Romania                   ROU          2
 Djibouti                 DJI          1               Rwanda                    RWA          2
 Dominican Republic      DOM           1               Sierra Leone              SLE          1
 Estonia                 EST           1               Singapore                 SGP          5
 Fiji                     FJI          1               Slovenia                  SVN          1
 Finland                  FIN         4                South Africa              ZAF         10
 France                  FRA          7                Spain                     ESP          3
 Germany                 DEU          11               Sri Lanka                 LKA          5
 Ghana                   GHA           1               Sweden                    SWE        13
 Greece                  GRC          3                Switzerland               CHE          4
 Haiti                    HTI          1               Taiwan                    TWN          8
 Hong Kong               HKG           3               Thailand                  THA          2
 Hungary                 HUN           2               Trinidad & Tobago         TTO          1
 India                   IND          15               Turkey                    TUR          4
 Indonesia               IDN           3               United Kingdom            GBR        139
 Ireland                  IRL         8                United States             USA        400
 Israel                  ISR          13               United States Minor
                                                                                 UMI         1
 Italy                    ITA          6               Outlying Islands
 Jamaica                 JAM          1                Venezuela                 VEN         2
 Japan                   JPN           6               Vietnam                   YNM         1
 Kenya                   KEN           1               Yugoslavia                YUG         1
 Korea, South            KOR           5               Zimbabwe                  ZWE         1



33 countries / territories with at least 4 respondents: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada,
China, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Korea (South),
Malaysia, Mexico, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Peru, the Philippines, Singapore, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Taiwan, Turkey, the United Kingdom, the United States.




                                                                                                   31
                      TABLE 3: Summary of Respondent Characteristics
Sample: All countries


Panel A: Years of experience in country’s labor affairs (Question 0.02)

                                              Counts                     Percent (%)

 Less than 1 year                                44                           2.8%
 1 to 5 years                                   247                           15.6%
 5 to 10 years                                  247                           15.6%
 More than 10 years                             1039                          65.7%

 Total                                          1582                          99.7%

Notes: Total does not sum to 100% because of 5 observations left blank by respondents. Percentages are similar
when restricted to the 33 countries with 4 or more respondents.



Panel B: Background of survey respondents (Question 0.03)

                                                  Counts                    Percent (%)

 Academic                                             290                       18.3%
 Corporate official                                   35                         2.2%
 Government official                                  69                         4.4%
 Independent lawyer / arbitrator                      28                         1.8%
 Journalist / Reporter                                20                         1.3%
 Labor activist                                       465                       29.4%
 Labor union official                                 496                       31.4%
 Other                                                135                        8.5%

 Total                                             1538                         97.2%

Notes: Total does not sum to 100% because of 44 observations left blank by respondents. Percentages are similar
when restricted to the 33 countries with 4 or more respondents.




                                                                                                                  32
              TABLE 3 (continued): Summary of Respondent Characteristics

Sample: All countries


Panel C: Responses on Personal Views and Positions

   Survey question                                       N            Mean           Std Dev

   7.01: Political stance (right-wing                  1539           5.650            1.264
         versus left-wing)

   7.02: Proper role of government in                  1552           6.039            1.218
         economic policy-making

   7.03: Should workers or employers/the               1550           5.165            1.868
         state bear most responsibility for
         employment and living standards?

   7.04: Need for global labor standards in            1558           6.415            1.339
         international trade agreements


Notes: Responses were on a scale of 1 to 7, with 1 corresponding to a position most favorable towards private
businesses and employers, and 7 corresponding to a position most favorably disposed towards workers’ interests.




                                                                                                                  33
      TABLE 4: Within-Country Reliability and Agreement of Survey Responses

Sample: Countries with at least 4 respondents (33 countries, unless otherwise stated)

Panel A: James, Demaree and Wolf rWG Statistic

Agreement: rWG                             Mean           Min           Max               rWG < 0.7

Module 1a, qn 1.01-1.09                     0.93          0.65           0.98                Taiwan
Module 1b, qn 1.10-1.12                     0.85          0.64           0.99        Denmark ; Norway
Module 2 (excl. qn 2.10)                    0.92          0.36           0.98                Taiwan
Module 3 (excl. qn 3.01, 3.08)              0.91          0.68           0.99                China
Module 4                                    0.92          0.76           0.97                 ---
Module 5                                    0.90          0.30           0.98                Taiwan
Module 6                                    0.88          0.41           0.98                Taiwan
Module 7                                    0.84          0.65           0.97           Brazil ; India

Notes: The multiple-item scale rWG statistic was computed; this captures the extent of agreement among the
respondents from each country for each module of questions. The critical value of 0.7 for this statistic is regarded as
a minimum threshold level of inter-respondent agreement. The sample of countries shrinks to 32 in the row for
questions 1.10-1.12 only because of omissions in the responses for Finland. The min, max and mean are computed
across countries.



Panel B: Intraclass Correlation Coefficient (ICC) and Spearman-Brown prediction formula (SB)

                                                   ICC                                SB
                                       Mean        Min        Max        Mean         Min           Max

Module 1a, qn 1.01-1.09                 0.38       0.16        0.54       0.95        0.88          0.98
Module 1b, qn 1.10-1.12                 0.14       0.11        0.17       0.83        0.79          0.86
Module 2 (excl. qn 2.10)                0.15       0.06        0.27       0.83        0.69          0.93
Module 3 (excl. qn 3.01, 3.08)          0.27       0.07        0.57       0.90        0.75          0.98
Module 4                                0.22       0.13        0.41       0.90        0.84          0.96
Module 5                                0.22       0.07        0.43       0.89        0.75          0.97
Module 6                                0.26       0.13        0.54       0.91        0.83          0.98
Module 7                                0.09       0.02        0.19       0.70        0.46          0.90

Notes: ICC for qn 2.10 = 0.28; for qn 3.01 = 0.58; for qn 3.08 = 0.59. SB for qn 2.10 = 0.93; for qn 3.01 = 0.98; for
qn 3.08 = 0.98. The min, max and mean are computed across questions in each module.




                                                                                                                    34
               TABLE 5: Indices of Labor Market and Workplace Conditions

Module 1a (qn 1.01-1.09 only)                                   Module 1b (qn 1.10-1.12 only)
General Economic Situation                                      Role of World Bank & IMF

        Country                   Mean       Std Dev                    Country                    Mean       Std Dev
 1      Norway                    5.809        0.128             1      Cyprus                     4.123        0.136
 2      Sweden                    5.614        0.103             2      Peru                       3.919        0.195
 3      Finland                   5.532        0.146             3      Korea, South               3.831        0.110
 4      Denmark                   5.444        0.117             4      Sri Lanka                  3.824        0.178
 5      Netherlands               5.174        0.123             5      Finland                    3.815        0.204
 6      Switzerland               5.173        0.138             6      Mexico                     3.506        0.152
 7      Cyprus                    5.079        0.136             7      Israel                     3.487        0.148
 8      New Zealand               5.040        0.117             8      South Africa               3.456        0.139
 9      Japan                     4.958        0.156             9      Brazil                     3.452        0.141
 10     Belgium                   4.887        0.150             10     Japan                      3.384        0.176
 11     Taiwan *                  4.854        0.148             11     Turkey                     3.383        0.190
 12     Ireland                   4.824        0.130             12     India                      3.341        0.109
 13     Germany                   4.802        0.176             13     Italy                      3.228        0.177
 14     Canada                    4.660        0.108             14     Australia                  3.193        0.133
 15     Austria                   4.643        0.154             15     France                     3.168        0.099
 16     Australia                 4.634        0.112             16     Norway *                   3.124        0.148
 17     United Kingdom            4.628        0.112             17     United Kingdom             3.117        0.120
 18     Malaysia                  4.625        0.131             18     Sweden                     3.097        0.127
 19     Singapore                 4.553        0.133             19     Malaysia                   3.075        0.100
 20     France                    4.433        0.122             20     Belgium                    3.061        0.137
 21     Israel                    4.222        0.157             21     Canada                     3.042        0.115
 22     Italy                     3.842        0.167             22     Netherlands                3.004        0.116
 23     United States             3.762        0.111             23     Taiwan                     2.981        0.171
 24     Korea, South              3.723        0.123             24     New Zealand                2.955        0.122
 25     China                     3.554        0.124             25     Philippines                2.945        0.078
 26     India                     2.884        0.119             26     Ireland                    2.820        0.136
 27     Sri Lanka                 2.851        0.133             27     Austria                    2.808        0.182
 28     Mexico                    2.682        0.150             28     United States              2.804        0.122
 29     Brazil                    2.646        0.149             29     Singapore                  2.802        0.125
 30     South Africa              2.609        0.152             30     Denmark *                  2.643        0.130
 31     Turkey                    2.547        0.166             31     China                      2.575        0.132
 32     Philippines               2.406        0.129             32     Germany                    2.448        0.169
 33     Peru                      2.255        0.137             33     Switzerland                1.631        0.174

Notes: Indices range from 1 to 7, with 1 corresponding to conditions most favorable towards businesses and
employers, and 7 corresponding to conditions most favorable towards workers. A * denotes those countries for
which the rwg statistic was less than 0.7 for the relevant subset of questions. Details of the calibration procedure are
in Section 3. The “Std Dev” column lists an upper bound of the standard deviation for the reported mean, taking into
account possible covariances between variables.




                                                                                                                    35
      TABLE 5 (continued): Indices of Labor Market and Workplace Conditions

Module 2 (excl qn 2.10)                                         Module 3 (excl qn 3.01 & 3.08)
Labor Market Conditions                                         Freedom of Association &
                                                                Collective Bargaining
        Country                   Mean        Std Dev                   Country                    Mean       Std Dev
 1      Finland                   5.714        0.187              1     Finland                    6.005        0.157
 2      Netherlands               5.378        0.169              2     Germany                    5.884        0.194
 3      Sweden                    5.345        0.129              3     Netherlands                5.810        0.153
 4      Norway                    5.207        0.166              4     Belgium                    5.699        0.181
 5      Belgium                   5.099        0.214              5     Sweden                     5.676        0.123
 6      Germany                   5.024        0.218              6     Norway                     5.504        0.152
 7      Austria                   5.001        0.195              7     Denmark                    5.497        0.139
 8      Denmark                   4.952        0.151              8     France                     5.260        0.170
 9      France                    4.855        0.177              9     Switzerland                5.251        0.153
 10     Japan                     4.690        0.169              10    Austria                    5.237        0.202
 11     Singapore                 4.670        0.176              11    Japan                      5.189        0.174
 12     Italy                     4.655        0.201              12    Italy                      5.113        0.212
 13     New Zealand               4.653        0.142              13    South Africa               5.053        0.175
 14     Australia                 4.558        0.146              14    Israel                     5.001        0.184
 15     Canada                    4.497        0.138              15    Canada                     4.867        0.139
 16     United Kingdom            4.441        0.145              16    New Zealand                4.800        0.143
 17     Cyprus                    4.429        0.179              17    Australia                  4.717        0.141
 18     South Africa              4.359        0.197              18    Ireland                    4.640        0.175
 19     Ireland                   4.261        0.169              19    Korea, South               4.472        0.119
 20     Israel                    4.241        0.202              20    United Kingdom             4.461        0.140
 21     Switzerland               4.241        0.194              21    Cyprus                     4.220        0.156
 22     Malaysia                  4.227        0.153              22    United States              4.208        0.148
 23     Korea, South              4.138        0.129              23    Brazil                     4.079        0.148
 24     United States             4.061        0.150              24    Philippines                4.067        0.149
 25     Taiwan *                  3.886        0.154              25    Malaysia                   3.903        0.141
 26     Philippines               3.837        0.175              26    Peru                       3.877        0.151
 27     China                     3.823        0.123              27    India                      3.831        0.125
 28     India                     3.788        0.153              28    Singapore                  3.796        0.147
 29     Brazil                    3.581        0.178              29    Taiwan                     3.496        0.150
 30     Sri Lanka                 3.568        0.168              30    Sri Lanka                  3.486        0.184
 31     Turkey                    3.412        0.198              31    Turkey                     3.378        0.186
 32     Mexico                    3.153        0.185              32    Mexico                     3.239        0.174
 33     Peru                      2.773        0.166              33    China *                    3.093        0.122


Notes: Indices range from 1 to 7, with 1 corresponding to conditions most favorable towards businesses and
employers, and 7 corresponding to conditions most favorable towards workers. A * denotes those countries for
which the rwg statistic was less than 0.7 for the relevant subset of questions. Details of the calibration procedure are
in Section 3. The “Std Dev” column lists an upper bound of the standard deviation for the reported mean, taking into
account possible covariances between variables.




                                                                                                                    36
      TABLE 5 (continued): Indices of Labor Market and Workplace Conditions

Module 4                                                        Module 5
Labor Disputes                                                  Employment Regulations &
                                                                Working Conditions
        Country                   Mean        Std Dev                   Country                    Mean       Std Dev
 1      France                    5.128        0.138              1     Sweden                     6.102        0.157
 2      Belgium                   5.095        0.171              2     Belgium                    6.100        0.261
 3      Italy                     5.075        0.192              3     Finland                    6.019        0.198
 4      Finland                   4.664        0.203              4     Netherlands                6.014        0.206
 5      Denmark                   4.633        0.136              5     Italy                      5.933        0.226
 6      Netherlands               4.561        0.149              6     Germany                    5.914        0.257
 7      Austria                   4.558        0.201              7     Norway                     5.888        0.199
 8      Norway                    4.535        0.145              8     France                     5.882        0.249
 9      South Africa              4.381        0.167              9     Cyprus                     5.730        0.158
 10     Ireland                   4.363        0.151              10    Denmark                    5.684        0.211
 11     Israel                    4.355        0.150              11    Austria                    5.533        0.232
 12     Sweden                    4.293        0.128              12    Israel                     5.298        0.241
 13     Cyprus                    4.202        0.171              13    Ireland                    5.273        0.213
 14     Peru                      4.161        0.162              14    South Africa               5.258        0.237
 15     Korea, South              4.123        0.133              15    Australia                  5.145        0.199
 16     Philippines               4.026        0.160              16    New Zealand                5.142        0.173
 17     Switzerland               4.008        0.155              17    Canada                     5.107        0.182
 18     Australia                 3.996        0.128              18    Japan                      4.940        0.196
 19     Japan                     3.978        0.165              19    India                      4.937        0.184
 20     India                     3.871        0.147              20    Singapore                  4.851        0.215
 21     New Zealand               3.848        0.129              21    Brazil                     4.816        0.194
 22     United Kingdom            3.811        0.123              22    Switzerland                4.719        0.243
 23     Canada                    3.805        0.118              23    Korea, South               4.653        0.142
 24     Brazil                    3.719        0.191              24    United Kingdom             4.640        0.194
 25     Germany                   3.697        0.181              25    Malaysia                   4.605        0.165
 26     China                     3.617        0.133              26    Philippines                4.579        0.194
 27     Malaysia                  3.612        0.150              27    Turkey                     4.428        0.277
 28     Mexico                    3.481        0.157              28    Sri Lanka                  4.228        0.210
 29     Sri Lanka                 3.458        0.161              29    Peru                       4.021        0.194
 30     United States             3.294        0.124              30    Mexico                     4.011        0.229
 31     Taiwan                    3.113        0.149              31    China                      4.008        0.133
 32     Singapore                 3.071        0.190              32    United States              3.999        0.192
 33     Turkey                    2.715        0.165              33    Taiwan *                   3.856        0.159


Notes: Indices range from 1 to 7, with 1 corresponding to conditions most favorable towards businesses and
employers, and 7 corresponding to conditions most favorable towards workers. A * denotes those countries for
which the rwg statistic was less than 0.7 for the relevant subset of questions. Details of the calibration procedure are
in Section 3. The “Std Dev” column lists an upper bound of the standard deviation for the reported mean, taking into
account possible covariances between variables.




                                                                                                                    37
      TABLE 5 (continued): Indices of Labor Market and Workplace Conditions

Module 6                                                        Question 2.10
Employee Benefits                                               % of workers in informal sector

        Country                   Mean        Std Dev                   Country                    Mean       Std Dev
 1      Netherlands               5.808        0.132              1     India *                    3.884        0.061
 2      Sweden                    5.788        0.102              2     Philippines *              3.767        0.073
 3      Norway                    5.613        0.146              3     Peru                       3.727        0.099
 4      Denmark                   5.557        0.124              4     Sri Lanka                  3.376        0.047
 5      Finland                   5.446        0.177              5     Brazil                     3.001        0.102
 6      Switzerland               5.377        0.178              6     Taiwan *                   2.947        0.061
 7      Belgium                   5.177        0.191              7     Mexico                     2.887        0.048
 8      Germany                   5.062        0.180              8     Turkey *                   2.780        0.072
 9      France                    5.021        0.170              9     China *                    2.640        0.038
 10     Austria                   4.972        0.176              10    Korea, South *             2.610        0.052
 11     Israel                    4.900        0.168              11    Switzerland *              2.499        0.081
 12     Taiwan *                  4.892        0.150              12    South Africa               2.223        0.066
 13     Japan                     4.865        0.151              13    Canada *                   1.863        0.041
 14     Cyprus                    4.843        0.177              14    Ireland *                  1.845        0.045
 15     New Zealand               4.484        0.136              15    Italy                      1.830        0.087
 16     Italy                     4.383        0.184              16    Austria                    1.753        0.077
 17     Australia                 4.284        0.131              17    Malaysia                   1.742        0.054
 18     Canada                    4.272        0.126              18    Singapore                  1.737        0.094
 19     Malaysia                  4.127        0.181              19    United States *            1.722        0.040
 20     United Kingdom            4.055        0.131              20    Australia                  1.586        0.051
 21     Ireland                   4.055        0.155              21    New Zealand                1.579        0.052
 22     Korea, South              3.716        0.134              22    United Kingdom             1.484        0.045
 23     Peru                      3.445        0.145              23    Japan                      1.444        0.089
 24     Brazil                    3.232        0.161              24    Sweden                     1.386        0.055
 25     China                     3.179        0.114              25    Denmark                    1.378        0.046
 26     Turkey                    3.103        0.161              26    Cyprus                     1.266        0.091
 27     India                     3.067        0.143              27    Germany                    1.266        0.057
 28     United States             3.065        0.133              28    Norway                     1.266        0.052
 29     South Africa              3.026        0.186              29    Israel                     1.231        0.049
 30     Philippines               2.871        0.196              30    Netherlands                1.231        0.043
 31     Mexico                    2.600        0.150              31    Finland                    1.144        0.069
 32     Singapore                 2.225        0.147              32    Belgium                    1.116        0.066
 33     Sri Lanka                 2.224        0.172              33    France                     1.102        0.038


Notes: Indices range from 1 to 7, with 1 corresponding to conditions most favorable towards businesses and
employers, and 7 corresponding to conditions most favorable towards workers. For questions seeking a quantitative
estimate, scores were coded from a 1 for an estimate of 0-20%, to 5 for an estimate of 81-100%. A * denotes those
countries for which the rwg statistic was less than 0.7 for the relevant subset of questions. Details of the calibration
procedure are in Section 3. The “Std Dev” column lists an upper bound of the standard deviation for the reported
mean, taking into account possible covariances between variables.




                                                                                                                    38
      TABLE 5 (continued): Indices of Labor Market and Workplace Conditions

Question 3.01                                                    Question 3.08
% of workers who are labor union                                 % of labor force covered by a collective
members                                                          bargaining agreement
        Country                    Mean       Std Dev                     Country                   Mean        Std Dev
 1      Sweden                     4.922        0.034              1      Sweden                     4.983        0.047
 2      Denmark                    4.791        0.042              2      Finland                    4.731        0.047
 3      Finland                    4.344        0.061              3      Belgium                    4.715        0.075
 4      Belgium                    3.681        0.038              4      Austria                    4.413        0.086
 5      Cyprus                     3.523        0.075              5      Netherlands                4.253        0.047
 6      Norway                     3.306        0.040              6      Denmark                    4.229        0.040
 7      China *                    3.096        0.043              7      France                     4.114        0.077
 8      Austria                    2.963        0.052              8      Italy *                    3.816        0.085
 9      South Africa *             2.740        0.045              9      Norway *                   3.755        0.056
 10     Ireland                    2.553        0.051              10     Germany                    3.644        0.053
 11     Switzerland                2.365        0.062              11     Switzerland *              3.609        0.093
 12     Israel                     2.348        0.040              12     Cyprus                     3.505        0.055
 13     Canada                     2.309        0.042              13     Ireland *                  3.447        0.076
 14     United Kingdom             2.294        0.042              14     Australia *                2.826        0.058
 15     Australia                  2.253        0.042              15     South Africa *             2.706        0.071
 16     Germany                    2.252        0.044              16     Israel                     2.604        0.059
 17     Italy                      2.223        0.057              17     United Kingdom *           2.368        0.061
 18     Netherlands                2.174        0.038              18     Canada                     2.312        0.059
 19     New Zealand                2.151        0.043              19     Brazil *                   2.154        0.063
 20     India *                    1.947        0.054              20     New Zealand                1.801        0.054
 21     Sri Lanka *                1.936        0.066              21     Mexico *                   1.746        0.052
 22     Brazil *                   1.933        0.098              22     India *                    1.735        0.049
 23     Mexico                     1.891        0.051              23     Singapore *                1.689        0.062
 24     Taiwan                     1.863        0.051              24     Japan                      1.486        0.068
 25     Japan *                    1.791        0.054              25     China                      1.459        0.041
 26     Singapore                  1.697        0.067              26     Sri Lanka                  1.445        0.103
 27     United States              1.394        0.042              27     United States              1.390        0.065
 28     Philippines                1.296        0.045              28     Taiwan                     1.323        0.054
 29     Turkey                     1.251        0.054              29     Philippines                1.283        0.065
 30     France                     1.200        0.050              30     Turkey                     1.205        0.061
 31     Peru                       1.150        0.067              31     Peru                       1.086        0.089
 32     Korea, South               1.061        0.045              32     Malaysia                   0.957        0.043
 33     Malaysia                   1.054        0.059              33     Korea, South               0.867        0.054


Notes: Indices range from 1 to 5, ranging from a 1 for an estimate of 0-20%, to 5 for an estimate of 81-100%. A *
denotes those countries for which the rwg statistic was less than 0.7 for the relevant subset of questions. Details of the
calibration procedure are in Section 3. The “Std Dev” column lists an upper bound of the standard deviation for the
reported mean, taking into account possible covariances between variables.




                                                                                                                      39
   TABLE 6: Estimated Effect of Respondent Orientation on their Perception of Labor Conditions in their Country

                                                                                    Coefficient (Standard Error)
                                   Module 1a          Module 1b          Module 2            Module 3            Module 4         Module 5           Module 6


                                     General        Role of IMF &       Labor Market        Freedom of       Labor Disputes     Employment           Employee
                                    Economic         World Bank          Conditions        Association &                        Regulations &         Benefits
                                    Situation                                               Collective                            Working
                                                                                            Bargaining                           Conditions

Respondent Orientation
7.01: Political orientation        0.06 (0.06)      -0.03** (0.01)      0.02 (0.03)         0.02 (0.03)       -0.01 (0.01)       -0.02 (0.02)       0.01 (0.04)
(right-wing vs left-wing)
7.02: Role of government in        -0.03 (0.04)       0.01 (0.01)       -0.01 (0.02)        0.00 (0.02)        0.01 (0.01)       0.02 (0.02)        -0.01 (0.03)
economic policy-making
7.03: State responsibility for    0.03*** (0.01)      0.01 (0.00)       0.01 (0.01)         0.01 (0.01)        0.01 (0.01)       0.02 (0.01)        0.03 (0.02)
workers’ living standards
7.04: Labor clauses in trade       -0.00 (0.03)     -0.02* (0.01)       0.00 (0.01)         0.01 (0.02)       -0.01 (0.01)       -0.02 (0.02)       -0.02 (0.03)
agreements

       Occupation

Corporate official                 -0.03 (0.23)       0.09 (0.10)        0.05 (0.09)        0.06 (0.13)       0.22** (0.09)       0.20 (0.14)        0.05 (0.21)
Government official                -0.15 (0.20)     0.16** (0.06)       -0.12 (0.14)       -0.09 (0.12)         0.10 (0.08)       0.02 (0.14)       -0.08 (0.17)
Independent lawyer / arbitrator    -0.49 (0.29)     0.20** (0.08)       -0.31 (0.19)       -0.18 (0.13)         0.01 (0.07)      -0.14 (0.13)       -0.20 (0.19)
Journalist / Reporter              -0.18 (0.18)       0.02 (0.06)       -0.02 (0.10)        0.01 (0.11)         0.01 (0.10)      -0.02 (0.13)       -0.15 (0.17)
Labor activist                      0.03 (0.12)      -0.05 (0.04)       -0.03 (0.07)       -0.07 (0.11)       -0.12* (0.06)      -0.15 (0.13)       -0.18 (0.15)
Labor union official                0.11 (0.11)      -0.04 (0.04)        0.00 (0.07)       -0.04 (0.09)        -0.09 (0.05)      -0.08 (0.10)       -0.09 (0.12)
Other                              -0.04 (0.12)      -0.03 (0.04)       -0.06 (0.07)       -0.09 (0.10)      -0.12** (0.06)      -0.16 (0.12)       -0.22 (0.14)
Occupation = NA                    -0.07 (0.15)       0.04 (0.05)       -0.01 (0.09)       -0.02 (0.10)         0.02 (0.08)       0.04 (0.10)       -0.08 (0.16)
Omitted Group = Academic

Dummy = 1 if NOT                   -0.09 (0.07)     -0.05** (0.02)      -0.04 (0.03)       -0.02 (0.05)      -0.07* (0.04)       -0.09 (0.07)       -0.12 (0.08)
Labourstart correspondent

R-squared                             0.05               0.10               0.03               0.02               0.05               0.03                  0.02

Notes: N= 1415 for all regressions. Additional controls include dummy variables for years of experience, and a dummy for not replying to the Labourstart
correspondent question. Standard errors are clustered by country. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively.

                                                                                                                                                              40
                                       TABLE 7: Correlation Matrix for GLS Labor Market Indices

Correlation coefficient and Spearman rank correlation among the labor market indices
                              Role of IMF      Labor       Freedom of       Labor        Employment      Employee      % informal      % labor      % collective     Personal
    Correlation coefficient    & World        Market       Association     Disputes      Regulations      Benefits       sector         union       bargaining       Views &
          Spearman’s rho         Bank        Conditions    & Collective                  & Working                                                                   Positions
                                                           Bargaining                     Conditions

 General Economic              -0.3500**     0.8249***      0.6616***      0.3520**       0.6023***      0.8271***     -0.8022***     0.5629***      0.6223***        0.1413
 Situation                      -0.3165*     0.7834***      0.6902***      0.3827**       0.6197***      0.8392***     -0.6949***     0.6026***      0.6521***        0.1664

 Role of IMF & World                          -0.2399        -0.2153        0.0661         -0.0305        -0.2423        0.1568        -0.0916        -0.2108        -0.3019*
 Bank                                         -0.2737        -0.1735        0.1183         -0.0094        -0.2119        0.1103        -0.1735        -0.1735         -0.2136

 Labor Market Conditions                                    0.8557***     0.5692***       0.8485***      0.7453***     -0.8305***     0.6023***      0.7780***        0.1984
                                                            0.8740***     0.6063***       0.8593***      0.7707***     -0.8419***     0.5428***      0.8018***        0.1708

 Freedom of Association &                                                 0.7293***       0.8618***      0.8040***     -0.7134***     0.5295***      0.8173***       0.3826**
 Collective Bargaining                                                    0.7403***       0.8626***      0.8352***     -0.7607***     0.5334***      0.8215***        0.2858

 Labor Disputes                                                                           0.7575***      0.5978***     -0.4529***     0.4521***      0.7414***        0.2298
                                                                                          0.7737***      0.6103***     -0.5311***     0.4923***      0.7283***        0.1454

 Employment Regulations                                                                                  0.7067***     -0.7107***     0.5977***      0.8755***        0.2203
 & Working Conditions                                                                                    0.7223***     -0.7483***     0.6120***      0.8810***        0.1604

 Employee Benefits                                                                                                     -0.6836***     0.5580***      0.7446***        0.1957
                                                                                                                       -0.7296***     0.5291***      0.7366***        0.1631

 % informal sector                                                                                                                   -0.4670***     -0.6478***        -0.2874
                                                                                                                                      -0.4365**     -0.6838***        -0.1581

 % labor union                                                                                                                                       0.7403***        -0.0195
                                                                                                                                                     0.7660***         0.1143

 % collective bargaining                                                                                                                                              0.2270
                                                                                                                                                                      0.2283


Notes: In each cell, the first figure is the correlation coefficient between the two indices, while the second figure is the Spearman rho rank correlation statistic. *,
**, and *** denote p-values significant at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively for tests against the null hypothesis that the indices are independent.
Calibrated indices are used except for “Personal Views & Positions”, where the mean of responses from each country across the Module 7 questions is used.



                                                                                                                                                                     41
                            TABLE 8: Consistency of GLS Indices with Measures of the Regulation of Labor

Correlation coefficient and Spearman rank correlation among the labor market indices
                                General     Role of IMF       Labor        Freedom of        Labor       Employment      Employee      % informal      % labor      % collective
    Correlation coefficient    Economic      & World         Market       Association &     Disputes     Regulations      Benefits       sector         union       bargaining
          Spearman’s rho       Situation       Bank         Conditions     Collective                    & Working
                                                                           Bargaining                     Conditions

 Botero et al. (2004):

 Employment laws                0.1408         0.0360       0.3376*         0.3966**      0.4640***      0.5196***       0.3945**       -0.0976       0.4019**      0.6363***
 index                          0.1924         0.0726       0.3515**        0.4450**      0.4901***      0.4813***       0.4472**       -0.2111        0.2676       0.5704***

 Collective relations          -0.2174        0.2417         -0.0618         0.1801        0.3464*         0.2145          0.0525        0.1368       -0.0619         0.1688
 laws index                    -0.1560        0.3295*         0.0506         0.2055        0.3615**        0.2262          0.0541        0.0374       -0.1239         0.1155

 Social security laws         0.6178***      -0.3690**      0.5556***      0.5882***      0.4494***      0.4725***       0.6802***     -0.5618***    0.5529***      0.5885***
 index                        0.6488***       -0.2804       0.5279***      0.5620***       0.4476**      0.4666***       0.6943***     -0.5121***    0.6312***      0.5883***

 % Employment in the                                                                                                                   0.7591***
 unofficial economy                                                                                                                    0.6703***

                                                                                                                                                     0.8240***
 Union Density (ILO)
                                                                                                                                                     0.7584***

 Right to collective                                                                                                                                                  -0.1152
 bargaining                                                                                                                                                           -0.1605

 Doing Business: Rigidity     -0.4779***     0.3987**         -0.2783        -0.0889        0.1265          0.0340         -0.0873      0.3682**       -0.0857        0.0991
 of Employment Index           -0.4001**     0.4748***        -0.2212        -0.0431        0.1276          0.0406         -0.0630       0.2593        -0.1507        0.0604

 EFW: Labor Market              -0.0812        -0.1546        -0.2092       -0.3253*        -0.3345*      -0.4189**      -0.3650**       0.1245       -0.3704**      -0.4229**
 Regulations                    -0.0784        -0.1905        -0.2481       -0.3306*       -0.3713**      -0.4212**      -0.3746**       0.1789        -0.2937       -0.3607**


Notes: In each cell, the first figure is the correlation coefficient between the two indices, while the second figure is the Spearman rho rank correlation statistic. *,
**, and *** denote p-values significant at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively for tests against the null hypothesis that the indices are independent.




                                                                                                                                                                     42
                     TABLE 9: Summary Statistics of Labor Market Indices by Country Income Brackets

                     General      Role of IMF       Labor       Freedom of        Labor       Employment      Employee       % informal      % labor      % collective
                    Economic       & World         Market       Association      Disputes     Regulations      Benefits        sector         union       bargaining
                    Situation        Bank         Conditions    & Collective                  & Working
                                                                Bargaining                     Conditions

 Mean: All            4.223          3.153          4.379          4.631          4.038          5.070          4.204          2.040          2.356          2.656
       Quartile 1     2.719          3.362          3.643          3.858          3.744          4.534          3.018          3.175          1.919          1.634
       Quartile 2     4.231          3.425          4.257          4.433          4.086          5.065          4.167          1.841          2.063          2.265
       Quartile 3     4.838          3.014          4.903          5.117          4.188          5.475          4.764          1.573          2.498          3.466
       Quartile 4     5.027          2.827          4.650          5.053          4.114          5.156          4.797          1.628          2.927          3.159
      Developing      2.980          3.392          3.696          3.862          3.742          4.504          3.145          2.967          1.759          1.513
      High-income
       non-OECD       4.677          3.348          4.307          4.128          3.685          4.934          4.215          1.795          2.358          2.280
          OECD        4.881          2.963          4.813          5.212          4.297          5.446          4.849          1.527          2.720          3.439
 Median: All          4.628          3.117          4.429          4.717          4.008          5.107          4.284          1.742          2.223          2.368
       Quartile 1     2.627          3.418          3.684          3.854          3.795          4.503          3.085          3.189          1.934          1.452
       Quartile 2     4.423          3.357          4.335          4.594          4.059          5.143          4.334          1.664          2.187          2.203
       Quartile 3     4.802          3.004          5.001          5.260          4.558          5.882          5.021          1.266          2.252          4.114
       Quartile 4     5.066          2.958          4.566          5.220          4.151          5.106          5.121          1.464          2.459          3.528
      Developing      2.682          3.452          3.788          3.877          3.719          4.579          3.103          2.887          1.891          1.445
      High-income
       non-OECD       4.704          3.234          4.335          4.008          3.657          5.074          4.807          1.502          2.106          2.146
          OECD        4.856          3.051          4.772          5.244          4.328          5.608          4.997          1.464          2.301          3.700
 Standard
 Deviation: All
                      1.046          0.477          0.661          0.828          0.573          0.697          1.058          0.835          0.998          1.279

Notes: Summary statistics in bold are for the sample of 33 countries. Countries are sorted into quartiles based on the observed distribution of mean real GDP per
capita (in constant 2000 US$) for the years 2001-2003, taken from the World Development Indicators (WDI), with Quartile 1 corresponding to the lowest income
quartile etc. The sorting of countries into Developing, High-income non-OECD and OECD countries is based on the World Bank’s classifications; there were 11,
4, and 18 countries in these respective categories. Although the WDI does not report income data for Taiwan, we placed Taiwan in Quartile 3 and classified it as
a high-income non-OECD country, together with Singapore, given that the CIA World Factbook estimates PPP-adjusted real GDP per capita between Taiwan
and Singapore in 2004 to be very similar (US$23,400 for Taiwan and US$23,700 for Singapore).



                                                                                                                                                              43
                               TABLE 10: OLS Regressions between GLS Indices and Outcome Variables

                                         ln(Mean real GDP per capita,                                Mean growth rate of real GDP
                 Dependent Variable:                                      ln(GINI coefficient)                                         Unemployment rate, 2001
                                                 2001-2003)                                             per capita, 2000-2003
                  Additional controls:                                                               ln(Real GDP per capita, 2000)   ln(Real GDP per capita, 2001)
                                                                    2                            2                              2
                                          Coefficient           R       Coefficient          R         Coefficient          R          Coefficient          R2
                                            0.971***           0.65      -0.122***          0.37         1.082**            0.32           -2.294           0.19
 General Economic Situation                  (0.117)                      (0.032)                        (0.455)                          (1.548)

                                            -0.821**           0.10        0.081            0.02           -0.228           0.17           1.743            0.13
 Role of IMF & World Bank                    (0.396)                      (0.108)                         (0.850)                         (1.255)

                                            1.340***           0.49      -0.172***          0.30           0.724            0.21           2.336            0.16
 Labor Market Conditions                     (0.230)                      (0.038)                         (0.523)                         (1.851)

 Freedom of Association &                   1.106***           0.51      -0.112***          0.20           -0.052           0.17          4.071*            0.34
 Collective Bargaining                       (0.189)                      (0.038)                         (0.514)                         (2.040)

                                            0.832***           0.13      -0.113**           0.10           0.473            0.19          2.773*            0.20
 Labor Disputes                              (0.300)                      (0.052)                         (0.387)                         (1.550)

 Employment Regulations &                   1.040***           0.31      -0.125***          0.17           0.082            0.17          3.111*            0.23
 Working Conditions                          (0.267)                      (0.044)                         (0.408)                         (1.669)

                                            0.821***           0.48      -0.109***          0.30           0.309            0.19           -0.041           0.11
 Employee Benefits                           (0.189)                      (0.034)                         (0.336)                         (0.759)

                                            -1.282***          0.71       0.097**           0.15           -0.596           0.19           -2.090           0.14
 % informal sector                           (0.127)                      (0.045)                         (0.744)                         (2.070)

                                            0.423***           0.11      -0.080***          0.15           0.416            0.22           0.474            0.11
 % labor union                               (0.148)                      (0.026)                         (0.291)                         (0.808)

                                            0.576***           0.34      -0.077***          0.21           0.033            0.17           1.026            0.15
 % collective bargaining                     (0.132)                      (0.020)                         (0.220)                         (0.668)


Notes: Separate regressions are run for each dependent variable and each labor market index in turn. The coefficients on the labor market variables, robust
standard errors and R2 values are reported. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively. The number of observations for the
regressions on income and the growth rate is 32, with Taiwan dropping out because of missing income data. The number of observations for the regressions on
inequality is 29, with Austria, Cyprus, Israel and Switzerland dropping out because of missing inequality data. The number of observations for the regressions on
the unemployment rate is 31, due to missing unemployment data from India and Taiwan.




                                                                                                                                                                   44
FIGURE 1: Comparison of Percentage Estimates from the GLS and Botero et al. (2004)


      Panel A: Size of informal sector

                                                4                                                        IN D
                                                                                                                                               PHL                           PER
      GLS: % workers in informal sector




                                                                                                                                                   LKA
        (1= 0-20%,..., 5 = 80-100%)




                                                                                                                                        BRA
                                                3                                                  OAN
                                                                                                                        MEX
                                                                                                                          TUR
                                                                                     C HN                         KOR
                                                                            C HE


                                                                                                                    ZAF


                                                2
                                                                                             CAN
                                                                                            IRL                   ITA
                                                                               AUT SGP
                                                                            U SA                                          MY S
                                                                                     NZL AUS
                                                                                     GBR
                                                                                   JPN
                                                                                             SWE
                                                                                            DN K
                                                                                     NLD DEU N OR ISR
                                                                                        FRA FIN     BEL
                                                1
                                                              0                               20                       40                                                    60
                                                                               Botero et al. (2004): % employment in unofficial economy




      Panel B: Unionization

                                                          5                                                                                                           SW E
                                                                                                                                                         DN K
             GLS: % workers who are labor union members




                                                                                                                                                                FIN


                                                          4
                    (1= 0-20%,..., 5 = 80-100%)




                                                                                                                                 BEL


                                                                                                                                                         NOR
                                                                            CH N
                                                          3                                                               AUT
                                                                                                 ZAF
                                                                                                                                       IRL
                                                                                           C HE CISR
                                                                                                  AN
                                                                                            AUS GBR      D EU
                                                                                                            ITA
                                                                                          N ZL NLD
                                                          2       IN D                     BRA
                                                                                                       OAN MEX
                                                                                                                                             LKA
                                                                                          JPN
                                                                                          SGP

                                                                             USA
                                                                           PHL
                                                                           TUR
                                                                    PER FRA
                                                                         MY SKOR
                                                          1
                                                              0                      .2                   .4                 .6                          .8                  1
                                                                                                   Botero et al. (2004): Union density




                                                                                                                                                                                   45
                                                APPENDIX TABLE 1: GLS Survey Questions
  For most of Modules 1 through 7, unless otherwise indicated, questions sought a response on a scale of 1 to 7 spanning the two polar opposite answer
  options provided. Interested readers are directed to the GLS website at http://gls.law.harvard.edu for a firsthand look at the survey instrument.


       Survey question                                                                    Response options

       Module 0: Respondent Information
0.01   Please identify the country on which you are reporting.                            Pull-down list of countries provided.

0.02   How many years have you been studying or participating in the labor relations      Less than 1 year ; 1 to 5 years ; 5 to 10 years ; More than 10 years
       of your country of expertise?

0.03   How would you best describe yourself?                                              Academic ; Corporate official ; Government official ;
                                                                                          Independent lawyer/arbitrator ; Journalist/Reporter ; Labor activist ;
                                                                                          Labor union official ; Other

0.04   Are you a Labourstart correspondent?                                               Yes ; No

       Module 1: The General Economic Situation
1.01   In 2004, your economy has so far                                                   1 = Been in a recession
                                                                                          7 = Been strong

1.02   The level of unemployment in your country is currently                             1 = High and a major social and economic problem
                                                                                          7 = Low and not a major social or economic problem

1.03   The rate of poverty in your country is currently                                   1 = High and a major social and economic problem
                                                                                          7 = Low and not a major social or economic problem

1.04   The difference in the quality of healthcare available to rich and poor people in   1 = Large
       your country is                                                                    7 = Small

1.05   The difference in the educational opportunities available to children from rich    1 = Large
       and poor families in your country is                                               7 = Small

1.06   The quality of public schools in your country is                                   1 = Very bad
                                                                                          7 = Equal to the best in the world



                                                                                                                                                          46
1.07   Workers in your country are                                                   1 = Poorly equipped to work in modern industry
                                                                                     7 = Equal to the best in the world at working in modern industry

1.08   Talented people from your country typically                                   1 = Seek opportunities to work abroad
                                                                                     7 = Remain and work in your country

1.09   The role of foreign trade in your country’s economy is                        1 = Limited or negligible
                                                                                     7 = Sizeable

1.10   To what extent do World Bank and International Monetary Fund policies         1 = No influence on policy
       influence economic decision-making in your country?                           7 = Large influence on policy

1.11   Based on your experience, the World Bank’s actions in your country have       1 = The business sector
       primarily helped the interests of                                             7 = Workers

1.12   Based on your experience, the International Monetary Fund’s actions in your   1 = The business sector
       country have primarily helped the interests of                                7 = Workers

       Module 2: The Labor Market
2.01   Hiring decisions in the PRIVATE sector of your country are based mainly on    1 = Personal connections
                                                                                     7 = Workers’ skills, education or experience

2.02   Hiring decisions in the PUBLIC or GOVERNMENT sector of your country are       1 = Personal connections
       based mainly on                                                               7 = Workers’ skills, education or experience

2.03   The minimum wage in your country is                                           1 = Evaded by firms
                                                                                     7 = Effectively enforced by the state or labor organizations

2.04   Workers’ pay levels in your country are                                       1 = Flexible and can be easily changed or re-negotiated
                                                                                     7 = Rigid and cannot be easily changed or re-negotiated

2.05   Pay in your country is                                                        1 = Strongly related to worker productivity
                                                                                     7 = Not related to worker productivity

2.06   How often do workers in your country fail to receive the full amount of the   1 = Such problems are a regular occurrence
       REGULAR wages that they are supposed to be paid?                              7 = Such problems are a rare occurrence

2.07   How often do workers in your country fail to receive the full amount of the   1 = Such problems are a regular occurrence
       OVERTIME wages that they are supposed to be paid?                             7 = Such problems are a rare occurrence




                                                                                                                                                    47
2.08   The effect that globalization and trade have had on unskilled workers in your       1 = Generally negative
       country has been                                                                    7 = Generally positive

2.09   To what extent is the government in your country seeking to privatize traditional   1 = Not privatizing much
       public sector jobs?                                                                 7 = Aggressively privatizing

       For questions 2.10, 2.11 and 2.12, the INFORMAL sector refers to workers who
       fall beyond the effective jurisdiction of labor and tax laws, either because they
       are self-employed or work for unofficial/unregistered businesses.

2.10   To your best knowledge, what percentage of workers in your country work in          0-20% ; 21-40% ; 41-60% ; 61-80% ; 81-100%
       the INFORMAL sector? (PLEASE MARK ONE BOX ONLY)

2.11   The rights of workers in the INFORMAL sector                                        1 = Receive little attention from the state or labor organizations
                                                                                           7 = Are effectively protected by the state or labor organizations

2.12   Wages in the FORMAL sector of your country are                                      1 = Set by individual companies that operate under market forces
                                                                                           7 = Set by a centralized bargaining process or by government statute

2.13   Child labor or the employment of minors is                                          1 = A common and widespread practice
                                                                                           7 = Effectively prohibited

2.14   Discrimination on the basis of gender in the workplace is                           1 = A common and widespread practice
                                                                                           7 = Effectively prohibited

2.15   Discrimination on the basis of race or ethnicity in the workplace is                1 = A common and widespread practice
                                                                                           7 = Effectively prohibited

       Module 3: Freedom of Association & Collective Bargaining
3.01   To your best knowledge, what percentage of workers in your country are              0-20% ; 21-40% ; 41-60% ; 61-80% ; 81-100%
       officially members of a labor union? (PLEASE MARK ONE BOX ONLY)

3.02   Labor unions in your country are                                                    1 = Under the control of the state or political parties
                                                                                           7 = Independent organizations

3.03   Protection of the right to form a union in your country is                          1 = Weak or non-existent
                                                                                           7 = Equal to the world’s most stringent

3.04   Arrests or attacks on labor leaders because of their union activity are             1 = Frequent
                                                                                           7 = Rare or non-existent

3.05   In a unionized firm, are new employees allowed to choose whether they want to       1 = Yes, employees have full personal choice

                                                                                                                                                           48
       join a labor union?                                                             7 = No, union membership is effectively mandatory in workplaces
                                                                                           where a union is present

3.06   The involvement of labor unions in politics in your country is                  1 = Minimal or non-existent
                                                                                       7 = Frequent and substantial

3.07   Labor unions in your country are generally                                      1 = Ineffective in protecting and advancing the interests of workers
                                                                                       7 = Effective in protecting and advancing the interests of workers

3.08   To your best knowledge, what percentage of the labor force is covered by a      0-20% ; 21-40% ; 41-60% ; 61-80% ; 81-100%
       collective bargaining agreement? (PLEASE MARK ONE BOX ONLY)

3.09   Unions conduct negotiations with employers                                      1 = Under government influence or pressure
                                                                                       7 = Freely and independently of the government

3.10   In the process of determining wages in your country, labor unions               1 = Are usually bypassed by employers
                                                                                       7 = Are very influential and powerful

3.11   The extension of collective bargaining contracts to non-union firms is          1 = Not legislated
                                                                                       7 = Required and enforced by regulations

3.12   Workers’ participation in the management of companies (through such bodies as   1 = Determined by employers
       workers’ councils) is                                                           7 = Effectively enforced by the state or labor organizations

3.13   In practice, workers’ opinions and suggestions on the management of companies   1 = Are usually bypassed by employers
                                                                                       7 = Are very powerful in influencing management decisions

       Module 4: Labor Disputes
4.01   Labor-employer relations in your country are generally                          1 = Cooperative
                                                                                       7 = Confrontational

4.02   The population of your country at large generally                               1 = Does not support or care about labor unions
                                                                                       7 = Supports labor unions on the issues they raise

4.03   In your country, the threat of strikes is                                       1 = Ineffective in increasing the bargaining power of labor unions and
                                                                                            workers
                                                                                       7 = Very effective in increasing the bargaining power of labor unions
                                                                                            and workers


4.04   In the event of a strike, non-union workers                                     1 = Rarely or never join in the strike

                                                                                                                                                      49
                                                                                             7 = Often support union workers by participating in the strike

4.05   In your country, wildcat strikes (strikes that are not authorized by a formal labor   1 = Rare or non-existent
       union) are                                                                            7 = A common occurrence

4.06   In your country, political strikes (strikes for political reasons or in protest of    1 = Rare or non-existent
       government policies) are                                                              7 = A common occurrence

4.07   Procedures requiring a waiting period or notification prior to conducting a strike    1 = Required and enforced by regulations
       are                                                                                   7 = Non-existent or typically ignored by workers or labor unions

4.08   In the event of a strike, how often do employers resort to hiring replacement         1 = Frequently
       workers?                                                                              7 = Rarely

4.09   In the event of a labor dispute, how often do employers resort to lockouts to         1 = Frequently
       place pressure on workers?                                                            7 = Rarely

4.10   When workers fail to receive the full amount of their wages, how likely are they      1 = Very unlikely to receive their full pay
       to obtain full repayment through courts or other administrative agencies?             7 = Very likely that a full resolution will be reached

4.11   The role of third-party mediation (such as labor arbitration courts) in resolving     1 = Non-existent or very limited
       labor disputes is                                                                     7 = Effective in resolving most disputes

4.12   Tripartite forums (involving labor, employers and the government) to help             1 = Non-existent or rarely used
       resolve labor disputes are                                                            7 = Often used to resolve disputes

       Module 5: Employment Regulations & Working Conditions
5.01   The terms of contracts for hiring workers on a full-time basis are determined by      1 = Employers
                                                                                             7 = Regulations or collective bargaining

5.02   The extension of the benefits enjoyed by full-time workers to part-time workers       1 = Employers
       is determined by                                                                      7 = Regulations or collective bargaining

5.03   Hiring of workers on fixed-term contracts (employment for only a fixed period         1 = A common practice
       of time) is                                                                           7 = Rare or non-existent

5.04   Maximum hours of work in a regular workweek are determined by                         1 = Employers
                                                                                             7 = Regulations or collective bargaining


5.05   The premium paid for overtime hours of work is determined by                          1 = Employers


                                                                                                                                                              50
                                                                                            7 = Regulations or collective bargaining

5.06   The number of days of paid vacation in a year for workers in FORMAL sector           1 = Employers
       firms is determined by                                                               7 = Regulations or collective bargaining

5.07   Paid time off for national or local holidays is determined by                        1 = Employers
                                                                                            7 = Regulations or collective bargaining

5.08   In practice, regulations on work hours and workplace conditions are                  1 = Ignored by employers
                                                                                            7 = Generally enforced

5.09   The labor standards and working conditions that foreign firms maintain in your       1 = Worse than those in domestic or state-owned firms
       country are                                                                          7 = Better than those in domestic or state-owned firms

5.10   Firing of workers in the FORMAL sector of your country is determined by              1 = Employers
                                                                                            7 = The state or labor organizations

5.11   Workers who believe they have been unfairly laid off                                 1 = Have no effective means to try to get their jobs back
                                                                                            7 = Can effectively try to get their jobs back through administrative or
                                                                                                legal channels

5.12   Do employers regularly notify a third party (such as a government agency or          1 = No, they never notify a third party
       labor union) prior to a collective layoff of workers?                                7 = Yes, they always notify a third party

5.13   Do employers implement “seniority rules” when laying off workers, so that the        1 = No, such decisions are entirely up to employers
       newest hires are laid off first and senior workers laid off last?                    7 = Yes, such seniority rules are always followed

5.14   Severance payment terms for dismissing full-time workers are determined by           1 = Employers
                                                                                            7 = Regulations or collective bargaining

5.15   Minimum health and safety standards in the formal sector are determined by           1 = Employers
                                                                                            7 = Regulations or collective bargaining

       Module 6: Employee Benefits
6.01   The current level of state-determined benefits or pension for old-age, retirement,   1 = Insufficient to cover the needs of workers
       disability and death in your country is                                              7 = Sufficient to cover the needs of workers

6.02   In funding future social insurance pensions or retirement benefits, your country     1 = Faces a potential “pensions crisis”
                                                                                            7 = Has adequate funds to finance such future payments

6.03   Private pensions programs are                                                        1 = Rarely used or non-existent
                                                                                            7 = Widely used

                                                                                                                                                           51
6.04   In your country, sickness and health benefits for workers are                       1 = Determined in practice by employers
                                                                                           7 = Legally required and funded by tax revenues

6.05   The current level of sickness and health benefits in your country is                1 = Insufficient to cover the needs of workers
                                                                                           7 = Sufficient to cover the needs of workers

6.06   In your country, unemployment benefits/unemployment insurance payments              1 = Employers
       provided by employers for workers are determined by                                 7 = Regulations or collective bargaining

6.07   The current level of unemployment benefits/unemployment insurance payments          1 = Insufficient to cover the needs of workers
       in your country is                                                                  7 = Sufficient to cover the needs of workers

6.08   Overall, the current level of social welfare benefits in your country is            1 = Lower than what your country’s budgetary situation can afford
                                                                                           7 = More than what your country’s budgetary situation can afford

       Module 7: Concluding Questions
7.01   On political issues, I would describe myself as                                     1 = Right-wing
                                                                                           7 = Left-wing

7.02   Which of the following best describes your opinion about the proper role that       1 = Governments should allow market forces to determine economic
       governments should play in economic policy-making?                                      outcomes
                                                                                           7 = Governments should intervene when market forces fail to achieve
                                                                                               desired social outcomes

7.03   In your opinion, who should bear the most of the responsibility for ensuring that   1 = Workers themselves
       workers have employment and receive a wage that supports a minimum standard         7 = Employers or the state
       of living?

7.04   In your opinion, do you agree that international trade agreements should include    1 = Strongly disagree
       clauses for global labor standards?                                                 7 = Strongly agree




                                                                                                                                                       52
                       APPENDIX TABLE 2: Matching of Questions with the Global Competitiveness Report

Subject                  World Economic Forum 2004 Question                                                               In WEF 2002?   GLS Qn match

Growth outlook           2.01 Your country’s economy                                                                          Yes            1.01
                         1 = Will likely be in recession in the next 12 months                                               Qn 2.01
                         7 = Will have strong growth in the next 12 months

Size of unofficial       5.07 The share of business activity in your country that you would estimate to be                    Yes            2.10
economy                  unofficial or unregistered (including under-reported official revenue by registered firms) is:      Qn 5.06
                         Less than 5% of businesses ; 6-10% ; 11-20% ; 21-30% ; 31-40% ; 41-50% ; 51-60% ;
                         61-70% ; more than 70%

Quality of public        7.01 The public (free) schools in your country are                                                   Yes            1.06
schools                  1 = Of poor quality     7 = Equal to the best in the world                                          Qn 7.01

Ease of hiring and       7.02 The hiring and firing of workers is                                                             Yes            5.01
firing                   1 = Impeded by regulations      7 = Flexibly determined by employers                                Qn 7.02         5.10

Labor-employer           7.03 Labor-employer relations in your country are                                                    Yes            4.01
relations                1 = Generally confrontational     7 = Generally cooperative                                         Qn 7.03

Wage-setting             7.04 Wages in your country are                                                                       Yes            2.12
                         1 = Set by a centralized bargaining process     7 = Up to each individual company                   Qn 7.04

Pay-productivity         7.05 Pay in your country is                                                                          Yes            2.05
relationship             1 = Not related to worker productivity     7 = Strongly related to worker productivity              Qn 7.05

Inequality in            7.10 The difference in the quality of the healthcare available to rich and poor people in            Yes            1.04
healthcare access        your country is                                                                                     Qn 7.06
                         1 = Large     7 = Small

Quality of workforce     7.11 The educational system in your country                                                           No            1.07
                         1 = Does not meet the needs of a competitive economy
                         7 = Meets of the needs of a competitive economy



                                                                                                                                                    53
Retention of talent     7.15 Your country’s talented people                                                         Yes       1.08
                        1 = Normally leave to pursue opportunities in other countries                              Qn 7.09
                        7 = Almost always remain in your country

Gender discrimination   7.16 In your country, private sector employment of women is                                  No       2.14
in the workplace        1 = Limited and usually takes place in less important jobs
                        7 = Equal to that of men
                        7.17 In your country, for similar work, wages for women are
                        1 = Significantly below those of men
                        7 = Equal to those of men

Basis of hiring         10.14 Senior management positions in your country are                                       Yes       2.01
decisions               1 = Usually held by relatives                                                             Qn 10.14
                        7 = Held by professionals managers chosen based on superior qualification

Role of World Bank      12.01 The World Bank performs an effective role in promoting a pro-private sector           Yes       1.10
                        development/pro-investment climate                                                        Qn 12.01A   1.11
                        1 = Very ineffective    7 = Very effective                                                Qn 12.01B
                        12.02 The World Bank performs an effective role in promoting socio-economic
                        development and poverty alleviation
                        1 = Very ineffective    7 = Very effective

Role of IMF             12.03 The International Monetary Fund (IMF) performs an effective role in promoting a       Yes       1.10
                        pro-private sector development/pro-investment climate                                     Qn 12.02A   1.12
                        1 = Very ineffective    7 = Very effective                                                Qn 12.02B
                        12.04 The International Monetary Fund (IMF) performs an effective role in promoting the
                        maintenance of high levels of employment and real income
                        1 = Very ineffective    7 = Very effective




                                                                                                                                     54
