                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  EULER EQUATION ERRORS

                                           Martin Lettau
                                        Sydney C. Ludvigson

                                        Working Paper 11606
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w11606


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2005




This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 0617858.
Ludvigson also acknowledges financial support from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation and the CV Starr
Center at NYU. We are especially grateful to Narayana Kocherlakota for detailed comments on an
earlier draft. We also thank Dave Backus, John Y. Campbell, John Cochrane, George Constantinides,
Massimiliano DeSantis, Wayne Ferson, Mark Gertler, Stephen Gordon, Fatih Guvenen, Ravi Jagannathan,
Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, George Tauchen, Martin Weitzman, Motohiro Yogo, and seminar participants
at Brown, Columbia, Dartmouth, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, the Federal Reserve Bank
of St. Louis, Harvard University, Johns Hopkins, New York University, Unversité Laval, West Virginia
University, Wharton, the 2005 CIRANO/CIREQ (Montreal) Financial Econometrics Conference, the
2005 Duke/UNC Asset Pricing Conference, and the 2005 Society for Economic Dynamics conference
for helpful comments. We thank Massimiliano Croce and Jack Favalukis for excellent research assistance.
Any errors or omissions are the responsibility of the authors.

© 2005 by Martin Lettau and Sydney C. Ludvigson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Euler Equation Errors
Martin Lettau and Sydney C. Ludvigson
NBER Working Paper No. 11606
September 2005, Revised October 2008
JEL No. G10,G12

                                             ABSTRACT

The standard, representative agent, consumption-based asset pricing theory based on CRRA utility
fails to explain the average returns of risky assets. When evaluated on cross- sections of stock returns,
the model generates economically large unconditional Euler equation errors. Unlike the equity premium
puzzle, these large Euler equation errors cannot be resolved with high values of risk aversion. To explain
why the standard model fails, we need to develop alternative models that can rationalize its large pricing
errors. We evaluate whether four newer theories at the vanguard of consumption-based asset pricing
can explain the large Euler equation errors of the standard consumption-based model. In each case,
we find that the alternative theory counterfactually implies that the standard model has negligible Euler
equation errors. We show that the models miss on this dimension because they mischaracterize the
joint behavior of consumption and asset returns in recessions, when aggregate consumption is falling.
By contrast, a simple model in which aggregate consumption growth and stockholder consumption
growth are highly correlated most of the time, but have low or negative correlation in severe recessions,
produces violations of the standard model's Euler equations and departures from joint lognormality
that are remarkably similar to those found in the data.


Martin Lettau
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
545 Student Services Bldg. #1900
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
lettau@haas.berkeley.edu

Sydney C. Ludvigson
Department of Economics
New York University
19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10002
and NBER
sydney.ludvigson@nyu.edu
1         Introduction
Previous research shows that the standard, representative agent, consumption-based asset
pricing theory based on constant relative risk aversion utility fails to explain the average
returns of risky assets.1 One aspect of this failure, addressed here, is the large unconditional
Euler equation errors that the model generates when evaluated on cross-sections of stock
returns. We present evidence on the size of these errors and show that they remain eco-
nomically large even when preference parameters are freely chosen to maximize the model’s
chances of …tting the data. Thus, unlike the equity premium puzzle of Mehra and Prescott
(1985), the large Euler equation errors cannot be resolved with high values of risk aversion.
        To explain why the standard model fails, we need to develop alternative models that
can rationalize its large Euler equation errors. Yet surprisingly little research has been
devoted to assessing the extent to which newer consumption-based asset pricing theories–
those speci…cally developed to address empirical limitations of the standard consumption-
based model–can explain its large Euler equation errors. Unconditional Euler equation errors
can be interpreted economically as pricing errors; thus we use the terms “Euler equation
error”and “pricing error”interchangeably.
        This paper makes three contributions. First, we show that leading consumption-based
asset pricing theories resoundingly fail to explain the mispricing of the standard consumption-
based model. Speci…cally, we investigate four models at the vanguard of consumption-
based asset pricing and show that the benchmark speci…cation of each of these theories
counterfactually implies that the standard model has negligible Euler equation errors when
its parameters are freely chosen to …t the data. This anomaly is striking because early
empirical evidence that the standard model’s Euler equations were violated provided much
of the original impetus for developing the newer models we investigate here.2
        Second, we show that the leading asset pricing models we study fail to explain the mis-
pricing of the standard model because they fundamentally mischaracterize the joint behavior
of consumption and asset returns in recessions, when aggregate consumption is falling. In
the model economies, realized excess returns on risky assets are negative when consumption
is falling, whereas in the data they are often positive.
        Our third contribution is to suggest one speci…c direction along which the current models
can be improved, based on a time-varying, state-dependent correlation between stockholder
and aggregate consumption growth. Speci…cally, we show that a stylized model in which
aggregate consumption growth and stockholder consumption growth are highly correlated
    1
     For example, Hansen and Singleton (1982); Ferson and Constantinides (1991); Hansen and Jagannathan
(1991); Cochrane (1996); Kocherlakota (1996).
   2
     For example, see the discussion in Chapter 8 of Campbell, Lo, and MacKinlay (1997).



                                                  1
most of the time, but have low or negative correlation in recessions, produces violations of
the standard model’s Euler equations and departures from joint lognormality of aggregate
consumption growth and asset returns that are remarkably similar to those found in the
data.
       To motivate the importance of these …ndings for consumption-based asset pricing theory,
it is helpful to consider, by way of analogy, the literature on the value premium puzzle in
…nancial economics. In this literature, the classic Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM)
resoundingly fails to explain the high average excess returns of value stocks, resulting in
a value premium puzzle (Fama and French 1992, 1993). It is well accepted that a fully
successful theoretical resolution to this puzzle must accomplish two things: (i) must provide
an alternative theory to the CAPM that explains the high average returns of value stocks,
and (ii) it must explain the failure of the CAPM to rationalize those high returns.
       Analogously, the large empirical Euler equation errors of the standard consumption-based
model place additional restrictions on new consumption-based models: not only must such
models have zero pricing errors when the Euler equation is correctly speci…ed according to
the model, they must also produce large pricing errors when the Euler equation is incorrectly
speci…ed using power utility and aggregate consumption. A related point is made by Kocher-
lakota (1996), who emphasizes the importance of Euler equation errors for theoretical work
seeking to explain the central empirical puzzles of the standard consumption-based model.
To understand why the classic consumption-based model is wrong, alternative theories must
generate the same large Euler equation errors that we observe in the data for this model.
       Our analysis employs simulated data from several contemporary consumption-based as-
set pricing theories expressly developed to address empirical limitations of the standard
consumption-based model. Clearly, it is not possible to study an exhaustive list of all mod-
els that …t this description; thus we limit our analysis to four that both represent a range
of approaches to consumption-based asset pricing, and have received signi…cant attention in
the literature. These are: the representative agent external habit-persistence paradigms of
(i) Campbell and Cochrane (1999) and (ii) Menzly, Santos, and Veronesi (2004), (iii) the
representative agent long-run risk model based on recursive preferences of Bansal and Yaron
(2004), and (iv) the limited participation model of Guvenen (2003). Each is an explicitly
parameterized economic model calibrated to accord with the data, and each has proven
remarkably successful in explaining a range of asset pricing phenomena that the standard
model fails to explain.3
   3
    The asset pricing literature has already demonstrated a set of theoretical propositions showing that any
observed joint process of aggregate consumption and returns can be an equilibrium outcome if the second
moments of the cross-sectional distribution of consumption growth and asset returns covary in the right
way (Constantinides and Du¢ e (1996)). Such existence proofs, important in their own right, are not the


                                                     2
    The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The next section lays out the empirical
facts on the Euler equation errors of the standard model and shows that they are especially
large for cross-sections that include a broad stock market index return, a short term Treasury
bill rate, and the size and book-market sorted portfolio returns emphasized by Fama and
French (1992, 1993). We then move on in Section 3 to investigate the extent to which
the leading asset pricing models mentioned above explain the mispricing of the standard
model. We show that some of these models can explain why we obtain implausibly high
estimates of risk aversion and the subjective rate of time-preference when freely …tting
aggregate data to the Euler equations of the standard consumption-based model. But, none
can explain the large unconditional Euler equation errors associated with such estimates
for plausibly calibrated sets of asset returns.4 Indeed, the asset pricing models we consider
counterfactually imply that parameter values can be found for which the unconditional Euler
equations of the standard consumption-based model are exactly satis…ed.
    The next part of Section 3 helps to diagnose the result by showing that each of the
four models studied satisfy su¢ cient conditions under which parameter values can always
be found such that the Euler equations of the standard model will be exactly satis…ed. The
economically important condition satis…ed by each model is that realized excess returns on
risky assets are negative whenever consumption growth is su¢ ciently negative. We show
that such a condition is violated in the data.
    We then move on in Section 3 to address the question of measurement error in consump-
tion. If aggregation theorems fail and per capita aggregate consumption is a poor measure of
individual assetholder consumption or the consumption of stockholders, the standard model’s
large Euler equation errors could in principle be attributable to using the wrong measure of
consumption in empirical work. To assess this possibility, we begin by considering a sim-
ple lognormal model of mismeasured consumption in which the aggregate consumption data
used in Euler equation estimation is a poor measure of the consumption of stockholders (re-
ferred to hereafter as the limited participation hypothesis). We show that if the true pricing
kernel based on stockholder consumption is jointly lognormally distributed with aggregate
subject of this paper. Instead, we ask whether particular calibrated economies of leading consumption-based
asset pricing models are quantitatively capable of matching the large pricing equation errors generated by
the standard consumption-based model when …tted to historical data. This is important because it remains
unclear whether fully speci…ed models built on primitives of tastes, technology, and underlying shocks, and
calibrated to accord with the data in plausible ways, can in practice generate the joint behavior of aggregate
consumption and asset returns that we observe in the data.
   4
     Campbell and Cochrane (2000) evaluate the pricing errors of the standard consumption-based model
implied by the habit model of Campbell and Cochrane (1999), by looking at the pricing errors for the most
mispriced portfolio. Their results suggest that there is scope for mispricing, but do not necessarily imply
signi…cant mispricing for the sets of stock portfolios we calibrate our models to match.


                                                      3
consumption and returns, then estimation of Euler equations using per capita aggregate
consumption produces biased estimates of the stockholder’s subjective discount factor and
risk aversion parameters, but does not rationalize the large pricing errors generated by the
standard model.
     We close Section 3 by turning our attention back to stylized models in which the con-
sumption used in our empirical tests is mismeasured (e.g., due to limited stock market
participation), but we relax the assumption of joint lognormality. When limited participa-
tion is combined with speci…c departures from joint lognormality, such as those based on a
time-varying, state-dependent correlation between stockholder and aggregate consumption,
consumption-based asset pricing theories come much closer to rationalizing the large Euler
equation errors of the standard paradigm that in large part motivated the search for newer
models in the …rst place. Section 4 concludes.


2      Euler Equation Errors: Empirical Facts
In this section we consider the empirical properties of the standard consumption-based model.
We begin by showing, using U.S. aggregate data, that there are no values of the risk-aversion
parameter and subjective time discount factor for which violations of the standard model’s
unconditional Euler equations are not economically large.
     Consider the intertemporal choice problem of a representative agent with constant relative
risk-aversion (CRRA) utility over aggregate consumption, who maximizes the expectation
of a time separable utility function:
                                   (1                       )
                                      X          1
                                              k Ct+k    1
                           Max Et                               ;   > 0;                       (1)
                               Ct
                                        k=0
                                                 1

subject to an accumulation equation for wealth. Ct+1 is per capita aggregate consumption,
    is the coe¢ cient of relative risk-aversion and    is a subjective time-discount factor. Agents
have unrestricted access to …nancial markets and face no borrowing or short-sales constraints.
     The asset pricing model comes from the …rst-order conditions for optimal consumption
and portfolio choice, which, by the law of iterated expectations, can be expressed as as set
of unconditional moment restrictions, or Euler equations, taking the form

                               j
                       E Mt+1 Rt+1       1 = 0;        Mt+1 = (Ct+1 =Ct )    ;                 (2)

       j
where Rt+1 denotes the gross raw return on any tradable asset. Mt+1 is the intertemporal
marginal rate of substitution (MRS) in consumption, which is the stochastic discount factor
(SDF), or pricing kernel. Euler equations may also be expressed as a function of excess


                                                  4
returns:                               h                      i
                                              j        f
                                      E Mt+1 Rt+1     Rt+1        = 0;                                   (3)
       f
where Rt+1 is the return on any reference asset, here speci…ed as the return on a one-period
riskless bond. We refer to (2) and (3) as the standard consumption-based model.
   Deviations from these two equations represent Euler equation errors. De…ne

                        ejR E Mt+1 Rt+1
                                    j
                                         1;           ejR;t+1            j
                                                                   Mt+1 Rt+1        1                    (4)
                        h                i
             ejX               j
                       E Mt+1 Rt+1    f
                                    Rt+1   ;          ejX;t+1            j
                                                                   Mt+1 Rt+1             f
                                                                                        Rt+1 :           (5)

We refer to either ejR or ejX as the unconditional Euler equation error for the jth asset return.
   Euler equation errors can be interpreted economically as pricing errors, also commonly
referred to as “alphas”in the language of …nancial economics. The pricing error of asset j is
de…ned as the di¤erence between its historical mean excess return over the risk-free rate and
the risk-premium implied by the model with pricing kernel Mt+1 . The risk premium implied
by the model may be written as the product of the asset’s beta for systematic risk times the
price of systematic risk (Cochrane (2005) provides an exposition). Thus the pricing error of
                   j
the jth return,        , is that part of the average excess return that cannot be explained by the
                                                          j         ejX
asset’s beta risk. It is straightforward to show that         =   E(Mt+1 )
                                                                           :   Pricing errors are therefore
                                                                                             1
proportional to Euler equation errors. Moreover, because the term E (Mt+1 )                      is the mean
of the risk-free rate and is close to unity for most models, pricing errors and Euler equation
errors are almost identical quantities. If the standard model is true, both errors should be
zero for any traded asset, for preference parameters          and        of the representative agent.
   Given a set of test assets and data on aggregate consumption, (2) and (3) can be estimated
using Generalized Method of Moments (GMM, Hansen (1982)). The parameters                           and   are
chosen to minimize a weighted sum of squared Euler equation errors:

                                min gT ( ; )    wT0 ( ; ) WwT ( ; ) ;                                    (6)
                                  ;

where W is a positive semi-de…nite weighting matrix and wT ( ; ) is the vector of Euler
equation errors for each asset, with jth element wjT ( ; ) given either by

                                                   1X j
                                                      T
                                         wjT ( ) =      e ;
                                                   T t=1 X;t
in the case of excess returns, or

                                                    1X j
                                                       T
                                        wjT ( ; ) =      e ;
                                                    T t=1 R;t

in the case of raw returns. Let b and b denote the arg min gT ( ; ).

                                                  5
   For most of the results below, we use the identity matrix, W = I, to weight the GMM
criterion function. We do so because this approach preserves the structure of the test assets,
which were speci…cally chosen for their economically interesting characteristics and because
they deliver a wide spread in cross-sectional average returns. Other matrices re-weight the
Euler equations, so that the GMM procedure amounts to minimizing the pricing errors of re-
weighted portfolios of the original test assets, destroying this structure. It should be noted,
however, that other weighting matrixes such as the optimal weighting matrix of Hansen
(1982) and the second moment matrix of Hansen and Jagannathan (1997) produce results
very similar to those reported below and do not alter our main conclusions.
   We focus our attention on the unconditional Euler equation errors for cross-sections of
asset returns that include a broad stock market index return (measured as the CRSP value-
weighted price index return and denoted Rts ), a short term Treasury bill rate (measured as
the three-month Treasury bill rate and denoted Rtf ), and six size and book-market sorted
portfolio returns available from Kenneth French’s Dartmouth web site. (A detailed descrip-
tion of the data is provided in the Appendix.) These returns are value-weighted portfolio
returns of common stock sorted into two size (market equity) quantiles and three book value-
market value quantiles. We use equity returns on size and book-to-market sorted portfolios
because Fama and French (1992) show that these two characteristics provide a “simple and
powerful characterization”of the cross-section of average stock returns, and absorb the roles
of leverage, earnings-to-price ratio and many other factors governing cross-sectional varia-
                                                                                                  0
tion in average stock returns. These returns are denoted as a vector RFt F         (Rt1 ; :::Rt6 ) .
We analyze the pricing errors for the eight assets Rts ; Rtf ; RFt F as a group, as well as for
the set of two assets comprised of only Rts and Rtf . The latter is of interest because the
standard model’s inability to explain properties of these two returns has been central to the
development of a consensus that the model is ‡awed. In addition, almost all asset pricing
models seek to match the empirical properties of these two returns, whereas fewer generate
implications for larger cross-sections of securities.
   To measure consumption, we use quarterly United States data on per capita expenditures
on nondurables and services, in 2000 dollars. The data span the period from the fourth
quarter of 1951 to the fourth quarter of 2002. Returns are de‡ated by the implicit price
de‡ator corresponding to this measure of consumption, Ct .
   Table 1 and Figure 1 that follow present summary statistics from the GMM estimation
of the Euler equations above. The square root of the average squared Euler equation errors
(RMSE) is reported as a measure of the magnitude of mispricing. To give a sense of how
the large pricing errors are relative to the returns being priced, the RMSE is often reported
relative to RMSR, the square root of the average squared (mean) returns of the assets under



                                                6
consideration.5
       Estimating the empirical counterpart of (2) and (3) by GMM demonstrates the dramatic
failure of the standard model along several dimensions. Table 1 shows that when                      and
                                      s            f
are chosen to minimize (6) for       Rt+1   and   Rt+1   alone (using raw returns), the RMSE is 2.7%
per annum, a magnitude that is 48% of the square root of the average squared returns on
these two assets. Since there are just two moments in this case, this means that there are
no values of       and      that set the two pricing errors to zero.6 When             and   are chosen to
minimize (2) for the eight asset returns, the RMSE is 3.05% per annum, a magnitude that is
33% of the square root of the average squared returns on the eight assets. The estimates b
and b (which are left unrestricted) are close to 1.4 and 90, respectively, regardless of which
set of test assets are used. The …nal two columns of Table 1 report the results of statistical
tests of the model, discussed below.
       The same patterns are visible when estimation is conducted on the Euler equations using
excess returns. Figure 1 displays the RMSE for the Euler equations in (3) over a range of
values of . The solid line plots the case where the single excess return on the aggregate stock
         s            f
market, Rt+1         Rt+1 , is priced; the dotted line plots the case for the seven excess returns
 s          f                  f
Rt+1       Rt+1 and RFt F     Rt+1 . In the case of the single excess return for the aggregate stock
market, the RMSE is just the Euler equation error itself. The …gure shows that the pricing
error for the excess return on the aggregate stock market cannot be driven to zero, for any
value of . Moreover, the minimized pricing error is large. The lowest pricing error is 5.2%
per annum, almost 60% of the average annual CRSP excess return. This result occurs at
a value for risk aversion of       = 117. At other values of ; the error rises precipitously and
reaches several times the average annual stock market return when                   is outside the ranges
displayed in Figure 1.
       Similar results hold when Euler equation errors are computed for the seven excess returns
 s          f              f
Rt+1       Rt+1 ; RFt F   Rt+1 . The minimum RMSE is about 60% of the square root of average
squared returns being priced, which occurs at              = 118: These results show that the degree
of mispricing in the standard model is about the same regardless of whether we consider the
   5
       For the Euler equations of raw returns, RMSE and RMSR are equal to
                                     v                         v
                                     u     N                   u     N
                                     u1 X         2            u1 X                2
                          RM SE      t          j
                                               eR ;    RM SR = t         E Rtj         ;
                                       N j=1                      N j=1


where N is the number of asset returns, and E Rtj is the (time-series) mean of the jth raw return. RMSE
and RMSR are de…ned in an analogous fashion for excess returns.
   6
     Note that the Euler equations are nonlinear functions of and : Thus, there is not necessarily a solution
to the pair of equations. See Section 3.2 for su¢ cient conditions for the existence of a solution.




                                                     7
single excess return on the market or a larger cross-section of excess stock market returns.7
       What drives the large Euler equation errors in the data? The lower panel of Table 1
provides an important clue: a signi…cant part of the unconditional Euler equation errors
generated by the standard model is associated with recessions, periods in which per capita
aggregate consumption growth is negative. For example, when data points coinciding with
the smallest six observations on consumption growth are removed from the sample, the root
mean squared pricing errors are substantially reduced. The RMSE is just 0.73% per annum
                                             s        f
or 13% of the root mean squared returns for Rt+1 and Rt+1 ; and 1.94% per annum or 21
                                                                     s      f
percent of the root mean squared returns on the eight asset returns Rt+1 ; Rt+1 ; RFt F . This
result echoes the …ndings in Ferson and Merrick (1987) who report less evidence against the
standard consumption-based model in non-recession periods.
       Table 2 identi…es these six observations as they are located throughout the sample. Each
occur in the depths of recessions, as identi…ed by the National Bureau of Economic Re-
search. In these periods, aggregate per capita consumption growth is steeply negative but
the aggregate stock return and Treasury-bill rate is, more often than not, steeply positive.
Since the product of the marginal rate of substitution and the gross asset return must be
unity on average, such negative comovement (positive comovement between Mt+1 and re-
turns) contributes to large pricing errors.8 One can also reduce the pricing errors by using
annual returns and year-over-year consumption growth.9 This procedure averages out the
worst quarters for consumption growth instead of removing them. Either way, a substantial
proportion of the cyclical variation in consumption is eliminated. For example, on a quar-
terly basis the largest declines in consumption are about six times as large at an annual rate
as those on a year-over-year basis. This explains why Kocherlakota (1996), who focuses on
annual data, is able to locate parameter values for              and     that exactly satisfy the Euler
equations of a stock return and Treasury-bill rate.
   7
      In computing the pricing errors above, we use the standard timing convention that end-of-period returns
dated in quarter t should be paired with consumption growth measured from t 1 to t. If, instead, returns
at t are paired with consumption growth from t to t + 1; a value for can be found that sets the pricing
error to zero for the single excess return Rs Rf . By contrast, the choice of timing convention has very
little a¤ect on the RMSE for the set of seven excess returns Rs Rf ; RF    t
                                                                             F
                                                                               Rf . We use the former timing
convention as it is standard empirical practice in estimation of Euler equations. We stress, however, that
the timing convention itself is not important for the comparisons with theoretical models that follow, since
those models always produce pricing errors that are close to zero regardless of which timing convention is
used.
    8
      Eliminating the recession periods, however, results in preference parameter estimates that are even more
extreme than they are in the full sample; for example b = 225: Therefore, if the criterion for success is
reasonable preference parameter estimates, then the standard model does worse when recession periods are
removed than when they are included.
    9
      For a recent example along these lines, see Jagannathan and Wang (2005).


                                                      8
       Of course, these quarterly recession episodes are not outliers to be ignored, but signi…cant
economic events to be explained. Indeed, we argue that such Euler equation errors, driven
by periods of important economic change, are among the most damning pieces of evidence
against the standard model. An important question is why the standard model performs so
poorly in recessions relative to other times.
       Although not reported above, we note that the pricing error of the Euler equation associ-
ated with the CRSP stock market return is always positive, implying a positive alpha in the
expected return-beta representation of the model. This says that unconditional risk premia
are too high to be explained by the stock market’s covariance with the marginal rate of
substitution of aggregate consumption, a result familiar from the equity premium literature
(Mehra and Prescott (1985), Kocherlakota (1996)). Still, it is important to remember that
unlike the equity premium puzzle, the large Euler equation errors cannot be resolved by high
values of .


2.1        Sampling Error and Tests for Joint Normality
We use GMM distribution theory to ask whether the estimated pricing errors wT ( ; )
are jointly more di¤erent from zero than what would be implied by sampling error alone.
When there are more moments than parameters to be estimated, this amounts to a test
of overidentifying restrictions. The last two columns of Table 1 report p values from chi-
squared tests of the model’s overidentifying restrictions for estimation of the eight Euler
equations for the raw returns Rts ; Rtf ; and RFt F . Although the results presented so far have
used the identity weighting matrix, the last column in Table 1 presents the p values from
the same statistical test using an estimate of the optimal GMM weighting matrix (Hansen
(1982)). The results from either weighting matrix are the same: we may strongly reject the
hypothesis that the Euler equation errors are jointly statistically indistinguishable from zero;
the p values for this test are less than 0.0001.10
       For the two-asset case, the model is just-identi…ed, so the overidentifying tests above are
not applicable. But note that the expectation in (3) is estimated using the sample means
ejX;t+1 . Fixing       and , it is possible to compute the sampling variation in the sample mean
of   ejX;t+1 ,   given as   2
                                =   2
                                    X =T;   where   X   is the sample standard deviation of ejX;t+1 and T is
the sample size.11
       The sampling error of the mean of ejX;t+1 is large when evaluated at the estimated values
  10
     Cochrane (2005), Chapter 11, explains how to apply Hansen’s (1982) GMM results to compute p-values
using an arbitrary …xed weighting matrix.
  11
     We also calculated standard errors for the mean of ejX;t+1 using a nonparameteric correction for serial
correlation. Since ejX;t+1 is close to serially uncorrelated, this correction has little a¤ect on the error bands.



                                                            9
b = 1:4 and b = 117. When Rj = Rs , a con…dence interval formed by plus and minus two
                           t+1  t+1
standard errors is ( 0:55%; 11%), in percent per annum. This large range is not surprising
and arises partly for the same reason that it is di¢ cult to estimate the equity premium
accurately: excess returns are highly volatile. But the large error bands also arise because
the data require a very high value for                    in an attempt to …t the equity premium. Such a
high value of      generates extreme volatility in the pricing kernel, making discounted returns
even harder to estimate precisely than nondiscounted returns. Unless one views                                    = 117
as plausible, however, such wide standard error bands for mean discounted returns serve
only to provide further evidence of the model’s empirical limitations, which even at                              = 117
leaves a pricing error that is more than half of the average annual stock return. If instead we
restrict the value of risk aversion to lie in the range 0                        89, the pricing errors are always
statistically di¤erent from zero at the …ve percent level of signi…cance. Accordingly, the
sample mean of ejX;t+1 is statistically insigni…cant, not because the pricing errors are small–
indeed they are economically large–but rather because discounted returns are so extremely
noisy when        = 117. Clearly the overidentifying restrictions deliver a much more powerful
test of the model.
       The results above are important for what they imply about the joint distribution of aggre-
gate consumption and asset returns. If consumption and asset returns are jointly lognormally
distributed, then GMM estimation of (2) on any two asset returns should produce estimates
of     and    for which the population Euler equations are exactly satis…ed. The results above
therefore suggest that consumption and asset returns are not jointly lognormal. For this
reason, it is natural to assess whether joint lognormality is a plausible description of our con-
sumption and return data, once we account for sampling error. Although previous statistical
studies suggest that stock returns are not lognormally distributed (see, for example, the stud-
ies discussed in Campbell, Lo, and MacKinlay (1997)), it is commonly held that consumption
and stock returns may be approximately jointly lognormally distributed, especially in lower
frequency data. We perform formal statistical
                                      h       tests of normality based on multivariate
                                                                           i           skew-
                                                                                                     0
ness and kurtosis12 for the vector Yt                                           s
                                                         log (Ct+1 =Ct ) ; log Rt+1 ; log Rtf            , as well as for
  12
    Multivariate skewness and kurtosis statistics are computed following Mardia (1970). Let xt be a p-
dimensional random variable with mean and variance-covariance matrix V of sample size T . Multivariate
skewness S and (excess) kurtosis K and asymptotic distributions are given by

                                                  T   T
                                                              !1=2
                                              1 XX 3                 T S2     2
                            S         =                 g
                                             T 2 t=1 s=1 ts            6      p(p+1)(p+2)=6

                                              T                          p
                                           1X 2                            TK
                            K         =         g      p (p + 2)     p               N (0; 1) ;
                                           T t=1 tt                    8p (p + 2)

where gts = (xt         ^
                   ^ )0 V   1
                                (xs                     ^ are sample estimates of
                                          ^ ) and ^ and V                              and V. S and K are zero if x is


                                                                10
                                     h                                                          i
                                                                s          f
the larger set of variables Xt           log (Ct+1 =Ct ) ; log Rt+1 ; log Rt+1 ; log RFt F          :
    Statistical tests based on multivariate skewness and kurtosis provide strong evidence
against joint normality. For Yt multivariate skewness is estimated to be 1.54 and multivariate
excess kurtosis is 4.64, with p values for the null hypothesis that these statistics are equal to
those of a multivariate normal distribution less than 0.0001. Similarly for Xt , multivariate
skewness is 4.65 and multivariate kurtosis is 35.93, and the statistical rejections of normality
are even stronger. The same conclusion arises from examining quantile-quantile plots (QQ
plots) for the vector time-series Yt and Xt , given in Figure 2. This …gure plots the sample
quantiles for the data against those that would arise under the null of joint lognormality,
along with pointwise standard errors bands.13 The QQ plots show substantial departures
from normality: a large number of quantiles lie far outside the standard error bands for joint
normality. We come back to these results below.


3     Euler Equation Errors in Asset Pricing Models
This section of the paper investigates the extent to which newer consumption-based asset
pricing theories–those speci…cally developed to address empirical limitations of the standard
consumption-based model–can explain its large Euler equation errors. If leading asset pric-
ing models are true, then in these models using (2) to price assets should generate large
unconditional asset pricing errors, as in the data.


3.1     Leading Asset Pricing Models
We use simulated data from each of the leading asset pricing models mentioned above to
study the extent to which these models explain the mispricing of the standard model. We
show that some of these models can explain why an econometrician obtains implausibly
high estimates of      and     when freely …tting aggregate data to (2). But, none can explain
the large unconditional Euler equation errors associated with such estimates for plausibly
calibrated sets of asset returns. Indeed, the asset pricing models we consider counterfactually
imply that values of        and     can be found for which (2) satis…es the unconditional Euler
equation restrictions just as well as the true pricing kernel, implying that the standard model
generates negligible pricing errors for cross-sections of asset returns.
jointly normally distributed. If x is univariate S and K are equivalent to the standard univariate de…nitions
of skewness and kurtosis.
   13
      Pointwise standard error bands are computed by simulating from the multivariate normal distribution
with length equal to the size of our data set.




                                                     11
3.1.1     Simulating the Models

To assess the extent to which the models above are capable of explaining the pricing errors
of the standard model, we assume each model generates the asset pricing data, and then
compute the pricing errors that would arise if an econometrician …t (2) to data generated by
the models. This requires simulating the models and then computing pricing errors of the
standard model using simulated data in precisely the same way that we did using historical
data. Except where noted, our simulations use the baseline parameter values of each paper.
It is important to emphasize that even though the primitive shocks in these theories are
often speci…ed as normally distributed, the pricing kernels are nonlinear, and thus both
the marginal distribution of asset returns, and the joint distribution of consumption and
returns— what matters for Euler equation errors— are endogenous features of the asset pricing
model. It follows that the pricing kernels and returns in these models are not unconditionally
jointly lognormally distributed with aggregate consumption growth as was presumed in the
previous sections, a fact that can be veri…ed by statistical tests on simulated data. The
question posed here is whether these models can endogenously generate a return distribution
su¢ ciently non-normal that it is capable of rationalizing the large Euler equation errors of
the standard consumption-based model (2).14 We brie‡y describe only the main features of
each model, and refer the reader to the Appendix and the original articles for details.

3.1.2     Misspeci…ed Preferences

We …rst consider theories that deviate from the standard consumption-based model (2) in
their speci…cation of investor preferences. These include the habit models of Campbell and
Cochrane (1999) and Menzly, Santos, and Veronesi (2004), and the long-run risk model of
Bansal and Yaron (2004). Since these are representative agent models, an econometrician
who attempted to …t (2) to data generated by these models would err by using the wrong
functional form for the marginal rate of substitution in consumption (misspeci…ed prefer-
ences).
  14
    For the three representative agents models, it is assumed that innovations in consumption growth are
lognormally distributed. It is reasonable to ask whether the lognormality assumption for consumption is
merely a convenient but inaccurate representation of the data that could be relaxed to generate the observed
Euler equation errors. The di¢ culty with this scenario is that the distribution of aggregate consumption
growth in the data appears to be well described by a lognormal process, while the distribution of stock
returns displays higher kurtosis than lognormal. (Results available upon request.) Thus, the distributional
assumptions made for consumption growth in these models are not only convenient, they are empirically
reasonable.




                                                    12
   The stochastic discount factor in the CC and MSV models takes the form
                                               Ct+1       Xt+1
                                Mt+1 =                                    ;
                                                 Ct       Xt
where Ct is aggregate consumption and Xt is habit level (a function of current and past
aggregate consumption), and       is the subjective discount factor. The key innovation in
each of these models concerns the speci…cation of the habit process Xt , which in both cases
evolves according to heteroskedastic autoregressive processes. However CC and MSV di¤er
                                                     CC
in their speci…cation of Xt (see the Appendix). Let Mt+1 denote the speci…cation of the SDF
                                                          M SV
corresponding to the Campbell-Cochrane model of Xt , and Mt+1  denote the speci…cation
of the SDF corresponding to the MSV model of Xt . Both CC and MSV assume that                         ct =
 + vt ;where vt is a normally distributed, i.i.d. shock, and both models derive equilibrium
returns for a risk-free asset and a risky equity claim that pays aggregate consumption as its
                                                             f          s
dividend. As above, the returns to these assets are denoted Rt+1 , and Rt+1 , respectively.
Campbell and Cochrane set       = 2 and        = 0:89 under their baseline calibration, both at
an annual rate. Menzly, Santos and Veronesi choose                 = 1 and        = 0:96: Notice that the
curvature parameter , is no longer equal to relative risk-aversion in these models.
   The MSV model is a multi-asset extension of the CC model that generates implications
for multiple risky securities, thus we study the implications of the habit models for larger
cross-sections of asset returns by applying the MSV framework. Each …rm is distinguished
by a distinct dividend process with dynamics characterized by ‡uctuations in the share sjt
                                                  Dtj
it represents in aggregate consumption, sjt =     Ct
                                                      .   Cross-sectional variation in unconditional
mean returns across risky securities is governed by cross-sectional variation in the covariance
between shares sjt and aggregate consumption growth                ct .
   Bansal and Yaron (2004) consider a representative agent who maximizes utility given
by recursive preferences of Epstein and Zin (1989, 1991) and Weil (1989). The stochastic
discount factor under Epstein-Zin-Weil utility used in BY takes the form
                                                   1
                                                     !
                               BY         Ct+1              1
                             Mt+1 =                     Rw;t+1 ;                                       (7)
                                            Ct

where Rw;t+1 is the simple gross return on the aggregate wealth portfolio, which pays a
dividend equal to aggregate consumption, Ct ,             (1       ) = (1     1= ) ;   is the intertemporal
elasticity of substitution in consumption (IES),          is the coe¢ cient of relative risk aversion,
and    is the subjective discount factor. The dynamics of consumption growth and stock
market dividend growth,     dt , take the form

                                     ct+1 =      + xt +        t t+1                                   (8)

                                  dt+1 =   d   + xt +          d t ut+1 ;                              (9)

                                                 13
                                                     xt+1 = xt +             c t et+1

                                           2          2               2       2
                                           t+1   =        +   1       t           +     w wt+1 ;

        2                                                                                      2
where   t+1     represents the time-varying stochastic volatility,                                 is its unconditional mean,
and ;      d,   ,   d;   ,   c,   1   and    w    are parameters, calibrated as in BY. Here, the stock mar-
ket asset is the dividend claim, given by (9), rather than a claim to aggregate consumption,
                                                           s
given by (8). We denote the return to this dividend claim Rt+1 , since it corresponds the
model’s stock market return. BY calibrate the model so that xt is very persistent, with a
small unconditional variance. Thus, xt captures long-run risk, since a small but persistent
component in the aggregate endowment can lead to large ‡uctuations in the present dis-
counted value of future dividends. Their favored speci…cation sets                                      = 0:998,   = 10 and
  = 1:5.
   We analyze the multi-asset implications of the BY model by considering risky securities,
indexed by j; that are distinguished by their cash-‡ow processes:

                                                 djt+1 =      j
                                                              d   +    j
                                                                           xt +   j
                                                                                  d t ut+1 :                            (10)

                                                      j
By considering a grid of values for                       , we create risky securities with di¤erent risk-premia,
since this parameter governs the correlation of equilibrium returns with the stochastic dis-
                                      j                                                                                     j
count factor. By altering             d,   we control the variance in the risky security returns, while                     d
controls the mean price-dividend ratio across risky assets.
   For both the MSV and BY models, we choose parameters of the cash-‡ow processes
to create a cross-section of asset returns that include a risk-free rate, an aggregate equity
return, and six additional risky securities, or eight securities in total. For each model, we
exactly replicate the authors’ original calibration to obtain the same risk-free return and
aggregate equity return studied there. For the six additional risky securities, we choose
parameters of the individual cash-‡ow processes that allow us to come as close as possible
to matching the spread in risk-premia found in the six size/book-market sorted portfolio
returns in the data. For the BY model, we can generate a cross-section of returns that
come very close to matching the historical spread in these returns. For example, the largest
spread in average annualized returns is given by the di¤erence between the portfolio in the
smallest size and highest book-market category and the portfolio in the largest size and lowest
book-market category, equal to about seven percent; thus we create six arti…cial returns for
which the largest spread is 6.7 percent per annum. Constructing such returns for the MSV
framework is more complicated, since the solutions for the multi-asset model hold only as an
approximation (see the Appendix for the approximate relation). Unfortunately, we …nd that
the approximation error in this model can be substantial under parameter values required to


                                                                      14
make the maximal spread as large as seven percent.15 As a result, we restrict the parameter
values to ranges that limit approximation error to reasonably small degrees. This still leaves
us with a signi…cant spread of 4.5 percent per annum in the returns of the six arti…cial
securities created.
       To study the implications of these representative-agent models, we simulate a large time-
series (e.g., 20,000 periods) from each model and compute the pricing errors that would arise
                                      Ct+1           c
                   c
in equilibrium if Mt+1 =        c      Ct
                                                         were …tted to data generated by these models. Thus, we
conduct precisely the same empirical estimation on model-generated data as was conducted
on historical data, above. The parameters                              c   and   c   are chosen by GMM to minimize
the Euler equation errors            ejR       =      c
                                                   E[Mt+1  j
                                                          Rt+1 ]           1. We denote the estimated parameters
that minimize the GMM criterion as bc and bc . As in the historical data, we focus on
                                  s        f
the case of N = 2 asset returns (Rt+1 and Rt+1 ), and the case of N = 8 asset returns,
  s      f      1           6
(Rt+1 ; Rt+1 ; Rt+1 ; :::; Rt+1 ).
       The main results, presented in Table 3, are as follows. For both habit models, we …nd
                                           c
the pricing errors that arise from …tting Mt+1 to model-generated data are numerically
zero, just as they are when the true habit pricing kernel is used. This result does not
depend on the number of assets being priced; it is the same for the two-asset case and
eight-asset case. Values of                c   and       c   can in each case be found that allow the standard
consumption-based model to unconditionally price assets just as well as the true pricing
kernel, as measured by the root mean-squared pricing error. The habit models can explain
what many would consider the implausible estimates (Table 1) of time preference and risk
aversion obtained when freely …tting aggregate data to (2). In the CC model, the values of                               c
                                                                   s              f
and      c   that minimize the GMM criterion for                  Rt+1     and   Rt+1   are 1.28 and 57.48, respectively.
The corresponding values in the MSV model are 1.71 and 30.64, respectively. This represents
a signi…cant distortion from the true values of these parameters. (Recall that the true
preference parameters are              = 2 and                = 0:89 in CC and            = 1 and      = 0:96 in MSV.)
                                                                                  c
But, it is in those parameters that all of the distortion from erroneously using Mt+1 to price
assets arises. No distortion appears in the Euler equation errors themselves.
       The conclusions for the Bansal-Yaron long-run risk model, also displayed in Table 3,
are the same. Here we follow BY and simulate the model at monthly frequency, aggregate
to annual frequency, and report the model’s implications for pricing errors and parameter
values. The monthly consumption data are time-aggregated to arrive at annual consumption,
and monthly returns are continuously compounded to annual returns.16 We …nd that                                     c   is
  15
     Menzly, Santos, and Veronesi (2004) state that the approximation error is small for the parameters they
employ, but it is not small for our parameters, which were chosen to mimic returns of the Fama-French
portfolios.
  16
     The resulting Euler equation errors are unchanged if they are computed for quarterly time-aggregate


                                                                  15
estimated to be close to the true value, but            c   is estimated to be about …ve times as high as
true risk aversion. As for the habit models, an econometrician will estimate high values of
risk aversion when …tting the standard consumption-based model to the BY data, but the
resulting Euler equation errors would be e¤ectively zero.17

3.1.3      Misspeci…ed Consumption

Next we consider the limited participation model of Guvenen (2003). The Guvenen economy
has two types of consumers, stockholders and nonstockholders, and two assets, a stock return
and a riskless bond. Nonstockholders are exogenously prevented from participating in the
stock market. The stochastic discount factor in this model is denoted
                                                             i      i
                                            G               Ct+1
                                           Mt+1     i                   ;
                                                             Cti

where Cti is stockholder consumption, which by assumption is not the same as aggregate
per capita consumption,         i   is the subjective discount factor of the stockholder, and       i   is the
stockholder’s relative risk aversion. Thus, an econometrician who attempted to …t (2) to
aggregate data would err by using the wrong measure of consumption, aggregate consump-
tion rather than stockholder consumption (misspeci…ed consumption). In other respects, the
model is a standard one-sector real business cycle model with adjustment costs in capital.
Both stockholders and nonstockholders receive labor income with wages determined compet-
itively by the marginal product of labor, and …rms choose output by maximizing the present
discounted value of expected future pro…ts. Both agents have access to the riskless bond.
    We follow the same procedure discussed above to quantify pricing errors in this model.
We simulate a large time series of arti…cial data and use these data to quantify the magnitude
of unconditional pricing errors that an econometrician would …nd if the misspeci…ed MRS,
              Ct+1      c
 c
Mt+1 =      c  Ct
                            , based on aggregate consumption, were …tted to asset pricing data
                  G
generated   by Mt+1 .       Since cash-‡ows are endogenously determined by the properties of a
general equilibrium setting in that model, the extension to multiple-assets is not straight-
forward. For this reason, we focus only on the implications of the Guvenen model for Rs
and Rf .
    The main results are presented in the bottom panel of Table 4. They show that the
Guvenen model, like the habit models, generates e¤ectively zero Euler equation errors when
consumption and quarterly returns rather than annual time-aggregated consumption and annual returns.
  17
     For models based on recursive preferences, Kocherlakota (1990) shows that there is an observational
equivalence to the standard model with power utility preferences, if the aggregate endowment growth is i.i.d.
However, the endowment growth process in the BY model is not i.i.d., but instead serially correlated with
stochastic volatility. Moreover, the annual consumption data are time-aggregated, which further distorts the
time-series properties from those of the monthly endowment process.

                                                        16
 c
Mt+1 is used to price assets, but in this case estimates of the parameters show much less
distortion from their true values. The table also reports the pricing errors using the true
        G
kernel Mt+1 based on stockholder consumption, which are quite small (0.02% on an annual
basis) but not exactly zero due to the rarely-binding borrowing constraints that apply to
                                                                                       c
both stockholders and nonstockholders. Euler equation errors based on the misspeci…ed Mt+1
are tiny even when preference parameter values are not chosen to minimize those errors. For
example, when               c   and    c   are set to their true values for stockholders, (in Guvenen’s baseline
speci…cation, stockholders have risk aversion                        i   = 2 and subjective discount factor             i   = 0:99),
the pricing errors using aggregate consumption are equal to about 0.4% at an annual rate for
the stock return and -0.34% for the risk-free rate, small in magnitude compared to the data.
When         c   and    c   are chosen to minimize the sum of squared pricing errors for these two asset
returns, as in empirical practice, the Euler equation errors are, to numerical accuracy, zero
for the stock return and risk-free return. Moreover, the estimated values for the subjective
time-discount factor and risk aversion from such an estimation show minimal distortion from
their true value, equal to bc = 0:99 and b = 4:49, respectively. These results imply that
                                                                 c
by increasing               by a factor of 2.5–from 2 to 4.5–the Guvenen model delivers a power utility
pricing kernel using aggregate consumption that explains the historical mean return on the
stock market and risk-free (Treasury bill) return just as well as the true pricing kernel based
on stockholder consumption. This model therefore does not explain the equity premium
puzzle of Mehra and Prescott (1985), which is the puzzle that a high value of                                          is required
to explain the magnitude of the equity premium when the power utility model is …tted to
aggregate consumption data.
     To aid in understanding these results, the top panels of Table 4 provides summary sta-
tistics from the model. Panel A of Table 4 shows that stockholder consumption growth
is about two and a half times as volatile as aggregate consumption growth, and perfectly
correlated with it. Stockholder consumption is over four times as volatile as nonstockholder
consumption growth, but the two are almost perfectly correlated, with correlation 0.99. This
is not surprising since both types of consumers participate in the same labor market and
bond markets; the agents di¤er only in their ability to hold equities and in their risk-aversion
(nonstockholders have higher risk-aversion). As a consequence, the true pricing kernel based
                                                     GU V
on the stockholder’s marginal rate of substitution, Mt+1  , is highly correlated with the mis-
                                                 c
speci…ed aggregate consumption “pricing kernel” Mt+1                                   c (Ct+1 =Ct )
                                                                                                           c   , for a variety of
values of         c    and      c.    Panel B of Table 4 shows this correlation for two combinations of
these parameters, …rst with these parameters set at their true values                                  c       =   i   = 0:99 and
 c   =   i   = 2, and second with               c   and   c   set to the values that minimize the equally-weighted
                                           c
sum of squared Euler equation errors when Mt+1 is used to price assets. In both cases, the
                     GU V      c
correlation between Mt+1  and Mt+1 is extremely high, 0.99. In addition, when                                               c   = 4:5,

                                                                     17
 GU V      c
Mt+1  and Mt+1 have virtually identical volatilities, so their asset pricing implications are
the same.

3.1.4     Additional Diagnostics

Misspeci…ed Preferences and Misspeci…ed Consumption One possible reaction to
the results above, is that we should take the representative agent nature of the CC, MSV and
BY models less literally and assume that they apply only to a representative stockholder,
rather than to a representative household of all consumers. Would the results for these
models be better reconciled with the data if we accounted for limited participation? Not
necessarily. As an illustration, we consider a limited-participation version of the MSV model
and show that the conclusions are unchanged from the representative agent setup.
   Since the MSV model is a representative agent model, we modify it in order to study
the role of limited participation. Assume that asset prices are determined by the framework
above, where a valid stochastic discount factor is a function of any stockholder’s consumption
Cti and stockholder’s habit Xti . The process for stockholder consumption is the same as in
MSV, described above, but now with i subscripts:

                                            cit =     i   +      i
                                                              i vt ;


where vti is a normally distributed i.i.d. shock. Aggregate consumption is assumed to follow
a separate process given by
                                                                 c
                                            ct =      c   +   c vt ;

with vtc a normally distributed i.i.d. shock. We analyze the results over a range of cases for
the correlation between vti and vtc , and their relative volatilities              i= c.

   Asset prices are determined by the stochastic discount factor of individual assetholders,
denoted
                                                     i           i         i
                                 M SV i             Ct+1       Xt+1
                                Mt+1         i                                 ;
                                                      Cti      Xti
       i
where Xt+1 is the external habit modeled as in MSV, now a function of Cti (the Appendix
                                                                    M SV i
provides an exact expression). We assume the data are generated by Mt+1    and compute
the Euler equation errors that arise from …tting

                                      c
                                     Mt+1        c   (Ct+1 =Ct )       c




to asset pricing data. We refer to this case as “misspeci…ed preferences and misspeci…ed
                                             c
consumption,”since an econometrician who …t Mt+1 to asset return data would be employing
both the wrong model of preferences and the wrong consumption measure. The parameters,


                                                     18
 c    and      c   are chosen to minimize an equally-weighted sum of squared pricing errors of the
assets under consideration, as with the historical data.
          The results are presented in Table 5, where the Euler equation errors for a range of
parameter values. The standard deviation of asset-holder consumption growth is allowed to
range from one times to …ve times as volatile as that of aggregate consumption growth, the
correlation from -1.0 to 1.0. The pricing errors (as measured by RMSE/RMSR) are reported
in the bottom subpanels. The top panel reports these errors for the two-asset case where
       s          f
only Rt+1  and, Rt+1 are priced; the bottom panel reports for the eight-asset case with six
additional risky securities. For each parameter con…guration, we also report the values bc
and bc that minimize the quadratic form gT ( c ; c ), as above.
                                                                       c
          Table 5 shows that the pricing errors that arise from using Mt+1 to price assets are
always zero, even if assetholder consumption growth has very di¤erent properties from ag-
gregate consumption growth. For example, aggregate consumption growth can be perfectly
negatively correlated with stockholder consumption growth and …ve times as volatile, yet
the pricing errors that arise from using Ct in place of Cti are still zero. Notice, however,
that the parameters           c   and   c   can deviate substantially from the true preference parame-
ters of stockholders. This is similar to the lognormal example in Section 3.1, in which the
use of mismeasured consumption distorts preference parameters, but does not explain the
large pricing errors generated by the standard consumption-based model.18 Results for the
multi-asset case are qualitatively the same as those for two-asset case. These …ndings rein-
force the conclusion that changing the pricing kernel does not necessarily change the pricing
implications.
          The results reveal a striking implication of leading asset pricing models: the unconditional
pricing errors of the standard consumption-based model can be virtually identical to those
using the true pricing kernel, even when (i) the true kernel has preferences di¤erent from the
CRRA form of the standard model, (ii) the consumption of marginal assetholders behaves
di¤erently from per capita aggregate consumption, and (iii) the number of assets exceeds
the number of free parameters to be estimated. This implies that the explanation for the
high average pricing errors produced by the standard model has to be something more than
limited participation and/or nonstandard preferences per se, since in many models parameter
values can be found that allow the standard model to price cross-sections of assets almost
as well as the true pricing kernel that generated the data.
     18
    Variation in i = c has little a¤ect on the estimated value of the risk-aversion parameter c . This happens
because we adjust the parameter in the MSV habit speci…cation (see the Appendix) at the same time as we
adjust i = c so that the mean excess return Rs Rf remains roughly what it is in MSV. Since the volatility
of aggregate consumption is kept the same and is adjusted to keep the returns of the same magnitude, c
doesn’t change much.


                                                        19
Time Aggregated Consumption What if the decision interval of households is shorter
than the data sampling interval, leading to time-aggregated consumption observations? We
have repeated the same exercise for all the models above using time-aggregated consumption
data, assuming that agents’decision intervals are shorter than the data sampling interval,
for a variety of decision intervals. An example is provided in the Appendix. For all models
the essential results for the Euler equation errors remain the same: values of            c   and c can
                                                                                                 c
always be found such that the unconditional pricing errors associated with using                Mt+1 to
price assets are very small relative to the data.

Finite Sample Pricing Errors The results above are based on long samples of model-
generated data, whereas the estimates using historical data are based on a …nite sample of 204
observations. An analysis provided in the Appendix shows that that our main conclusions
are robust to using samples equal in size to that of our historical dataset.


3.2        Diagnosing the Result
Why do leading asset pricing models counterfactually imply that the standard consumption-
based model has negligible Euler equation errors? To explain these results, in this section we
present su¢ cient conditions under which values for             and    can be found such that the Euler
equations of the standard model in the just-identi…ed two asset case are exactly satis…ed,
and show that each of the leading asset pricing models satis…es these conditions, while in
the historical data such conditions are violated.19 Speci…cally, the question we address is, in
the model of interest, what su¢ cient conditions imply that there exists a              such that
                              "                          #
                                  Ct+1        s      f
                            E               Rt+1 Rt+1      = 0:                                     (11)
                                   Ct

If a      can be found that satis…es the Euler equation above, we can always …nd a                  that
satis…es the risk-free rate Euler equation.
       Denote:


                                                Xt     Ct =Ct 1 :
                                                 Zt    Rt    Rtf :
                                             f (Xt )   E[Zt jXt ]:

We make four assumptions.
       Assumption 1
  19
       We are grateful to Narayana Kocherlakota for suggesting this line of argument.

                                                       20
      There is an X < 1 and       < 0 such that f (Xt ) <      for all Xt < X.
      Assumption 2
      E[(Xt =X) jXt < X] ! 1 as            ! 1.
      Assumption 3
      E[f (Xt )jXt > X] is …nite.
      Assumption 4
      E (Xt )    Zt is a continuous function of :

                                                                       Ct+1
Proposition 1 When the standard pricing kernel Mt+1 =                   Ct
                                                                                 is …t to data generated
by any model for which Assumptions 1 through 4 hold, values of                 and   can be found that
exactly satisfy the two Euler equations corresponding to a risky asset return and risk-free
rate, or any two asset returns. Proof: See the Appendix.

      Assumptions 2, 3 and 4 are technical conditions that will be satis…ed for most consumption-
based asset pricing models with well behaved distributions, including those investigated
above. Assumption 1 is the economically meaningful one. It that says that, for all realiza-
tions of consumption growth less than X, the excess returns on the risky asset are negative
on average. Intuitively, Assumption 1 says that realizations of the risky asset return that
are low relative to the risk-free rate coincide with bad economic times.
      The leading consumption-based asset pricing models we study all satisfy the four con-
ditions listed above. In particular, negative realizations of the excess return on the risky
asset coincide with bad economic times in the form of falling consumption growth, and the
key economic Assumption 1 is satis…ed. To illustrate, Figure 3 shows …tted values from
nonparametric regressions of excess returns on consumption growth, for each of the four
models:
                                     Rtj    Rtf = m(Ct =Ct 1 ) + t ;                               (12)

where m ( ) is a nonparametrically estimated function.20 The estimates are formed from
simulated data of each model’s benchmark speci…cation. Notice that in each model, for
consumption realizations su¢ ciently negative, excess returns are also negative, satisfying
Assumption 1. By contrast, this condition is violated in the historical data, because the
lowest consumption realizations coincide with positive excess returns on average (Table 2).
This property of the historical data is also visible in Figure 4, which presents the …tted values
from the nonparametric regression (12) using quarterly historical consumption and return
data. Conditional on consumption growth being su¢ ciently low, realized excess returns
are on average positive in the historical data. However, as Figure 5 demonstrates, if we
estimate the nonparametric regression (12) on historical data excluding all recession periods
 20
      The regression uses a Gaussian kernel with optimally chosen bandwidth.

                                                    21
in our sample, Assumption 1 is now satis…ed: excess return realizations are negative when
consumption realizations low (top panel). Moreover, in the sample excluding recessions,
a value for         that satis…es the Euler equation (11) can now be found (Figure 5, bottom
panel). These results show that the leading asset pricing models we consider fail to explain
the mispricing of the standard model because they mischaracterize the joint behavior of
consumption and asset returns in recessions.
       Two points about these results deserve emphasis. First, the …ndings for the four consumption-
based models we consider are unlikely to depend on the precise calibration of the models.
Although this is impossible to verify in general for the models that require numerical so-
lutions, it is straight forward to verify in the MSV model, for which closed-form solutions
exist. Speci…cally, in the MSV model, the excess return on the market portfolio is an a¢ ne
function of the innovation in consumption, where only the magnitude (but not the sign)
of the parameters of the a¢ ne function depend on the calibration. Thus, su¢ ciently small
realizations of consumption growth will always coincide with negative excess returns on the
risky asset.
       Second, it is straightforward to show that many simple models of limited stock market
participation will also satisfy su¢ cient conditions of the type presented above regardless
of the correlation between stockholder and aggregate consumption, as long as stockholder
consumption is jointly lognormally distributed with aggregate consumption and returns. We
analyze an example of this case in the next subsection.

3.2.1      A Limited Participation/Incomplete Markets Model With Joint Lognor-
           mality

Suppose that the consumption measure Ct , used by an econometrician to estimate the Euler
equation (2) is mismeasured, perhaps because per capita aggregate consumption is a poor
measure of individual assetholder consumption (markets are incomplete), or the consumption
of stockholders (limited stock market participation). For our purposed here, a model of
limited stock market participation is isomorphic to a model of incomplete markets, since what
matters is the common implication that the consumption of the marginal assetholder may
behave di¤erently from per capita aggregate consumption.21 Suppose also that aggregate
consumption, stockholder or individual consumption, and asset returns are unconditionally
jointly lognormally distributed. We use lowercase letters to denote log variables, e.g.,              ct+1
log (Ct+1 =Ct ) :
  21
    With limited stock market participation, the set of Euler equations of stockholder consumption imply that
a representative stockholder’s marginal rate of substitution is a valid stochastic discount factor. Similarly,
with incomplete consumption insurance the set of Euler equations of household consumption imply that any
household’s marginal rate of substitution is a valid stochastic discount factor.

                                                     22
   Denote the MRS of an individual stockholder as
                                                                      i                i
                                                 i                   Ct+1
                                                Mt+1            i                          ;                        (13)
                                                                      Cti
where Cti is the consumption of stockholder i,                       i    is the subjective time discount factor of this
stockholder, and             i    is the stockholder’s coe¢ cient of relative risk aversion. If agents have
                                               i
unrestricted access to …nancial markets, then Mt+1 correctly prices any traded asset return
                                          i    j
held by the stockholder, implying that E Mt+1 Rt+1 = 1 for any traded asset return. The
                                                         f           i
risk-free rate is de…ned as a one-period riskless bond, Rt+1 = 1=Et Mt+1 :
                              i
   We can interpret the MRS, Mt+1 ; either as that of a representative stockholder in a limited
participation setting (in which case Cti is the consumption of a representative stockholder),
or as that of an individual assetholder in an incomplete markets setting (in which case Cti is
the consumption of any marginal assetholder, e.g., Constantinides and Du¢ e (1996)). For
                                i
brevity, we hereafter refer to Ct+1 simply as stockholder consumption, and to (13) simply as
the limited participation model.
   An econometrician who maintained the assumption of power utility but erroneously es-
timated Euler equations using data on per capita aggregate consumption, Ct+1 in place of
 i                                     c
Ct+1 , would use the misspeci…ed “MRS”Mt+1 :

                                                 c                   Ct+1              c

                                                Mt+1            c                          ;                        (14)
                                                                      Ct
where   c   and      c   are generic parameter values that do not necessarily correspond to the true
preference parameters of stockholder i. Notice that while the Euler equation error associated
                    i
with the true MRS, Mt+1 , is zero by construction, the Euler equation error associated with
                    c
the erroneous MRS, Mt+1 , need not be zero.
   Most economic models will satisfy the technical Assumptions 2-4 given above. In ad-
dition, many lognormal models of limited participation will satisfy Assumption 1. As one
example, suppose the log di¤erence in stockholder consumption,                                 cit ; follows a stationary
ARM A(p; q) process and consider an orthogonal decomposition of aggregate consumption
growth into a part that is correlated with asset-holder consumption and a part, "it , orthogonal
to stockholder consumption,
                                                         ct =            cit + "it ;                                (15)
                Cov ( ct ;       cit   )
where       =     Var(
                       = ci i c : Here ci denotes the correlation between ct and cit . If the
                    )     cit
log di¤erence in stockholder consumption has a Wold representation taking the form
                                                                     X
                                                                     1
                                                   cit   =k+                  j t j;
                                                                     j=0

where   t   is an i.i.d. innovation.

                                                                    23
       To relate consumption to returns, note that the innovation in log asset return surprises
on any asset must be equal to the revision in expected future dividend growth on the asset
(discounted at some constant rate ) minus the revision in expected future returns (also
discounted at , see Campbell (1991)). If the stock return is modeled as a claim to assetholder
consumption, and if risk premia are constant, return surprises will then be linearly related to
the consumption innovation, since both the revision in expected discounted dividend growth
and the revision in expected discounted risk-free rates are functions of the consumption
innovation     t+1 :   For example, if the risk-free rate is constant, the innovation in the log stock
return is linear in the consumption innovation:
                                 s            s                                    2
                                rt+1      Et rt+1 =     t+1        0   +   1   +       2   + :::
                                                       !   t+1 :


Hence if a positive shock to stockholder consumption today is good news about future con-
sumption (! > 0) and if stockholder consumption is positively correlated with aggregate
consumption ( > 0), Assumption 1 is satis…ed. This follows from the lognormality assump-
tion (with its unbounded support for consumption growth) and the linear relation between
return innovations and consumption innovations. Notice that, if stockholder consumption
growth is negatively correlated with aggregate consumption growth ( < 0), the model will
satisfy an analogous set of su¢ cient conditions to those given above, in which there exists
an X such that, for all realizations of consumption growth greater than X, the expected
risk premium is negative. Either way, the assumption of lognormality implies that we can
always …nd values for           c   and   c   such that the Euler equations of the standard model in the
just-identi…ed two asset case are exactly satis…ed.
       In addition, it is possible to derive explicit expressions for preference parameters that
exactly satisfy the Euler equations of the standard model.22 To do so, …rst note that, under
joint lognormality, the pricing error may be written

                                    ejR = E Rj E [M c ] exp Cov mc ; rj                        1:          (16)

Noting that the Euler equation error is identically zero under M i , implying

                                      E Rj E M i exp Cov mi ; rj                       = 1;

and using m = log ( )                  c, we may write
                               E [M c ]
                       ejR =            exp        c Cov      c; rj +          i Cov       ci ; r j   1:   (17)
                               E [M i ]
  22
    The calculations below are similar in spirit to those in Vissing-Jorgensen (1999), who shows how limited
stock market participation biases estimates of relative risk aversion based on aggregate consumption. Vissing-
Jorgensen’s calculations presume heterogenous households rather than a representative-stockholder, as below.

                                                           24
                                            s                             f
           For a single risky asset return Rt+1 and the risk-free return Rt+1 , there are two equations
in two unknowns, with analytical solutions given by

                                                is           if
                            bc =      i                                ;                                                                                      (18)
                                                cs           cf
                                                                   2 2                                       2 2
                            bc =       exp           c c
                                                                   c c
                                                                                          i       i+
                                                                                                             i i
                                                                                                                    +     c cs    i is      ;                 (19)
                                                                       2                                      2

where         cs      Cov( c; rs ),        if           Cov            ci ; r f ;                 cf         Cov        c; rf ;   2
                                                                                                                                  c         V ar ( c),        2
                                                                                                                                                              i
              i
V ar ( c ),           c   is the mean growth rate of aggregate consumption, and                                                       i   is the mean growth
                                                                           23
rate of the consumption of asset-holder i:
          A more intuitively appealing expression for bc can be obtained by assuming the risk-free
rate is constant. While this is an approximation, it turns out to be well satis…ed in the data,
since most proxies for the risk-free rate (such as the Treasury-bill rate) are extremely stable.
Using the orthogonal decomposition (15), (18) can be written

                                                                                              i
                                                                   bc =                           "i s
                                                                                                         ;                                                    (20)
                                                                                      +            is


where         "i s   =Cov "it ; Rt+1
                                 s
                                     . For assets that are uncorrelated with "it , (e.g., any risky asset
that is on the log mean-variance e¢ cient frontier),                                                     "i s     = 0 and (20) collapses to

                                                                                i                        i
                                                              bc =                   =        i               :                                               (21)
                                                                                                       ci c

The above expression tells us that limited participation can in principal account for high
estimated values of             c   (and   c)       obtained when …tting data to (14), if stockholder consumption
is more volatile than aggregate consumption and/or very weakly correlated correlated with
it.
          It is important to emphasize, however, that, in the two asset case, the values of                                                              c,   and
 c    obtained when the model is estimated using the misspeci…ed MRS based on aggregate
                                                                 s        f
consumption growth still insure that the log pricing errors for Rt+1 and Rt+1 are identically
zero, ejR = 0. This follows because, under lognormality, the log model is linear and the
problem collapses to solving two linear equations in two unknowns. This is demonstrated in
Figure 6, for the two-asset cases using actual historical return data. The “data” line plots
    Notice that, in equilibrium, bc and bc will take the same value regardless of the identity of the assetholder.
     23

This follows because any two households must in equilibrium agree on asset prices, so that the Euler equation
holds for each individual household. Thus,

                                                                  is            if                            ks     kf
                                                c   =    i                                =        k
                                                                  cs            cf                            cs     cf

for any two asset-holders i and k:


                                                                                     25
RMSE/RMSR over a range of values for             c,   after choosing   c   so as to minimize the sum
of squared Euler equation errors   ejR;t ,   which do not impose lognormality. The line labeled
“lognormality” plots the RMSE/RMSR over a range of values for                  c,   after choosing      c   to
minimize the sum of squared pricing errors in (16), under the assumption that returns and
consumption growth are jointly lognormal. Under lognormality, a value for                c   can be found
that exactly satis…es the Euler equation, in contrast to the data. Thus, the only consequence
of using aggregate per capita consumption in this setting is a bias in the estimated parameters
bc and bc ; there is no consequence for the Euler equation errors themselves, which remain
zero. It follows that any lognormal model of limited participation cannot explain the large
empirical Euler equation errors of the standard model found in the data.
   In the case of multiple risky assets, lognormality does not necessarily imply that such
Euler equation errors will each be identically zero, since in this case there are more moment
conditions than free parameters. Nevertheless, a lognormal model is unlikely to match the
magnitude of the Euler equation errors found in the data. The Appendix discusses this case
and shows that the lognormal model cannot match the magnitude of the Euler equation
errors for the eight-asset case, especially in the empirically relevant region where            c   is large.
                                                                                       i
   It should be noted that the results in this subsection hold for any pricing kernel Mt+1
that is jointly lognormally distributed with returns and aggregate consumption growth; it is
not necessary that the pricing kernel take the form given in (13). As long as the true kernel
 i
Mt+1 is jointly lognormally distributed with aggregate consumption and returns, values for
the discount factor and risk aversion can be found for which the standard model generates
identically zero unconditional Euler equation errors for any two asset returns.


3.3     Limited Participation/Incomplete Markets With State De-
        pendent Correlations
We now revisit the potential role of limited participation in explaining the large Euler equa-
tion violations of the standard consumption-based model, with an eye toward the important
role of recessions in these …ndings. This requires relaxing the assumption of unconditional
joint lognormality.

3.3.1   Limited Participation with State Dependent Correlations

An intriguing feature of aggregate consumption and return data is that violations of Euler
equations in (2) are especially large in recessions. For example, in the troughs of recessions
in the 1950s, 1970s, early 1960s, 1980s and 1990s, as identi…ed by the National Bureau of
Economic Research, net aggregate consumption growth is negative but the aggregate stock


                                                  26
return and Treasury-bill rate are, more often than not, positive (Table 2). These …ndings
suggest that the link between the aggregate economy and asset returns is fundamentally
di¤erent in economic downturns than in upturns. The …ndings above suggest that a complete
description of the joint behavior of consumption and asset returns must be consistent with
this state dependency.
      As a preliminary step, we consider the following modi…cation to the simple limited par-
ticipation model motivated by the empirical …ndings above. Assume that both stockholder
and aggregate consumption growth are i.i.d. processes, with normally distributed shocks.
For simplicity, stockholders are presumed to have CRRA utility and, as above, stock prices
are determined only by stockholder’s consumption. We modify the previous framework, how-
ever, by assuming that the correlation between the growth rates of stockholder consumption
and aggregate consumption is time-varying and depends on the state of the economy. In
“normal”times, the correlation between consumption growth of stockholders and aggregate
consumption growth is one. Normal times are modeled as any period in which aggregate con-
sumption growth is not unusually low, say one standard deviation or more below its mean.
In “bad”times, the correlation between consumption growth of stockholders and aggregate
consumption growth is signi…cantly less than one, even negative. Bad times are modeled as
any period when aggregate consumption growth is more than one standard deviation below
its mean. This changing correlation could be due to unemployment shocks that primarily
a¤ect less wealthy nonstockholders, to binding borrowing constraints that make it harder for
nonstockholders to smooth consumption in recessions, or to cyclical shifts in the composition
of income between labor and capital.
      Interestingly, a time-varying correlation of this type between stockholder consumption
and aggregate consumption growth generates deviations from joint log-normality of aggre-
gate consumption growth and asset returns in the model that are remarkably similar to
those found in the data. (Although the shocks to aggregate consumption and stockholder
consumption growth are normally distributed, the time-varying correlation means that their
joint distribution with endogenous returns is unconditionally nonnormal.) It also allows the
model to rationalize the large Euler equation errors of the standard, representative agent,
CRRA model. To illustrate, we model the equity claim as a claim to stockholder consump-
tion, cit , and model additional risky securities, indexed by j, as those with dividend processes
taking the form         dj =   j
                                   cit + "jt ;where "jt is an i.i.d. shock uncorrelated with   cit . By
             j
varying          across assets, we create a spread in the covariance of returns on these securi-
ties with stockholder consumption growth, and therefore a spread in risk premia. Values
for    j
           and the standard deviation of "jt are chosen to mimic the spread in returns in the
6 Fama-French portfolios for which we have historical data. For the results below, stock-
holder risk-aversion is set to       = 10: Since we have assumed, for illustrative simplicity, that

                                                    27
stockholders have CRRA utility, this stylized model has some important limitations. For
example, with     = 10, the model generates a mean risk-free rate that is much higher than
in the data (Weil (1989)); thus we set       = 1:2 to obtain more reasonable values. Never-
theless, the simplicity of the model serves to illustrate an important point, namely that a
state-dependent correlation between the consumption of stockholders and nonstockholders
can help explain why the standard consumption-based model’s Euler equations are violated
by such large magnitudes.
   Figure 7 shows QQ plots from model-simulated data, which are directly comparable to
those using historical data in Figure 2. Note that the deviations from joint log-normality
are concentrated in periods with observations that are in the tails of the joint distribution,
both in the data and in the model. These deviations from log-normality are of the type
necessary to generate large Euler equation errors for the misspeci…ed SDF based on aggregate
consumption and power utility. Table 6 shows that the state-dependent correlations model
is able to generate pricing errors for the standard model that rival those in the data, both for
the set of two asset returns that include the stock market return and the risk-free rate, as well
as for a larger cross-section of returns that include the 6 additional risky securities. The table
has a layout similar to that of Table 5, except that we vary the correlation in bad states at the
top of each column, rather than the unconditional correlation. The calibrations that deliver
the largest Euler equation errors are those for which the correlation between aggregate and
stockholder consumption is unity most of the time (in good states), but is negative in bad
states (de…ned as states in which aggregate consumption is more than one standard-deviation
below its mean). For example, when the correlation in bad states is -0.5 and the standard
deviation of stockholder consumption growth is twice that of aggregate consumption growth,
this model implies Euler equation errors for the standard consumption-based model, as
measured by RMSE/RMSR, of 0.47, a value that almost exactly replicates that found in the
data when the standard model is …t to historical data on aggregate consumption, the stock
market and Treasury-bill (Table 1). Finally, Figure 8 shows …tted values from nonparametric
regressions of excess returns on consumption growth as in (12) using simulated data from this
model. The …tted values have a pattern that is remarkably similar to those in the data: the
lowest consumption realizations coincide with positive excess returns on average, violating
Assumption 1. These results are promising because they go signi…cantly in the direction
required to explain why the standard model appears so misspeci…ed.
   We close this section by noting that limited participation combined with arbitrary de-
partures from normality does not in general explain the mispricing of the standard model.
The Appendix provides an analysis of this issue by considering a range of non-normal mod-
els based on Hermite expansions around the normal density. Most non-normal models we
considered imply that the wrong pricing kernel based on aggregate consumption delivers

                                               28
tiny pricing errors even when the joint distribution of   ct ,   cit , and returns are signi…cantly
non-normal. This suggests that the explanation for the large pricing errors of the standard
representative agent model must be more than limited participation per se. The joint dis-
tribution of assetholder, aggregate consumption and returns has to be of a particular form,
and it is that form that must be the central part of the story.
    The examples in this section are designed to be illustrative and are not meant to be taken
as realistic models. Nevertheless, they are useful for building intuition about why the lead-
ing models fail to match the empirical properties of the standard model’s Euler equations
found in the data. The previous section showed that a very low or even negative uncon-
ditional correlation between stockholder and nonstockholder consumption is not by itself
enough to explain why the standard model fails: when the MSV model is modi…ed to have
limited participation, a low unconditional correlation between stockholder and nonstock-
holder consumption does not generate non-negligible pricing errors. Instead, what is needed
is a state-dependent correlation, of the type explored above. It is straightforward to intro-
duce the same state-dependent correlation between stockholder and aggregate consumption
into the limited participation version of the MSV habit model. Doing so, we obtain results
very similar to those reported above. This is encouraging because it suggests that leading
consumption-based models can be modi…ed to …t the Euler equation facts, while at the same
time preserving their favorable implications for a range of other asset pricing phenomena.


4     Conclusion
It is well understood that the standard, representative agent, consumption-based asset pric-
ing theory based on constant relative risk aversion utility fails to explain the behavior of
risky assets. Some aspects of this failure have been famously pointed out by authors like
Mehra and Prescott (1985), who argue that the model is incapable of rationalizing the eq-
uity premium for reasonable levels of risk aversion. Other researchers have estimated the
Euler equations of the model using GMM, and found that the model is formally rejected in
statistical tests (e.g., Hansen and Singleton (1982)). This paper points out that the puzzle
with this model runs much deeper: the unconditional Euler equation errors for the stan-
dard consumption-based model cannot be driven to zero–indeed they remain economically
large–for any value of risk aversion or the subjective rate of time-preference.
    The empirical failure of the standard consumption-based model (including its rejection
in GMM tests of the model’s Euler equations) has driven the search for new consumption-
based models. Many of these theories have delivered important insights into …nancial market
behavior. We show here, however, that none explain why the standard model is so soundly


                                              29
rejected in basic GMM tests of its Euler equations. If the data on asset returns and con-
sumption were generated by any of the leading models considered in the previous section,
an econometrician would estimate zero Euler equation errors and the consequence of using
the wrong pricing kernel would simply be incorrect estimates of     and . Assets could be
priced just as well using the misspeci…ed standard consumption-based model as they could
using anyone of the newer models. This is true both for explaining the behavior of the
market return and risk-free rate generated by the models’own baseline calibrations, and for
explaining larger cross-sections of risky returns. Moreover, some leading models imply that
the standard consumption-based has negligible asset pricing errors even when it is based
both on the wrong consumption measure (aggregate consumption instead of individual as-
setholder consumption) and on the wrong model of underlying preferences (CRRA instead
of habit or recursive preferences).
   We show that the leading asset pricing models we study fail to explain the mispricing
of the standard model because they fundamentally mischaracterize the joint behavior of
consumption and asset returns in periods of signi…cant economic change, namely in economic
downturns, when aggregate consumption is falling. An important question is why the models
we study perform so poorly in recessions relative to other times.
   We suggested one speci…c direction along which the current models can be improved,
based on a time-varying, state-dependent correlation between stockholder and aggregate con-
sumption growth. But our preliminary analysis leaves room for much future work. Ultimately
it will be important to model the primitive technological sources of any state-dependent cor-
relation between the consumption of stockholders and that of the rest of the economy. The
theoretical results also raise tantalizing empirical questions. Is there any direct evidence
that the correlation of stockholder and non-stockholder consumption is state-dependent? If
so, can this time-variation be linked to asset returns and cyclical variation in the economy?
Unfortunately, these questions are di¢ cult to answer because of the dearth of time-series
data on household consumption.
   A number of alternative research directions could prove fruitful for explaining the mis-
spricing of the standard consumption-based model. Possibilities include classes of economic
models with endogenously distorted beliefs, as surveyed in the work of Hansen and Sargent
(2000) or illustrated in the learning model of Cogley and Sargent (2004). In such models,
beliefs are distorted away from what a model of rational expectations would impose, so asset
return volatility can be driven by ‡uctuations in beliefs not necessarily highly correlated
with consumption. Other candidates include any modi…cations to the standard model that
would make unconditional Euler equations more di¢ cult to satisfy, especially in recessions,
such as binding restrictions on the ability to trade and smooth consumption, short-sales con-
straints, and transactions costs (e.g., Luttmer (1996); He and Modest (1995); Heaton and

                                             30
Lucas (1996, 1997); Ludvigson (1999); Guo (2004)) or infrequent adjustment in consump-
tion (Gabaix and Laibson (2002); Jagannathan and Wang (2005)). An important area for
future research will be to determine whether such modi…cations are capable of delivering the
empirical facts, once introduced into plausibly calibrated economic models with empirically
credible frictions.




                                            31
5     Appendix
5.1    Data Description
This appendix describes the data. The sources and description of each data series we use
are listed below.

CONSUMPTION
Consumption is measured in per capita terms as expenditures on nondurables and services,
excluding shoes and clothing. The quarterly data are seasonally adjusted at annual rates, in
billions of chain- weighted 1996 dollars. The components are chain-weighted together, and
this series is scaled up so that the sample mean matches the sample mean of total personal
consumption expenditures. We exclude shoes and clothing expenditure from this series since
they are partly durable and are therefore inappropriate in a measure of the service ‡ow
of consumption. Our source is the U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic
Analysis.

POPULATION
A measure of population is created by dividing real total disposable income by real per capita
disposable income. Our source is the Bureau of Economic Analysis.

PRICE DEFLATOR
Real asset returns are de‡ated by the implicit chain-type price de‡ator (1996=100) given for
the consumption measure described above. Our source is the U.S. Department of Commerce,
Bureau of Economic Analysis.

ASSET RETURNS

      Three-Month Treasury Bill Rate: secondary market, averages of business days, discount
      basis%; Source: H.15 Release –Federal Reserve Board of Governors.

      Six size/book-market returns: Six portfolios, monthly returns from July 1926-December
      2003. The portfolios, which are constructed at the end of each June, are the inter-
      sections of 2 portfolios formed on size (market equity, ME) and 3 portfolios formed
      on the ratio of book equity to market equity (BE/ME). The size breakpoint for
      year t is the median NYSE market equity at the end of June of year t. BE/ME
      for June of year t is the book equity for the last …scal year end in t-1 divided by
      ME for December of t-1. The BE/ME breakpoints are the 30th and 70th NYSE
      percentiles. Source: Kenneth French’s homepage, http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/
      pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html.
      The stock market return is the Center for Research and Security Prices (CRSP) value-
      weighted stock market return. Our source is the Center for Research in Security Prices.


5.2    Detailed Description of Models
The utility function in the CC and MSV models take the form
                              (1                    )
                                X (C i X i )1     1
                                    t t   t
                        U =E                          ;     >0                                               (22)
                                t=0
                                        1

where Cti is individual consumption and Xt is habit level which they assume to be a function
of aggregate consumption, and      is the subjective discount factor. In equilibrium, identical
agents choose the same level of consumption, so Cti is equal to aggregate consumption, Ct .
CC de…ne the surplus consumption ratio
                                                Ct        Xt
                                       St                      < 1;
                                                     Ct
and model its log process as evolving according to a heteroskedastic …rst-order autoregressive
process (where as before lowercase letters denote log variables):

                       st+1 = (1       ) s + st + (st ) (ct+1                 ct        g) ;

where , g, and s are parameters.       (st ) is the so-called sensitivity function that CC choose
to satisfy three conditions: (1) the risk-free rate is constant, (2) habit is predetermined at
steady state, and (3) habit moves nonnegatively with consumption everywhere. We refer the
reader to the CC paper for the speci…c functional form of                          (st ) : The stochastic discount
factor in the CC model is given by

                                    CC               Ct+1 St+1
                                   Mt+1 =                                 :
                                                      Ct St
In all of the models considered here, the return on a risk-free asset whose value is known
with certainty at time t is given by
                                      f                           1
                                     Rt+1       (Et [Mt+1 ])          ;

where Mt+1 is the pricing kernel of whichever model we are considering.
   MSV model the behavior of Yt ; the inverse surplus consumption ratio:
                                                  1
                                    Yt =                   > 1:
                                            1    (Xt =Ct )
Following Campbell and Cochrane (1999), MSV assume that Yt follows a mean-reverting
process, perfectly negatively correlated with innovations in consumption growth:

                        Yt = k Y       Y         (Yt           ) ( ct         Et    1    ct ) ;
where Y is the long-run mean of Y and k, ; and                              are parameters, calibrated as in MSV.
Here      ct     log (Ct+1 =Ct ), which they assume it follows an i.i.d. process

                                                       ct =         + vt ;

where vt is a normally distributed i.i.d. shock. The stochastic discount factor in the MSV
model is
                                             M SV              Ct+1 Yt
                                            Mt+1  =                                    :
                                                                Ct Yt+1
     Since the MSV model is a representative agent model, we modify it in order to study
the role of limited participation. Assume that asset prices are determined by the framework
above, where a valid stochastic discount factor is a function of any stockholder’s consumption
Cti and stockholder’s habit Xti . The process for stockholder consumption is the same as in
MSV, described above, but now with i subscripts:

                                                       cit =    i   +      i
                                                                        i vt ;


where vti is a normally distributed i.i.d. shock. Aggregate consumption is assumed to follow
a separate process given by
                                                                           c
                                                       ct =    c    +   c vt ;

with vtc a normally distributed i.i.d. shock. We analyze the results over a range of cases for
the correlation between vti and vtc , and their relative volatilities                           i= c.

     For the representative stockholder, we model the …rst di¤erence of Yti as in MSV:
                                            i
                              Yti = k Y          Yi             Yti              cit       Et   1   cit ;

                                                                               M SV i
and compute equilibrium asset returns based on the stochastic discount factor Mt+1    =
      i
     Ct+1 =Cti      Yti =Yt+1
                           i
                                      : As before, this is straightforward using the analytical solutions
provided in MSV.
     Next, we compute two types of unconditional pricing errors. First, we compute the
pricing errors generated from erroneously using aggregate consumption in the pricing kernel
in place of assetholder consumption. That is, we compute the pricing errors that arise from
       ch
using Mt+1          c   (Ct+1 =Ct )    c
                                           Ytc =Yt+1
                                                  c      c                 M SV i
                                                              in place of Mt+1    to price assets, where             c   and
 c   are chosen freely to …t the data, and where Ytc follows the process
                                             c
                              Ytc = k Y          Yc            (Ytc        ) ( ct          Et   1   ct ) :

With the exception of , all parameters are set as in MSV. The parameter                                      is set to keep
the mean return on the aggregate wealth portfolio the same as in MSV. Thus, if                                   i= c    = 2,
the value of       in MSV is divided by two.
   To model multiple risky securities, MSV model the share of aggregate consumption that
each asset produces,
                                    Dtj
                                       sjt =
                                          for j = 1; :::; n;
                                    Ct
where n represents the total number of risky …nancial assets paying a dividend D. MSV
assume that these shares are bounded, mean-reverting and evolve according to

                                   sjt =       j
                                                    sj        sjt + sjt (si ) t ;

where      (sj ) is an N dimensional row vector of volatilities and                          t       is an N dimensional
                                                                                   j
column vector of standard normal random variables, and                                 and sj are parameters. (N
n + 1 because MSV allow for other sources of income, e.g., labor income, that support
consumption.) Cross-sectional variation in unconditional mean returns across risky securities
in this model is governed by cross-sectional variation in the covariance between shares and
                                                sjt
aggregate consumption growth: Cov              sjt
                                                    ; cct t    , for j = 1; :::; n. This in turn is determined
                                   j
by cross-sectional variation in        , sj and          (sj ) : We create n arti…cial risky securities using
                                                                                                 j
an evenly spaced grid of values for these parameters. The values of                                  lie on a grid between
0 and 1, and the values of sj 2 [0; 1) lie on a grid such that the sum over all j is unity.
The parametric process for        (sj ) follows the speci…cation in MSV in which the volatilities
depend on a N -dimensional vector of parameters v j as well as the individual share processes
                                                                 X
                                                                 n
                                                          j
                                           (sj ) = v                   skt v k :
                                                                 k=0
                              j
We choose the parameters          , sj , and v j , to generate a spread in average returns across
assets. In analogy to the empirical exercise (Panel B of Table 1), we do this for n = 6 risky
securities plus the aggregate wealth portfolio return and the risk-free for a total of 8 asset
returns.
   Closed-form solutions are not available for the individual risky securities, but MSV show
that equilibrium price-dividend ratios on the risky assets are given by the approximate
relation
                               Ptj                                 sj      js
                                                                              j
                                         aj0 + aj1 St + aj2            + a 3 i St ;                                  (23)
                               Dtj                                 sjt      st
where St       1=Yti and where Yti again denotes the inverse surplus ratio of an individual
assetholder indexed by i, which should not be confused with the indexation by j, which
denotes a security. The parameters aj0 , aj1 ; aj2 ; and aj3 are all de…ned in terms of the other
parameters above. Using these solutions for individual price-dividend ratios, we create a
cross-section of equilibrium risky securities using
                                                                   !
                                            j    j
                                          Pt+1 =Dt+1 +1
                            i
                           Rt+1 =                                      exp         djt+1 :                           (24)
                                                   Ptj =Dtj
      Bansal and Yaron (2004) consider a representative agent who maximizes utility given by
recursive preferences of Epstein and Zin (1989, 1991) and Weil (1989). The utility function
to be maximized takes the form
                          (1                                                              )
                            X                    n           1                  1   o1
                                               t                          1
                  U =E                            (1     ) Ct    +    Et Ut+1                 ;                      (25)
                                      t=0

where          (1      ) = (1     1= ) ;       is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution in consump-
tion (IES),      is the coe¢ cient of relative risk aversion, and is the subjective discount factor.
The stochastic discount factor under Epstein-Zin-Weil utility takes the form given in (7).


5.3      Proof of Proposition 1
For     = 0: E[Xt Zt ] > 0 since E[Zt ] > 0 (i.e., the unconditional risk premium is positive).
Given continuity (Assumption 4), the question then becomes, is there a                            so that E[X    Z] <
0?



       E[Xt Zt ] = E[Xt E[Zt jXt ]] = E[Xt f (Xt )]
                     = P (Xt < X)E[Xt f (Xt )jXt < X] + P (Xt                   X)E[Xt f (Xt )jXt           X]

      Since Xt      is decreasing in X if        > 0, the second conditional expectation has the following
property:
                                E[Xt f (Xt )jXt > X] < Xt E[f (Xt )jXt               X]

      The …rst conditional expectation has the following property:

                          E[Xt f (Xt )jXt < X] < E[Xt                jXt < X]
                                                         = X     E[(Xt =X) jXt < X]

      Thus,

     E[Xt Zt ] < X          P (Xt < X) E[(Xt =X) jXt < X] + P (Xt                        X)E[f (Xt )jXt         X]

As      goes to in…nity the right hand side goes to minus in…nity since

                                           X      ! 1 since X < 1
                                  E[f (Xt )jXt         X] is …nite by Assumption 3,
                    E[(Xt =X) jXt < X] !                 1 by Assumption 2 and since                <0

      Q.E.D.
5.4       A Simple Limited Participation/Incomplete Markets Model
          with Joint Lognormality: Multiple Risky Assets Case
This appendix discusses the distortion in parameter values and Euler equation errors that
arise in the simple lognormal model with multiple risky asset returns. In this case, lognor-
mality does not necessarily imply that such Euler equation errors will each be identically
zero, since in this case there are more moment conditions than free parameters. For N > 2
asset returns, it is not possible to give a intuitively appealing analytical expression for the
distortion in parameter values, although values can be obtained numerically. It is, however,
possible to illustrate analytically the distortion in                        c    to a very close approximation, by fo-
cusing on log pricing errors and assuming that the risk-free rate is constant. In this case we
can choose      c   so that E [M i ] = E [M c ] ; which insures that the pricing error for the risk-free
rate is zero. Note that this does not imply that the risk-free rate puzzle is trivial, since                                  c

is unrestricted and in particular can be chosen to be greater than unity if required to set
the pricing error to zero. While this is an approximation, it turns out to be well satis…ed in
the data, since the Treasury-bill rate is extremely stable.24 We maintain this approximation
purely for expositional purposes; the reader should be aware that exact results are very close.
       With this approximation in hand, the value of                     c       that minimizes the sum of squared log
errors, log 1 +      ejR   , is given by
                                                           P                      !
                                                            j      cj        ij
                                              bc =   i      P           2
                                                                                       ;                                   (26)
                                                               j        cj

                                                                 P
where      cj   Cov( c; rj ) ;       ij    Cov( ci ; rj ) ; and “ j ” indicates summation over all asset
returns j being priced. “Hats” indicate parameter values estimated by minimizing the sum
of squared Euler equation errors (using GMM with the identity weighting matrix), as above.
A more complicated expression can be obtained for bc . Note that the estimates of c and                                       c
are biased, and do not correspond to any marginal investor’s true risk aversion parameter.
       Figure A1 shows that a lognormal model is unlikely to match the magnitude of the
Euler equation errors found in the data. As above, the “data” line plots RMSE/RMSR
over a range of values for           c,   after choosing   c   so as to minimize the sum of squared Euler
equation errors       ejR;t ,   which do not impose lognormality. The line labeled “lognormality”
plots the RMSE/RMSR over a range of values for                                    c,       after choosing   c   to minimize the
sum of squared pricing errors in (16), under the assumption that returns and consumption
                                                           h     i
  24
    If Mti is the true pricing kernel, then E Mti = E 1=Rtf : Since we assume E Mti = E [Mtc ], our
                                 h     i
assumption implies E [Mtc ] = E 1=Rtf , which prices the risk-free rate exactly if Rtf is constant. It follows
                                                               h      i    h i
that the approximation error in pricing the risk-free rate is E 1=Rtf   1=E Rtf , which is -0.01 percent per
annum.
growth are jointly lognormal. One way to interpret the “lognormal” line is to note that,
                                                              i
under joint lognormality, we can always …nd a pricing kernel Mt+1 = expflog ( )                                  cit+1 g
that generates a set of log returns taking the form rtj =                      j
                                                                                      cit +   j
                                                                                              t,   for some constant    j

                           j
and i.i.d. innovation      t,   that have the same means, variances and covariances with                          ct as
                                                                                                                   j
those in the historical data, and prices those asset exactly. This is done by choosing                                 to
                                                                               j
match the mean excess return for each asset, choosing var( ) to match the volatility of each
return, and choosing cov( ; "i ) to match the cov(rj ; c) from the data. The dashed line
                                                                                   c
labeled “lognormality” then gives the pricing errors that would arise from …tting Mt+1 to
data generated from this lognormal model. Figure A1 shows that no lognormal model can
explain the magnitude of the pricing errors in the data.


5.5     Hermite Expansions Around the Normal Density
Gallant and Tauchen (1989) show that the Hermite expansion can be put in tractable form
by specifying the density as

                                                   a (y)2 f (y)
                                  h (y) = R R R                          :
                                                a (u)2 f (u) du1 du2 du3

Here, a (y) is the sum of polynomial basis functions of the variables in y; it is squared to
insure positivity and divided by the integral over R3 to insure the density integrates to
unity. We set a (y)2 = (a0 + a1 y1;t + a2 y2;t + a3 y3;t )2 , a …rst-order expansion but one that
can nonetheless accommodate quite signi…cant departures from normality. We investigate a
large number of possible joint distributions by varying the parameters a0 ,...,a3 : When a0 = 1
and a1 = a2 = a3 = 0, h (y) collapses to the Gaussian joint distribution, f (y).
   Under the assumptions above, the equilibrium price-dividend ratio is a constant, P=D,
that satis…es                       Z Z
                       P=D                 i               i
                              =                exp             y2 exp (y3 ) h (y2 ; y3 ) dy2 dy3 :
                      P=D + 1

5.5.1     Expansions Around Normality

We employ …rst-order Hermite expansions around the multivariate normal distribution, and
consider the Euler equation errors associated with two assets, a stock market return and a
                                               0
risk-free rate. Let yt = ( ct ; cit ; dt )           (y1;t ; y2;t ; y3;t )0 , where     ct is aggregate consumption
growth,    cit   is individual asset-holder consumption growth, and                      dt is dividend growth of an
aggregate stock market claim. We will consider asset pricing models in which these variables
are i.i.d., but not necessarily jointly lognormally distributed.
   Ideally, the unconditional joint density of yt would be estimated. Unfortunately, this
density must be calibrated because a lack of su¢ ciently long time-series data on stockholder
consumption prohibits estimation. Let the joint density of yt be denoted h (y).
                                                          i                                  i
          The MRS of individual assetholder consumption, Mt+1                               Ct+1 =Cti   , is a valid sto-
chastic discount factor. Under the assumptions above, the equilibrium price-dividend ratio
is a constant, P=D. Given a distribution h (y) and the equilibrium value for P=D, it is
                                                                                 c
straightforward to compute the pricing errors associated with erroneously using Mt+1
 c   (Ct+1 =Ct )      c
                          to price assets. As above, we assume the asset return data are generated by
 i
Mt+1 and solve numerically for the values of                      c   and    c   that minimize an equally-weighted
sum of squared pricing errors               ejR                          c
                                                  that arise from using Mt+1 to price assets.
          Parameters of the leading normal density are calibrated to match data on aggregate con-
sumption growth and dividend growth for the CRSP value-weighted stock market index, on
an annual basis.25 The parameters for asset-holder consumption and assetholder preferences
are somewhat arbitrary since there is insu¢ cient data available to measure these empiri-
cally. We therefore consider a range for ; , i = c , i = c ; ci ; and id , where i E ( cit ),
                    p                  p
 c    E ( ct ), i     Var ( cit ), c     Var ( ct ), and id Cov( cit ; ct ) are parameters
of f (y). Because our calibration corresponds to an annual frequency, the Euler equation
errors we compute are comparable to the annualized errors from U.S. data reported in Table
1.
          We evaluated pricing errors obtained from a wide grid (over 20,000 parameter combina-
tions) for the Hermite parameters a0 through a3 . To conserve space, we report a limited
number of results. Table A1 reports results for which                            is set to 5,    to 0.99,   i= c   = 1, 2,
4,        i= c   = 0:85, 1:5,   ci   = 0:1,       id   = 0:9. The point of this table is that there are a wide
range of cases in which the joint distribution of yt deviates considerably from normality (of-
ten producing bimodal marginal density shapes) and yet the pricing errors associated with
                   c                                i
erroneously using Mt+1 to price assets in place of Mt+1 are, to numerical accuracy, zero. For
example, the kurtosis of the marginal distribution of                            ct is often greater than 11, and the
skewness greater than 4, but still the Euler equation errors from using a representative agent
pricing kernel are zero. The parameter estimates are biased, however, echoing the lognormal
results. The parameter               c   is larger than the true        when asset-holder consumption growth is
more volatile than aggregate consumption growth or when it is not highly correlated with it,
as suggested by (21). When Cov( c; d) =                         cd    is negative,    c   is negative, as also suggested
     25
    From annual post-war data used in Lettau and Ludvigson (2005), we take the E ( c) to be 2% annually
and E ( d) to be 4% annually; the standard deviation c is c = 1:14% and the standard deviation of d
is d = 12:2%. The covariance cd between c and d is notoriously hard to measure. It is estimated to be
negative, equal to -0.000177 in the annual post-war data used by Lettau and Ludvigson (2005), but others
have estimated a positive correlation (e.g., Campbell (2003)). We therefore consider both small negative
values for this covariance (equal to the point estimate from Lettau and Ludvigson (2005)), and small positive
values of the same order of magnitude, e.g., 0.000177.
by (21).
     We reach similar conclusions when evaluating the Euler equation errors for a larger cross-
section of returns. These results have been omitted to conserve space, but can be summarized
                                                                                         c
as follows. As in the two-asset case, we …nd that the average pricing errors from using Mt+1
to price assets are often very small, indeed close to zero, even for signi…cant perturbations
from joint lognormality. A small number of cases provided larger pricing errors, but these
cases were relatively rare, occurring in less than 0.2% of the parameter permutations.


5.6       Additional Diagnostics
5.6.1      Time Aggregated Consumption

To explore how time aggregation of aggregate data is likely to a¤ect our results, we assume
that agents make decisions quarterly but that the data sampling interval is annual. We also
allow for the possibility that aggregate consumption is a misspeci…ed measure of assetholder
consumption. For all models the essential results for the Euler equation errors remain: values
of   c   and    c   can always be found such that the unconditional pricing errors associated with
          c
using    Mt+1   to price assets are very small relative to the data, even when using time-averaged
data. As one example, Table A.1 shows results for the MSV model with limited participation.
To conserve space, we report only the results for this model, since the conclusion is unchanged
for the other models, although note that the results above for the BY model are already
based on time-aggregate data. The table shows that the pricing errors are again small,
even when data is time-aggregated. Most values of RMSE/RMSR are close to zero. The
largest occurs for the eight asset case and is equal to 0.07, far smaller than the value of
0.33 found in the data, which happens only if we assume stockholder consumption growth
is negatively correlated with aggregate consumption growth. Since time-averaging changes
both the serial dependence of the consumption data and its unconditional correlation with
returns, this suggests that the exact time-series properties of consumption growth are not
crucial for explaining the large pricing errors of the standard model.

5.6.2      Finite Sample Pricing Errors

To investigate how …nite sample considerations are likely to a¤ect our conclusions, we redo
the simulation exercises reported on above using samples of the size employed in our empirical
application. Table A.2 reports the maximum RMSE/RMSR over 1,000 samples of size 204
                         c
that arises from …tting Mt+1 to data generated from the relevant model. We do not report
small-sample results for the eight-asset MSV model. The small sample behavior of the MSV
model is problematic because the model is solved in continuous time and moreover holds only
as an approximation for multiple risky securities. As a result, we …nd that small amounts of
approximation error are compounded by discretization error in small samples and it is not
possible to reduce these errors to reasonable levels unless the number of decisions within the
period is almost in…nite. Nevertheless, we are able to report the results for the two-asset
case, since the solutions for the aggregate consumption claim and risk-free rate in the MSV
model are not approximate. Table A.2 shows that, for the three representative agent models,
                                                                           c
CC, MSV, and BY, the maximum Euler equation errors that arise from …tting Mt+1 to data
are numerically zero, for both the two-asset and eight-asset speci…cations. The Guvenen
model produces a slightly higher maximum RMSE/RMSR in …nite samples, equal to about
0.87% at an annual rate, but still well below the value of almost 50% found in historical data
(Table 1).
References
Bansal, R., and A. Yaron (2004): “Risks for the Long-Run: A Potential Resolution of Asset
  Pricing Puzzles,” Journal of Finance, 59(4), 1481–1509.

Campbell, J. Y. (1991): “A Variance Decomposition for Stock Returns,”Economic Journal, 101,
  157–179.

        (2003): “Consumption-Based Asset Pricing,” in Handbook of the Economics of Finance
  Vol. I-B, ed. by G. Constantinides, M. Harris, and R. Stulz, pp. 803–887. North-Holland, Ams-
  terdam.

Campbell, J. Y., and J. H. Cochrane (1999): “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based
  Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,”Journal of Political Economy, 107, 205–251.

        (2000): “Explaining the Poor Performance of Consumption-Based Asset Pricing Models,”
  Journal of Finance, 55(6), 2863–2878.

Campbell, J. Y., A. W. Lo, and C. MacKinlay (1997): The Econometrics of Financial
  Markets. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Cochrane, J. H. (1996): “A Cross-Sectional Test of an Investment-Base Asset Pricing Model,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 104, 572–621.

        (2005): Asset Pricing, Revised Edition. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Cogley, T., and T. J. Sargent (2004): “The Market Price of Risk and the Equity Premium:
  A Legacy of the Great Depression?,” Unpublished paper, New York University.

Constantinides, G. M., and D. Duffie (1996): “Asset Pricing With Heterogeneous Con-
  sumers,” Journal of Political Economy, 104, 219–40.

Epstein, L., and S. Zin (1989): “Substitution Risk Aversion and the Temporal Behavior of
  Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework,” Econometrica, 57, 937–968.

        (1991): “Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior of Consumption and
  Asset Returns: An Empirical Investigation,” Journal of Political Economy, 99, 555–576.

Fama, E. F., and K. R. French (1992): “The Cross-Section of Expected Returns,” Journal of
  Finance, 47, 427–465.

        (1993): “Common Risk Factors in the Returns on Stocks and Bonds,”Journal of Financial
  Economics, 33, 3–56.

Ferson, W. E., and G. M. Constantinides (1991): “Habit Persistence and Durability in
  Aggregate Consumption,” Journal of Financial Economics, 29, 199–240.
Ferson, W. E., and J. J. Merrick (1987): “Non-stationary and Stage of the Business Cycle
  E¤ects in Consumption-Based Asset Pricing Relations,” Journal of Financial Economics, 18,
  127–146.

Gabaix, X., and D. Laibson (2002): “The 6-D Bias and the Equity Premium Puzzle,”in NBER
  Macroeconomics Annual: 2002, ed. by B. Bernanke, and K. Rogo¤, pp. 257–312. MIT Press,
  Cambridge, MA.

Gallant, A. R., and G. Tauchen (1989): “Seminonparametric Estimation of Conditionally
  Constrained Heterogeneous Processes: Asset Pricing Applications,” Econometrica, 57(5), 1091–
  1120.

Guo, H. (2004): “Limited Stock Market Participation and Asset Prices in a Dynamic Economy,”
  Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis forthcoming, 39, 495–516.

Guvenen, M. F. (2003): “A Parsimonious Macroeconomic Model for Asset Pricing: Habit For-
  mation or Cross-sectional Heterogeneity?,” Rochester Center for Economic Research Working
  Paper No. 499.

Hansen, L. P. (1982): “Large Sample Properties of Generalized Methods of Moments Estimators,”
  Econometrica, 50, 1029–54.

Hansen, L. P., and R. Jagannathan (1991): “Restrictions on Intertemporal Marginal Rates of
  Substitution Implied by Asset Returns,” Journal of Political Economy, 99, 225–262.

          (1997): “Assessing Speci…c Errors in Stochastic Discount Factor Models,” Journal of
  Finance, 52, 557–590.

Hansen, L. P., and T. J. Sargent (2000): “Wanting Robustness in Macroeconomics,”Unpub-
  lished Paper, New York University.

Hansen, L. P., and K. Singleton (1982): “Generalized Instrumental Variables Estimation of
  Nonlinear Rational Expectations Models,” Econometrica, 50(5), 1269–86.

He, H., and D. M. Modest (1995): “Portfolio Choice and Asset Prices: The Importance of
  Entrepreneurial Risk,” Journal of Finance, 103, 94–117.

Heaton, J., and D. Lucas (1996): “Evaluating the E¤ects of Incomplete Markets on Risk Sharing
  and Asset Pricing,” Journal of Political Economy, 104(3), 443–87.

          (1997): “Market Frictions, Savings Behavior, and Portfolio Choice,” Macroeconomic Dy-
  namics, 1(1), 76–101.

Jagannathan, R., and Y. Wang (2005): “Lazy Investors, Discretionary Consumption, and the
  Cross-Section of Stock Returns,”Unpublished paper, Kellog School of Management, Northwest-
  ern University.
Kocherlakota, N. R. (1990): “Disentangling the Coe¢ cient of Relative Risk Aversion from
  the Elasticity of Intertemporal Substitution: An Irrelevance Result,” Journal of Finance, 45(1),
  175–190.

           (1996): “The Equity Premium: It’s Still A Puzzle,” Journal of Economic Literature, 34,
  42–68.

Lettau, M., and S. C. Ludvigson (2005): “Expected Returns and Expected Dividend Growth,”
  Journal of Financial Economics, 76, 583–626.

Ludvigson, S. C. (1999): “Consumption and Credit: A Model of Time-Varying Liquidity Con-
  straints,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 81, 434–447.

Luttmer, E. G. J. (1996): “Asset Pricing in Economies with Frictions,” Econometrica, 64(6),
  1439–1467.

Mardia, K. (1970): “Measures of Multivariate Skewness and Kurtosis with Applications,” Bio-
  metrika, 57, 519–530.

Mehra, R., and E. C. Prescott (1985): “The Equity Premium Puzzle,” Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 15, 145–161.

Menzly, L., T. Santos, and P. Veronesi (2004): “Understanding Predictability,” Journal of
  Political Economy, 112(1), 1–47.

Vissing-Jorgensen, A. (1999): “Limited Stock Market Participation and the Equity Premium
  Puzzle,” Unpublished manuscript, Northwestern University, Kellog School of Management.

Weil, P. (1989): “The Equity Premium Puzzle and the Risk-Free Rate Puzzle,” Journal of Mon-
  etary Economics, 24(3), 401–421.
                             Table 1: Euler Equation Errors with CRRA Preferences


 Assets                 δb         γ
                                   b         RMSE (in %)            RMSE/RMSR              p (W = I)         p (W = S −1 )

 Rs , Rf              1.41       89.78             2.71                   0.48                 N/A                N/A
 Rs , Rf , 6 FF       1.39       87.18             3.05                   0.33                 0.00                0.00

                                Excluding Periods with low Consumption Growth
 Rs , Rf              2.55      326.11             0.73                   0.13                 N/A                N/A
 Rs , Rf , 6 FF       2.58      356.07             1.94                   0.21                 0.00                0.00

Notes: This table reports the minimized annualized postwar data Euler Equation errors for CRRA preferences. The
preference
          parameters      δbc and  γ
                                     bc are chosen to minimize the mean square pricing error for different sets of returns:
minδc ,γc g(δc , γc ) W g(δc , γc ) where g(δc , γc ) = E[δc (Ct /Ct−1 )−γc Rt − 1]. Rs is the CRSP-VW stock returns, Rf is the
                     0

3-month T-bill rate and Ct is real per-capita consumption of nondurables and services excluding shoes and clothing. The
table also reports results when the periods with the lowest six consumption growth rates are eliminated. The table reports
estimated δ,bγ
             b and the minimized value of RMSR/RMSRR where RMSE is the square root of the average squared Euler
Equation error and RMSR is the square root of the averaged squared returns of the assets under consideration for W = I.
The last two colums report χ2 p-values for tests for the null hypothesis that Euler Equation errors are jointly zero for
W = I and W = S −1 where S is the spectral density matrix at frequency zero. The data span the period 1951Q4 to
2002Q4.
                                 Table 2: Low Consumption Growth Periods

              Quarter          NBER Recession Dates              Ct /Ct−1 − 1           Rts          Rtf
             1980Q02                  80Q1-80Q3                      -1.28             16.08        3.59
             1990Q04                  90Q3-91Q1                      -0.87             8.75         2.16
             1974Q01                  73Q4-75Q1                      -0.85             -1.26        2.37
             1958Q01                  57Q3-58Q2                      -0.84             7.03         0.65
             1960Q03                  60Q2-61Q1                      -0.64             -4.93        0.67
             1953Q04                  53Q1-54Q2                      -0.60             7.87         0.47

Notes: This table reports consumption growth, the return of the CRSP-VW stock returns Rs and the 3-month T-bill
rate Rf (all in in percent per quarter) in the six quarters of our sample with the lowest consumption growth rates. The
consumption measure is real per-capita expenditures on nondurables and services excluding shoes and clothing. The data
span the period 1951Q4 to 2002Q4.
                                          Table 3: Euler Equation Errors

       Model                 δbc         γ
                                         bc        RMSE/RMSR (Rs , Rf )               RMSE/RMSR (8 assets)
       Data                                                    0.48                                0.33
       CC Habit             1.28       57.48                   0.00                                N/A
       MSV Habit            1.71       30.64                   0.00                                0.00
       BY LR Risk           0.93       48.97                   0.00                                0.00

Notes: This table reports the annualized Euler Equation errors for stock returns Rs and the riskfree rate Rf from
simulated data from Campbell and Cochrane’s habit model (CC Habit), Menzly, Santos and Veronesi’s habit model
(MSV Habit) and Bansal and Yaron’s long run risk model (BY LR Risk) for CRRA preferences. The preference pa-
                    bc are chosen to minimize the mean square Euler Equation error: minδc ,γc g(δc , γc )0 g(δc , γc ) where
                                                                                                                     
rameters δbc and γ
g(δc , γc ) = E[δc (Ct /Ct−1 )−γc Rt − 1]. RMSR is the square root of the averaged squared returns of the assets under
consideration. RMSE is the square root of the average squared Euler Equation error. Euler Equation errors are computed
from simulations with 10,000 observations.
                                     Table 4: Properties of Guvenen’s Model


                                     Panel A: Consumption Growth
                               Ct /Ct−1 − 1       Cti /Ct−1
                                                        i   −1         Ctn /Ct−1
                                                                             n −1        Rts        Rtf
                 Mean               0.01               0.02               0.00          1.31     0.64
              Std. Dev.             2.04               4.53               0.83          7.30     1.69
             Correlation            1.00               1.00               0.99          1.00     0.17
                                    1.00               1.00               0.98          0.99     0.17
                                    0.99               0.98               1.00          0.99     0.16
                                    1.00               0.99               0.99          1.00     0.19
                                    0.17               0.17               0.16          0.19     1.00
                               Panel B: Stochastic Discount Factors
                                   Mti (0.99, 2.00)       Mtc (0.99, 2.00)       Mtc (0.99, 4.49)
                   Mean                    0.99                 0.99                  0.99
                Std. Dev.                  0.09                 0.04                  0.09
               Correlation                 1.00                 1.00                  1.00
                                           1.00                 1.00                  1.00
                                           1.00                 1.00                  1.00
                                     Panel C: Euler Equation Errors
              Consumption             (δ, γ)          E[Mt (δ, γ) Rts − 1]       E[Mt (δ, γ) Rtf − 1]
                    SH             (0.99, 2.00)               0.02%                    0.02%
                    AC             (0.99, 2.00)               0.39%                    -0.34%
                    AC             (0.99, 4.49)               0.00%                    0.01%

Notes: This table reports properties of Guvenen’s model. Panel A reports the properties of consumption growth rates
of aggregate consumption Ct /Ct−1 , stockholders consumption Cti /Ct−1 i
                                                                           , nonstockholders consumption Ctn /Ct−1
                                                                                                                 n
                                                                                                                    , stock
          s                        f
returns Rt and the riskfree rate Rt in Guvenen’s model. Panel B reports properties of stochastic discount factors. The
first row reports properties of the SDF for stockholders consumption. The remaining rows report SDF properties for
total consumption and different preference parameters. The stochastic discount factors are of the CRRA form Mt =
δ(Ct /Ct−1 )−γ . The first parameter in parenthesis is δ, the second one is γ. Panel C reports the annual Euler Equation
error Guvenen’s model. The preference parameters δ and γ are chosen to minimize the equally weighted sum of Euler
Equation errors for the stock returns Rs and the riskfree rate Rf . The first row labelled “SH” reports the Euler Equation
errors for stockholders consumption. The remaining rows labelled “AC” report Euler Equation errors for aggregate
consumption and different preference parameters. All statistics are quarterly.
                           Table 5: Properties of a Limited Participation Habit Model


                σi /σc                                     ρ(Cti /Ct−1
                                                                   i , C /C
                                                                        t   t−1 )

                               −1.0            −0.5           −0.25             0.25           0.5            1.0
                                                              2 Assets: Rs , Rf
                                                                        δbc
                   1            0.51           0.24            0.03             5.27           2.69          1.61
                   2            0.52           0.24            0.03             5.20           2.75          1.83
                   5            0.48           0.23            0.03             4.94           2.81          1.79
                                                                       γ
                                                                       bc
                   1           -30.71         -60.15         -128.80          127.03          58.59         27.93
                   2           -29.22         -61.24         -132.02          117.99          61.69         33.28
                   5           -33.48         -64.30         -131.01          117.94          64.43         32.56
                                                               RMSE/RMSR
                   1            0.00           0.00            0.00             0.00           0.00          0.00
                   2            0.00           0.00            0.00             0.00           0.00          0.00
                   5            0.00           0.00            0.00             0.00           0.00          0.00
                                                                   8 Assets
                                                                        δbc
                   1            0.50           0.24            0.04             5.44           2.76          1.74
                   2            0.50           0.23            0.04             5.60           2.80          1.74
                   5            0.48           0.21            0.03             5.74           2.94          1.85
                                                                       γ
                                                                       bc
                   1           -30.83         -61.99         -123.23          124.24          61.51         31.21
                   2           -31.69         -62.76         -124.21          126.92          62.34         31.22
                   5           -33.73         -67.43         -134.53          133.41          65.50         34.11
                                                               RMSE/RMSR
                   1            0.03           0.03            0.03             0.03           0.04          0.03
                   2            0.04           0.03            0.03             0.03           0.03          0.03
                   5            0.03           0.03            0.04             0.03           0.03          0.04

Notes: This table reports preference parameters and Euler Equation errors in Menzly, Santos and Veronesi’s (2004) habit
model. Consumption growth of stockholders is assumed to follow a random walk with a mean of 2% and standard deviation
of 1%. All parameters are as in Menzly, Santos and Veronesi except α, which is set obtain the same average stock return
as in Menzly-Santos-Veronesi. σi and σc are the standard deviations of stockholder’s and aggregate consumption growth,
respectively, and ρ(Cti /Ct−1
                          i
                              , Ct /Ct−1 ) is their correlation. The preference parameters δbc and γ bc are chosen to minimize
the mean square Euler Equation error minδc ,γc g(δc , γc )0 W g(δc , γc ) where g(δc , γc ) = E[Mtc Rt − 1], Mtc = δc ( CCt−1 )−γc .
                                                                                                                         t


Ct is aggregate consumption, Rs is the return of equity, Rf is the riskfree rate, and W = I. R includes the return of
the market Rs , the riskfree rate Rf and the returns of six individual assets. RMSR is the square root of the averaged
squared returns of the assets under consideration. RMSE is the square root of the average squared Euler Equation error.
The weighting matrix W is the identity matrix.
Table 6: Limited Participation CRRA Model and State-Dependent Correlation Estimated with Aggregate
                                     Consumption CRRA SDF


                 σi /σc                                    ρ− (Cti /Ct−1
                                                                     i , C /C
                                                                          t  t−1 )

                                −1.0           −0.5          −0.25             0.25          0.5             1.0
                                                               2 Assets: Rs , Rf
                                                                        δbc
                    1            1.39           2.27          3.33             2.16          1.67           1.26
                    2            2.11           3.04          4.27             6.67          3.75           2.19
                    5            4.42           4.30          5.15             0.00          2.55           5.15
                                                                        γ
                                                                        bc
                    1           19.30          47.77         72.82            44.27         29.26           14.07
                    2           47.37          68.58         90.13            162.03        83.06           45.21
                    5          107.78          93.29         95.69            142.34       193.52          101.68
                                                                RMSE/RMSR
                    1            0.55           0.43          0.27             0.00          0.00           0.00
                    2            0.53           0.47          0.40             0.00          0.00           0.00
                    5            0.33           0.41          0.41             0.00          0.00           0.00
                                                                     8 Assets
                                                                        δbc
                    1            1.33           2.22          3.23             2.19          1.71           1.30
                    2            2.00           2.81          3.75             6.95          3.80           2.25
                    5            3.86           3.10          3.17             5.12          6.69           4.79
                                                                        γ
                                                                        bc
                    1           19.30          47.77         72.82            44.27         29.26           14.07
                    2           47.37          68.58         90.13            162.03        83.06           45.21
                    5          107.78          93.29         95.69            142.34       193.52          101.68
                                                                RMSE/RMSR
                    1            0.31           0.25          0.16             0.00          0.00           0.00
                    2            0.29           0.26          0.22             0.01          0.00           0.00
                    5            0.17           0.22          0.22             0.19          0.12           0.02

  Notes: This table reports preference parameters and Euler Equation errors in a CRRA model with state-dependent
  correlation of stockholder’s and aggregate consumption growth rates. Aggregate consumption growth is assumed to
  follow a random walk with a mean of 2% and standard deviation σc of 1% (annually). The standard deviation of
  stockholders is σi . Aggregate consumption growth and stockholders consumption growth is perfectly correlation unless
  aggregate consumption growth is more than one standard deviation below its mean. In such periods, the correlation is
  ρ− (Cti /Ct−1
            i
                , Ct /Ct−1 ). Risk aversion of stockholders is 10 and their time discount factor is 1.2. Equity is modelled as lev-
  ered claims to stockholders consumption. The Euler eqution is estimated using aggregate consumption        growth. The pref-
  erence parameters δbc and γ  bc are chosen to minimize the mean square Euler Equation error minδc ,γc g(δc , γc )0 W g(δc , γc )
  where g(δc , γc ) = E[Mtc Rt − 1], Mtc = δc ( CCt−1
                                                    t
                                                      )−γc . Ct is aggregate consumption, Rs is the return of equity, Rf is the
  riskfree rate, and W = I. R includes the return of the market Rs , the riskfree rate Rf and the returns of six individual
  assets. RMSR is the square root of the averaged squared returns of the assets under consideration. RMSE is the square
  root of the average squared Euler Equation error. The weighting matrix W is the identity matrix.
                  Table A.1: Lim. Partic./Inc. Markets Euler Equation Errors for Stock Return and Risk-Free Rate: Hermite Densities
                                                                   Cov(Δc,Δd)=0.00017
 γ     δ     ρ(Δc,Δci) ρ(Δci,Δd) σ(i)/σ(c) μ(Δci)/μ(Δc)   γc     δc      e(Rs)      e(Rf)   Sk[c]    Ku[c]      Sk[i]     Ku[i]    Sk[d]                                             Ku[d]
 5    0.99      0.1       0.9        1        0.85      36.211 2.5613 4.95E-10 4.90E-10 4.0917 11.195 -0.0042337           3     0.036111                                           3.0009
 5    0.99      0.1       0.9        1         1.5      36.217 2.3988 2.12E-10 2.10E-10 4.0899 11.181 -0.004228            3     0.036063                                           3.0009
 5    0.99      0.1       0.9        2        0.85      71.495 6.0675 1.14E-09 1.12E-09 4.0952 11.207 0.0078509            3     0.04699                                            3.0015
 5    0.99      0.1       0.9        2         1.5      71.53 5.6869 1.50E-09 1.49E-09 4.0934 11.193 0.0078403             3     0.046927                                           3.0015
 5    0.99      0.1       0.9        4        0.85      129.08 14.235 9.75E-08 9.67E-08 4.1018 11.229        0.032021 3.0007 0.068751                                               3.0032
 5    0.99      0.1       0.9        4         1.5      129.22 13.395 -9.01E-08 -8.50E-08    4.1    11.215   0.031977 3.0007 0.068658                                               3.0031

                                                                                Cov(Δc,Δd)=-0.00017
 γ     δ     ρ(Δc,Δci) ρ(Δci,Δd) σ(i)/σ(c) μ(Δci)/μ(Δc)             γc         δc     e(Rs)      e(Rf)               Sk[c]      Ku[c]          Sk[i]   Ku[i]   Sk[d]                 Ku[d]
 5    0.99      0.1       0.9        1        0.85                -64.06     0.1052 -1.41E-14 -1.40E-14             4.1037     11.313      -0.0041596    3   -0.66437               3.2899
 5    0.99      0.1       0.9        1         1.5                -64.05     0.0987 -1.27E-08 -1.27E-08             4.1034     11.303      -0.0041543    3   -0.66356               3.2891
 5    0.99      0.1       0.9        2        0.85                -118.7     0.0121 -6.34E-14 -6.22E-14             4.1071     11.324       0.0077134    3   -0.65304               3.2802
 5    0.99      0.1       0.9        2         1.5                -118.6     0.0113 -8.05E-11 -8.07E-11             4.1067     11.314       0.0077036    3   -0.65225               3.2795
 5    0.99      0.1       0.9        4        0.85                -210.4     0.0002 -6.58E-13 -6.60E-13             4.1134     11.346       0.031459 3.0007 -0.63043                3.2614
 5    0.99      0.1       0.9        4         1.5                -210.2     0.0001 -2.31E-13 -2.31E-13             4.1131     11.336        0.03142  3.0007 -0.62966               3.2607

                                                                                 Cov(Δc,Δd)=0.00017
                i       i                  i
 γ     δ ρ(Δc,Δc ) ρ(Δc ,Δd) σ(i)/σ(c) μ(Δc )/μ(Δc)                 γc         δc      e(Rs)     e(Rf)               Sk[c]      Ku[c]          Sk[i]        Ku[i]       Sk[d]        Ku[d]
 5    0.99  0.1       0.9        1        0.85                    35.488     1.7114 -7.93E-09 -8.00E-09             0.2175     3.0307        0.49692       2.4804      0.46153      2.2946
 5    0.99  0.1       0.9        1         1.5                    35.488     1.6032 -7.94E-09 -7.99E-09             0.2175     3.0307        0.49691       2.4804      0.46153      2.2946
 5    0.99  0.1       0.9        2        0.85                    70.978     2.7445 9.82E-09 9.64E-09               0.2175     3.0307        0.49692       2.4804      0.46154      2.2946
 5    0.99  0.1       0.9        2         1.5                    70.978     2.571 9.82E-09 9.64E-09                0.2175     3.0307        0.49691       2.4804      0.46153      2.2946
 5    0.99  0.1       0.9        4        0.85                    141.96     4.3612 2.26E-07 2.25E-07               0.2175     3.0307        0.49692       2.4804      0.46154      2.2946
 5    0.99  0.1       0.9        4         1.5                    141.96     4.0855 2.26E-07 2.25E-07               0.2175     3.0307        0.49692       2.4804      0.46153      2.2946

                                                                                Cov(Δc,Δd)=-0.00017
 γ     δ     ρ(Δc,Δci) ρ(Δci,Δd) σ(i)/σ(c) μ(Δci)/μ(Δc)             γc         δc     e(Rs)      e(Rf)               Sk[c]      Ku[c]          Sk[i]        Ku[i]       Sk[d]        Ku[d]
 5    0.99      0.1       0.9        1        0.85                -35.46     0.4115 -4.87E-08 -4.88E-08             -0.218     3.0308        0.49691       2.4804      0.46152      2.2946
 5    0.99      0.1       0.9        1         1.5                -35.46     0.3855 -4.88E-08 -4.88E-08             -0.218     3.0308        0.4969        2.4804      0.46151      2.2946
 5    0.99      0.1       0.9        2        0.85                -70.92     0.1587 4.66E-15 4.66E-15               -0.218     3.0308        0.49691       2.4804      0.46152      2.2946
 5    0.99      0.1       0.9        2         1.5                -70.92     0.1487 4.22E-15 5.33E-15               -0.218     3.0308        0.4969        2.4804      0.46151      2.2946
 5    0.99      0.1       0.9        4        0.85                -141.8     0.0146 1.21E-13 1.22E-13               -0.218     3.0308        0.49692       2.4805      0.46153      2.2946
 5    0.99      0.1       0.9        4         1.5                -141.8     0.0137 1.15E-13 1.18E-13               -0.218     3.0308        0.49691       2.4804      0.46152      2.2946

Notes: This table reports output on the pricing error associated with erroneously using aggregate consumption in place of asset-holder consumption, for a range of parameter values and joint
distributions. γi is the persumed value of asset-holder risk-aversion; δi is the presumed value of the asset-holder's subjective discount rate; ρ(Δc,Δc i) denotes the correlation between
aggregate consumption growth and asset-holder consumption growth in the leading normal; ρ(Δci,Δd) denotes the correlation between asset-holder consumption growth and dividend growth
in the leading normal; σ(Δci)/σ(Δc) denotes the standard deviation of asset-holder consumption growth divided by the standard deviation of aggregate consumption growth in the leading
normal; μ(Δci)/μ(Δc) denotes the mean of asset-holder consumption growth divided by the mean of aggregate consumption growth in the leading normal; γc and δc are the values of γ and δ
that minimize the pricing errors using aggregate consumption; e(Rs) is the error for the Euler equation associated with the stock return; e(Rf) is the pricing error of the Euler equation
associated with the risk-free rate, and Sk[ ], Ku[ ] refer to the skewness and kurtosis of aggregate consumption (c), asset-holder consumption (i), and dividends (d).
           Figure 1: Euler Equation Errors for CRRA Preferences: Excess Returns




Notes: The figure plots
                    h   RMSE/RMSR as a functioni     of γ for excess returns. The Euler equation
                              −γ           f
errors are eX = E δ(Ct+1 /Ct ) (Rt+1 − Rt+1 ) . The solid line shows RMSE/RMSR for R =
Rs , the dotted line shows RMSE/RMSR for R = (Rs , 6 FF). For each value of γ, δ is chosen
to minimize the Euler equation error for the risk-free rate.
                                   Figure 2: QQ Plots – Data




Notes: This figure shows multivariate quantile-quantile (QQ) plots of log consumption growth
and asset returns. Each panel plots the sample quantiles (on the y-axis) against the quantiles
of a given distribution (on the x-axis) as well pointwise 5% and 95% bands. The top panel
shows the QQ plot for the joint distribution of ∆c, rs and rf , i.e. the quantiles of the squared
Mahalanobis distances against those of a χ23 distribution. The bottom panel shows the QQ
plot for the joint distribution of ∆c, rs , rf and 6 FF portfolios, i.e. the quantiles of the squared
Mahalanobis distances against those of a χ29 distribution. The squared Mahalanobis distance Dt
for a p-dimensional multivariate distribution xt with mean µx and variance-covariance matrix
V is defined as Dt = (xt − µx )0 V −1 (xs − µx ). Under the null hypothesis that ∆c, rs and rf
are jointly normally distributed, Dt has a χ2p distribution.
                        Figure 3: Nonparametric Regressions – Models




Notes: The figure shows fitted values for nonparametric regressions Rt = m(Ct /Ct−1 ) + et using
a Gaussian kernel with optimally chosen bandwidth for simulated data generated by the asset
pricing models of Campbell-Cochrane, Menzly-Santos-Veronesi, Bansal-Yaron and Guvenen.
                        Figure 4: Nonparametric Regressions – Data




Notes: The figures shows fitted values of nonparametric regression Rt = m(Ct /Ct−1 ) + et using
a Gaussian kernel with optimally chosen bandwidth.
                Figure 5: Nonparametric Regressions Excluding Recessions




Notes: The top panel shows fitted values of nonparametric regression Rt = m(Ct /Ct−1 ) + et
where quarters designated as recessions by the NBER are excluded. The bottom panel plots
pricing errors as in Figure 1 but when quarters designated as recessions by the NBER are
excluded.
         Figure 6: Euler Equation Errors with and without Lognormality – 2 Assets




Notes: This figure plots RMSE/RMSR with and without the assumption of joint lognor-
mality as a function of γc . δc is chosen to minimize the RMSE for each value of γc for
R = (Rs , Rf ). The Euler equation error for asset j without assuming lognormality is
ejR = δc E [exp {−γc ∆c + rj }] − 1. Under the assumption of joint lognormality, the Euler equa-
tion error is ejR = δc exp {−γc E∆c + γc2 σc2 /2 + Erj + σr2 /2 − γc Cov(∆c, rj )} − 1.
                Figure 7: QQ Plots – Model with State-Dependent Correlation

                                         Panel A: 2 Assets




                                         Panel B: 8 Assets




Notes: This figure shows multivariate quantile-quantile (QQ) plots of log consumption growth
and asset returns for data generated by the CRRA model with state-dependent correlation. See
the notes to figure 3 for a description of the QQ plots and the notes to table 7 for a description
of the model and values for the parameters. ρ− (Cti /Ct−1
                                                       i
                                                          , Ct /Ct−1 )is − 0.5 and σi /σc is 2. Panel
A shows the case of 2 assets, Panel B presents the 8 asset case.
            Figure 8: Nonparametric Regressions: State-Dependant CRRA Model




Notes: The figure shows fitted values for nonparametric regressions for simulated data generated
by the CRRA asset pricing model with state dependant correlation. The regression specification
is the same as in Figure 4.
        Figure A.1: Euler Equation Errors with and without Lognormality – 8 Assets




Notes: This figure plots RMSE/RMSR with and without the assumption of joint lognor-
mality as a function of γc . δc is chosen to minimize the RMSE for each value of γc for
R = (Rs , Rf , 6 FF). The Euler equation error for asset j without assuming lognormality is
ejR = δc E [exp {−γc ∆c + rj }] − 1. Under the assumption of joint lognormality, the Euler equa-
tion error is ejR = δc exp {−γc E∆c + γc2 σc2 /2 + Erj + σr2 /2 − γc Cov(∆c, rj )} − 1.
