NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHY IS FISCAL POLICY OFTEN PROCYCLICAL?
Alberto Alesina
Guido Tabellini
Working Paper 11600
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11600
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2005

We thank Eliana La Ferrara, Roberto Perotti, Kenneth Rogo, Francesco Trebbi and participants in a seminar
at Harvard for useful suggestions, Ashoka Mody and Diego Saravia for help with part of the data collection,
and Filipe Campante for outstanding research assistantship and comments. We gratefully acknowledge
financial support from NSF through a grant from NBER (Alesina) and CIAR, MIUR and Bocconi University
(Tabellini) The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Alberto Alesina and Guido Tabellini. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Why is Fiscal Policy Often Procyclical?
Alberto Alesina and Guido Tabellini
NBER Working Paper No. 11600
September 2005
JEL No.
ABSTRACT
Many countries, especially developing ones, follow procyclical fiscal polices, namely spending goes
up (taxes go down) in booms and spending goes down (taxes go up) in recessions. We provide an
explanation for this suboptimal fiscal policy based upon political distortions and incentives for
less-than-benevolent government to appropriate rents. Voters have incentives similar to the
“starving the Leviathan” classic argument, and demand more public goods or fewer taxes to prevent
governments from appropriating rents when the economy is doing well. We test this argument
against more traditional explanations based purely on borrowing constraints, with a reasonable
amount of success.
Alberto Alesina
Department of Economics
210 Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
aalesina@harvard.edu
Guido Tabellini
IGIER Bocconi University
Via Salasco 5
20136 Milan
ITALY
guido.tabellini@uni-bocconi.it

Why is fiscal policy often procyclical?∗
Alberto Alesina and Guido Tabellini
Harvard University and IGIER Bocconi
First draft: March 2005
This version: July 2005

Abstract
Many countries, especially developing ones, follow procyclical fiscal
polices, namely spending goes up (taxes go down) in booms and spending goes down (taxes go up) in recessions. We provide an explanation
for this suboptimal fiscal policy based upon political distortions and
incentives for less-than-benevolent government to appropriate rents.
Voters have incentives similar to the “starving the Leviathan” classic
argument, and demand more public goods or fewer taxes to prevent
governments from appropriating rents when the economy is doing well.
We test this argument against more traditional explanations based
purely on borrowing constraints, with a reasonable amount of success.

1

Introduction

Most economists would agree with the normative prescription that tax rates
and discretionary government spending as a fraction of GDP ought to remain
constant over the business cycle. If governments respected these prescriptions, we should observe a counter-cyclical pattern in fiscal policy. Namely,
∗

We thank Eliana La Ferrara, Roberto Perotti, Kenneth Rogoﬀ, Francesco Trebbi and
participants in a seminar at Harvard for useful suggestions, Ashoka Mody and Diego
Saravia for help with part of the data collection, and Filipe Campante for outstanding
research assistantship and comments. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from
NSF through a grant from NBER (Alesina) and CIAR, MIUR and Bocconi University
(Tabellini)

1

during a boom: (i) government spending as a share of GDP should go down
because of automatic stabilizers (if discretionary spending remained constant
in real terms, the eﬀect would be reinforced); (ii) with constant tax rates and
some degree of progressivity, government revenues as a share of GDP should
go up (the eﬀect would be reinforced by tax cuts in recessions and tax increases in boom.); (iii) as a result, budget surpluses as a share of GDP should
increase. The opposite should occur in recessions.1
In practice, in many developing countries fiscal policy has the opposite
properties: it is procyclical. In particular, government spending as a share of
GDP goes up during booms and down in recessions, while deficits increase in
booms and decrease in recessions. In OECD countries, instead, fiscal policy is
generally counter-cyclical.2 Gavin and Perotti (1997) were the first to point
out that in Latin America fiscal policy is procyclical, but Talvi and Vegh
(2005), Catao and Sutton (2002) and Kaminski, Reinhart, and Vegh (2004)
noted that this is not a Latin American phenomenon only: procyclicality of
fiscal policy is common in many — though not all — developing countries.
Why do many countries follow seemingly sub optimal procyclical fiscal
policies that add to macro economic instability? A common answer has to
do with the supply of credit. In bad times many developing countries cannot
borrow, or can do so only at very high interest rates, therefore they cannot
run deficits and have to cut spending; in booms they can borrow more easily
and choose to do so, increasing public spending (cf. Gavin and Perotti 1997,
Catao and Sutton 2001 and Kaminski, Reinhart, and Vegh 2004).
This argument is incomplete, however, since it begs two critical questions. First, why don’t these countries self-insure by accumulating reserves
in good times, so that they are less likely to face binding credit constraints in
recessions? Second, why would lenders not provide funds to countries even
in recessions, if they were convinced that the borrowing would optimally
1

In light of the careful discussion of Kaminski, Reinhart and Vegh (2004) we want to
be clear regarding our choice of words. We define as counter-cyclical a policy that follows
the tax smoothing principle of holding constant tax rates and discretionary government
spending as a fraction of GDP over the cycle. They define such policy as “acyclical”. Both
we and they would define as procyclical a policy in which tax rates go down in booms and
up in recessions and spending over GDP goes up in booms. As those authors themselves
note, our definition is the most common in the literature.
2
Some countries belonging to both groups have accumulated large amounts of public
debt. For a review of models that explain excessive deficits, see Alesina and Perotti (1995)
and Persson and Tabellini (2000). On the cyclical property of fiscal policy in OECD
countries see Perotti (2004)

2

smooth out the cycle?
To answer both questions one needs to consider the political arena, and
this is what we do in this paper. We argue that procyclical and myopic
fiscal policy stems from a political agency problem. Voters face corrupt governments that can appropriate part of tax revenues for unproductive public
consumption, i.e. political rents. Rents can be thought of as direct appropriation (stealing) of tax revenues by government oﬃcials, but also favors
paid to special interests such as public employees or “friends” of the government, often identified along ethnic, or religious lines etc. Voters can replace
a government that abuses of his powers, but in equilibrium they generally
cannot push rents all the way to zero. This agency problem interacts with
lack of information: voters observe the state of the economy, but they cannot
observe government borrowing, at least not at the margin; for instance, the
government can accumulate hidden oﬀ-balance-sheet liabilities. Hence, when
voters see the economy booming, they demand higher utility for themselves
(in the form of lower taxes, or better public goods), in a way that resembles the “starve the Leviathan” argument. This forces the government to
impart a procyclical bias to fiscal policy, and to borrow too much. Thus,
procyclical and myopic fiscal policy (i.e. an increase in government spending during booms and excessive government borrowing) arises from voters’
demands — note that voters do not demand irrational policies, they are just
poorly informed about economic policy. They demand and obtain, through a
reelection constraint on the government, a second-best solution to an agency
problem in an environment of corruption and imperfect information. Formally, the model extends to a dynamic environment with public debt a model
of moral hazard and political accountability originally formulated by Barro
(1973) and Ferejohn (1986), and adapted to public finance by Persson and
Tabellini (2000).
We then take the theoretical predictions to the data. First, we confirm
previous evidence on the widespread procyclicality of fiscal policy. This is
mainly due to government spending, that goes up in booms and down in
recession as a share of GDP. Second, we show a strong positive correlation
between procyclicality and measures of corruption: more corrupt countries
display a more procyclical fiscal policy. Third, the correlation between corruption and procyclicality is only or mainly present in democracies, confirming the theoretical idea that procyclicality emerges because voters try to hold
corrupt governments accountable. Finally, we ask how robust is the correlation between corruption and procyclicality when also taking into account the
3

evidence on borrowing constraints. This is not easy, because more corrupt
governments might also face more binding credit constraints. As a result,
many of the same variables that influence political corruption are also likely
to aﬀect the severity of borrowing constraints — indeed, corruption is highly
correlated with credit ratings in the data. Nevertheless, we present some
suggestive evidence that political agency problems in democracies, rather
than credit market imperfections, are the underlying cause of procyclical fiscal policy. Our main conclusion is that procyclicality of fiscal policy results
from a government failure, not a market failure, and takes place irrespective
of whether or not the government is up against a credit limit. Fiscal policy
is procyclical because rational but uninformed voters “starve the Leviathan”
and demand more in good times than in bad times.
We are not the first to suggest a political explanation to the procyclicality
of fiscal policy. In Talvi and Vegh (2005), the presence of surpluses increases
the government propensity to spend; this distortion is assumed, however,
rather than derived from an explicit political model. An alternative political explanation is the “voracity eﬀect” of Tornell and Lane (1999) and
Lane and Tornell (1998): when more resources are available (i.e. in booms),
the common pool problem is more severe and the fight over common resources intensifies, leading to budget deficits. But we do not know of other
papers that link fiscal myopia and procyclicality to a political agency problem.3 Finally, the idea that voters induce debt accumulation to discipline
governments that they do no trust is related to Jensen and Meckling (1976).
That seminal contribution shows that debt financing (as opposed to external
equity financing) can mitigate the agency problem inside the firm; but of
course, the mechanism through which this happens in our political context
is diﬀerent.
Our idea that political agency can lead to excessive debt accumulation
when voters are uninformed diﬀers from two other political models of government borrowing in the literature. The strategic debt argument (Alesina and
Tabellini (1990), Persson and Svensson (1989), Tabellini and Alesina (1990))
does not rely on an agency problem: voters are not uninformed about fiscal
policy and the results are driven by diﬀerent preferences amongst political
parties or groups of voters. In the rational budget cycles literature (Ro3

Satyanath and Subramanian (2004) show empirical evidence that democratic failure
explains macroeconomic instability; but they focus on the distinction between democracies vs non-democracies, whereas we argue that procyclical fiscal policy stems from the
interaction of democratic accountability and political corruption.

4

goﬀ and Siebert (1989) and Rogoﬀ (1990)), voters face an adverse selection
problem and this leads to distorted fiscal policy before the election. The
assumption about voters’ information is similar to ours, but here the incentive problem is one of moral hazard, not adverse selection. Moreover, those
papers do not discuss the reaction of economic policy to external shocks, nor
do they allow for a state variable like government debt.
The paper is organized as follows. In section 2 we lay out the model.
In section 3 we derive the economic and political equilibrium. Section 4
discusses the empirical evidence; the last section concludes.

2

The Model

2.1

The economy

Consider a small open economy with an infinite horizon. The private sector consists of a representative consumer that maximizes the presented discounted value of expected utility from private consumption:
E

∞
X

β t u(ct )

(1)

t=0

where ct denotes consumption in period t, E is the expectations operator,
and u(·) is a smooth and strictly concave increasing function. For simplicity,
we neglect the economic choices of the private sector, and only focus on
its political role of controlling the government agency problem. Thus, we
assume that private consumption in each period is just given by endowment
income (y) net of taxes (τ ): ct = yt − τ t . The model is meaningful only
if government debt is non-neutral and this is the simplest way to get that
property. Income is an i.i.d. random variable, drawn each period from a
distribution with bounded support over [y, ȳ]. All variables are expressed in
per capita terms.4
Government spending in period t only takes the form of (non-negative)
rents, rt ≥ 0, that benefit the government but not the consumer. Adding productive government spending would complicate the notation without changing the results: for all practical purposes, we can think of u(ct ) as the utility
4

Alternative but more complicated assumptions would be to allow the consumer to
borrow or lend in an economy with tax distortions, or to model explicitly a liquidity
constraint on private consumption.

5

accruing to the private sector from private and public consumption, and of τ t
as the additional taxes needed to pay for unproductive spending that benefits
the government but not the consumers at large.
In period t the government can issue public debt, bt+1 , at a market price
β. Government debt is bought by foreign residents and there is full repayment
of debt next period.5 Thus, exploiting the government budget constraint, we
can write private consumption in period t as:
ct = yt − rr + βbt+1 − bt

(2)

We assume that there is a limit to how much resources a government
can appropriate for his own exclusive benefit: rt ≤ Rt . The upper bound
Rt denotes what the government can steal from the public coﬀers without
ending up in jail. We consider two alternative assumptions about Rt . In
the simplest case, it is a constant: Rt = r̄. Alternatively, we assume that
the upper bound on rents is a decreasing and concave function of public
debt outstanding: Rt = R(bt ), with Rb < 0, Rbb < 0. Thus, if the previous
legislature accumulated a large amount of government debt, there is less room
to steal today. As discussed in the next subsection, debt is only observed
by the public at large in the subsequent period, when it has to be repaid.
Thus, this second assumption says that, if the government accumulated large
liabilities in the previous legislature, it is under more careful scrutiny today,
both from the domestic voters and international organizations, and as a result
the upper bound on rents is more severe. As we shall see, the assumption
that there is an upper bound on rents plays a role even if this constraint
is not binding in equilibrium, because it determines the strength of out-ofequilibrium threats. But the policy response to income shocks is the same
irrespective of whether the upper bound Rt is a constant or a function of
debt outstanding.
Finally, we assume that government debt can be issued only up to a
maximum amount b̄. Up to this amount, debt is always repaid in full and
there is no default risk nor any credit market imperfection. This upper limit
on government debt is low enough (compared to the possible realizations of
per capita income), so that the non-negativity constraints on consumption
5

The assumption of a small open economy is appropriate for our empirical work, in
which we consider this kind of countries. Without default risk there is no risk premium,
but in our empirical analysis we allow for the eﬀects of risk premia on government-issued
liabilities.

6

and rents are not violated in equilibrium:
y − b̄ > r̄
¯
R(b̄) > 0

(3)
(4)

The first inequality guarantees that, even if the upper bound on rents is a
constant and income is lowest, outstanding debt can always be repaid in full
without pushing private consumption to zero. The second inequality implies
there is always something to steal, even if the upper bound on rents is a
decreasing function of debt, and debt is maximal. These assumptions play
no role, other than to make sure that the equilibrium does not violate some
non-negativity constraints.
In this simple environment, the optimal policy for the voters is of course
rt = 0 and a debt policy that smooths private consumption in the face
of income shocks. Such a policy would typically induce the consumer to
spend only a fraction of any income increase, since by assumption income is
i.i.d. and hence income increases are temporary. Conversely, negative income
shocks would lead to some debt accumulation and consumption would fall
less than one for one with income.

2.2

The political system

Elections are held at the end of each period. The incumbent government
only cares about grabbing rents for himself. Thus, he maximizes:
E

∞
X

β t v(rt )

t=0

where it is understood that he can get rents only while in oﬃce (if the incumbent is not reappointed, then future political rents will be enjoyed by
another politician in oﬃce). The utility function v(·) is smooth, increasing
and strictly concave.
The political environment is adapted from Barro (1973), Ferejohn (1986)
and Persson and Tabellini (2000, ch. 4). Specifically, government policy is
chosen after the elections, by the incumbent, and there is no commitment to
electoral promises. Thus, there is an element of “contract incompleteness” in
the political environment, and the government can only be held accountable
ex-post through backward-looking voting strategies. This accountability is
7

made possible by assuming that, at each election, the incumbent is challenged
by an identical opponent, whose role is to provide an alternative. Voters
choose the optimal voting strategy that minimizes their loss of welfare from
this agency problem. Relative to the models of Ferejohn (1986) and Persson
and Tabellini (2000), we have added government debt. This makes the model
truly dynamic, while the previous literature on political agency had static
economic environments.
Voters observe their own current utility as well as their income (and hence
how much they are paying in taxes). But they do not observe how much government debt is being accumulated in the current period. This is equivalent
to saying that the government can incur oﬀ-balance-sheet liabilities with
which to pay for rents. The size of these liabilities only becomes known to
the voters after the elections. This assumption is consistent with the vast literature that has emphasized the size and significance of creative accounting
and lack of transparency of the budget especially in developing countries; it
has the same flavor of the information assumptions of the literature or rational political business and budget cycles.6 Note how an ex post “discovery”
of large government liabilities may trigger more control over the government
and therefore make it more diﬃcult for the government to appropriate rents
in the future, which is one of the cases we examine below.
Thus, the sequence of events is as follows: (i) At the start of each period,
before government policy is chosen, voters observe their income before taxes
in the current periods, yt , and debt outstanding, bt ; they select a reservation
level of private consumption, c∗t , and promise re-election to the incumbent
conditional on attaining at least that level of consumption. (ii) The government observes the reservation level demanded by voters as well as their
current income, and sets policy for the current period, namely rents (rt ) and
government debt (bt+1 ). (iii) Voters observe their utility from private consumption and vote according to their promise This sequence of events is
6
See in particular Von Hagen and Harden(1994), Alesina and Perotti (1995), Milesi
Ferretti (2003), amongst others, on the role of lack of transparency in the budget process,
and Rogoﬀ (1990), Rogoﬀ and Siebert (1990) and Persson and Tabellini (2000) for rational
political cycles. Note that there is an asymmetry: while voters do not observe bt+1 until
period t + 1, foreign lenders do not lend to the government past the point b̄ ; hence
international financial markets have better information about the debt policy compared
to national voters. Qualitatively, this assumption is not implausible, although here for
simplicty it is formulated in a very stark form: voters are totally ignorant, while foreign
investors are perfectly informed. As we shall see, however, the upper bound b̄ plays no
role in the case in which the ceiling on rents is a function of debt outstanding: Rt = R(bt ).

8

repeated in each period.
An equilibrium is a reservation level of private consumption that is optimal for the voters in the current period, given the initial conditions and
taking into account subsequent equilibrium outcomes, and a policy that is
optimal for the government, given the voting strategy and subsequent equilibrium outcomes. Note that this definition of sequential equilibrium rules
out pre-commitment by the voters to a sequence of voting rules. Voters can
punish the government for bad behavior during the current legislature. But
we do not allow voters to punish the government for the policy chosen before
the previous election, once they discover how much public debt was accumulated during the previous legislature. In other words, we restrict attention to
Markov-perfect equilibria. Since the government is fully informed and there
is no asymmetric information, rational voters can fully predict government
policy, even if they do not observe it. Hence, in equilibrium no government
change occurs and the incumbent is always re-elected, although the threat
of out of equilibrium events is a major determinant of the voters’ and of the
government’s decisions.

3

Equilibrium policies

In this section, we characterize the equilibrium and then we discuss its properties. Since it is simpler, we start with the case in which the upper bound
on rents is a constant irrespective of public debt outstanding: Rt = r̄. The
appendix describes the equilibrium under the alternative assumption that
Rt = R(bt ). Suppose that the incumbent chooses to forgo re-election. In
this case, he will certainly grab as many rents as possible, and obtain utility
v(Rt ) = v(r̄).7
Next, suppose that the incumbent government seeks to please the voters.
Let W (b, y, c) be the incumbent’s maximal utility in this case, given current
income y, debt outstanding b, and voters demands c. Let a 0 in front of a
variable denote next period values. Then W (b, y, c) is defined by:
W (b, y, c) = Max
[v(r) + βEV (b0 , y 0 )]
0
r,b

7

(5)

Under our assumptions, government debt policy in this out-of-equilibrium outcome is
not well defined (in the sense that the government is indiﬀerent about bt+1 ). But we don’t
need to specify the out-of-equilibrium debt to determine the equilibrium outcome, so we
leave it at that.

9

subject to the budget constraint, r = y − c + βb0 − b and to the upper bounds
on rents and government debt. The function V (·) is the equilibrium value of
reappointment for the incumbent, in the future state (b0 , y 0 ).
The incumbent can always choose to forego re-election. Hence, voters
cannot push government utility below the threshold v(r̄) (what he can achieve
by grabbing maximal rents once). In other words, for any values of b and y,
voters’ demands have to satisfy the following incentive constraint:
W (b, y, c) ≥ v(r̄)

(6)

Clearly, it is optimal for the voters to demand private consumption up to the
point where (6) holds as equality. Not doing that would simply enable the
government to grab more rents for itself, without increasing voters’ utility in
current and future periods. Hence, equilibrium demands by the voters, c∗ ,
are a function c∗ = C(b, y), defined implicitly by the condition:
W (b, y, c∗ ) = v(r̄)

(7)

We can then define the equilibrium value of reappointment, namely the
function V (b, y) introduced above, as:
V (b, y) = W (b, y, c∗ ) = v(r̄)

(8)

where the last equality follows by (7).
Since (8) must hold for any values of b and y, it must also hold in all future
periods. Thus, V (b0 , y 0 ) = v(r̄) for all possible values of y 0 and b0 . Based on
(5) and (8), equilibrium rents in the current period are then implicitly defined
by the following condition:
v(r) + βv(r̄) = v(r̄)

(9)

The left hand side of (9) is the incumbent’s utility if he pleases the voters,
given the equilibrium continuation value of being reappointed tomorrow. The
right hand side is his utility if he steals as much as possible today, but is
then thrown out of oﬃce. In equilibrium, the incumbent must be indiﬀerent
between these two options. Equation (9) can be easily solved to obtain
equilibrium rents:8
r∗ = v−1 [v(r̄)(1 − β)]
(10)
8

Implictly, we are assuming that equilibrium rents are strictly positive.

10

It remains to determine optimal public debt, b0 , for a government seeking
re-appointment. Using the previous notation, this is the solution to the
following optimization problem:
Max
[(y − c∗ + βb0 − b) + βEV (b0 , y 0 )]
0
b

(11)

subject to b0 ≤ b̄. The expression inside the round brackets corresponds to
rents in the current period, given the voters equilibrium request, c∗ . The last
term is the expected equilibrium continuation value (i.e. what the government expects to get from next period onwards if he is re-appointed).
By the argument above, EV (b0 , y 0 ) = v(r̄) for any value of b0 . This means
that, from the perspective of a government seeking reappointment, issuing
public debt in the current period entails no future costs. The costs are
fully borne by the consumers. But by assumption, consumers do not observe
government debt. Hence, the incumbent can pocket the proceeds from issuing
government debt in the form of higher rents. Indeed, the optimal debt policy
that solves (11) is to always borrow as much as possible: b0∗ = b̄. Equilibrium
private consumption is then easily obtained by inserting all these results in
the budget constraint, (2).
We summarize all this in the following:
Proposition 1 Suppose that the upper bound on rents is a constant, Rt = r̄.
Then the equilibrium stochastic steady state has:
c∗ = y − r∗
r∗ = v−1 [v(r̄)(1 − β)]
b∗ = b̄
The steady state is reached after one period.
The appendix solves the case in which the upper bound on rents depends
on debt outstanding: Rt = R(bt ). The solution procedure is very similar,
the only diﬀerence being that issuing government debt now is costly for the
government, because it reduces the value of its out-of-equilibrium threat next
period. As a result, equilibrium debt is now at an interior optimum lower than
the upper bound b̄, and the steady state is reached gradually rather than at
once. But throughout the adjustment to the steady state, and once the steady
state is reached, consumption moves one for one with income. Equilibrium
debt and rents are not aﬀected by income shocks. More specifically, the
appendix proves:
11

Proposition 2 Suppose that the upper bound on rents depends on debt outstanding, Rt = R(bt ). Then the equilibrium stochastic steady state has:
c∗ = y − r∗
r∗ = v −1 [v(R(b∗ ))(1 − β)]
and steady state debt is at an interior optimum b∗ < b̄. Under the conditions
stated in the appendix, the steady state is locally stable. During the adjustment to the steady state, income shocks only aﬀect consumption, that changes
one for one with income.

3.1

Discussion

According to Propositions 1 and 2, income shocks change consumption one
for one: positive income shocks are not saved through the government budget
to bring about higher utility for tomorrow; and negative income shocks do not
lead to more government borrowing. This happens irrespective of whether
the government is up against its debt ceiling or not. This failure to smooth
income shocks with fiscal policy is due to an agency problem, not to a credit
market imperfection. The intuition is straightforward: consumers do not
observe debt accumulation. They also know that they cannot trust the
government. Thus, when they see better macroeconomic conditions, they
demand higher utility for themselves. If they did not do that, the government
would simply appropriate more rents, and they would not receive any higher
consumption in the future anyway. The converse happens when income is
seen to go down.
To keep the model simple, here the government can only deliver utility
to the voters through tax cuts. Thus, literally the model predicts that the
tax revenue to GDP ratio goes down in booms and up in recessions. But
as already noted, it would be easy to add productive government spending
to the model (that also yields utility to the voters). In such a case, during
an economic boom voters would demand both higher private and public
consumption. Depending on the specific assumptions, either government
spending would go up or tax rates would go down when income increases,
or both. But either way, voters would demand immediate welfare gains, and
would not trust the government to save resources for the future.
Finally, note that in the model as we have it written, the degree of ”corruption” is a zero-one variable: either the government can appropriate rents,
12

in which case fiscal policy is procyclical, or it cannot, in which case fiscal
policy is optimal. This stark contrast comes form the strong assumptions on
government preferences. We also solved a two-period version of this model
with a relative weight capturing how much the government cares about rents
relative to consumer welfare. In such a model, the degree of procyclicality
is a function of the weight given to consumer welfare: the more government
cares about rents, the larger is the reaction of private consumption to income shocks (i.e., the more procyclical fiscal policy is, in the sense described
above).

4
4.1

Empirical Evidence
Estimation strategy

The model of the previous sections explains procyclical fiscal policy as the
result of a political agency problem. Voters do not trust the government,
and demand higher utility (in the form of lower taxes or higher productive
government spending) when they see aggregate output going up. Thus, the
model predicts that procyclical fiscal policy should mainly be observed in
countries where political corruption is widespread. In countries where the
government is subject to checks and balances, and political rents are negligible or diﬃcult to capture, voters have no reason to mistrust the government
and impart a procyclical bias to fiscal policy. Moreover, procyclical fiscal
policy results from a corrupt government which is nevertheless accountable
to the voters. If the government were totally unaccountable (say in a stable
dictatorship), then corruption would be high but voters could not influence
what the government does, and hence the procyclical bias should not be
observed or be less prevalent.
To take these predictions to the data, we estimate a cross-country regression of the following type:
Betai = φ0 + φ1 Control_of _corruptioni + φ2 Xi + ui

(12)

where the i subscript denotes countries, the dependent variable, Beta, is a
measure of counter-cyclicality in fiscal policy, the variable Control_of _corruption
is a measure of (the absence of) political corruption, and X denotes other
control variables described below. The coeﬃcient of interest is φ1 , which we
expect to be positive: fiscal policy is more counter-cyclical when there is less
13

corruption. Moreover, we expect φ1 to be positive in democracies, but not
in dictatorships: corruption imparts a procyclical bias in democracies (where
the government is accountable to the voters), but not in dictatorships (where
accountability is not an issue).
Finally, it is not obvious that the relationship between political corruption
and procyclicality in fiscal policy is linear and continuous (a tiny amount of
more corruption leads to slightly more procyclicality). On the contrary, the
version of the model which we presented implies that there are two groups
of countries: those where political checks and balances are not working well
and corruption is rampant, and those to which this does not apply. The
former is more likely to be the case in less developed economies, given the
well known positive correlation between quality of institutions and per capita
income. In fact, previous studies have shown that procyclical fiscal policy
is a big problem in some developing countries, but not among industrial
democracies (cf. Kaminski, Reinhart and Vegh 2004). To allow for a nonlinear relationship between corruption and procyclicality in fiscal policy, we
also estimate a probit version of (12), where the dependent variable is 1 if
Betai > 0 (counter-cyclical fiscal policy) and 0 if Betai < 0 (procyclical
fiscal policy). Thus, we estimate the probability of observing procyclical
fiscal policy in country i. The regressors are the same regressors that appear
on the right hand side of (12).

4.2
4.2.1

Data
Cyclicality of fiscal policy

We construct a measure of cyclicality of fiscal policy following Catao and
Sutton (2002), who in turn adapt Gavin and Perotti’s (1997) specification.
Our measure of procyclicality is the coeﬃcient β from the following regression estimated separately for each country in the sample (t subscripts
denote years):
∆St = α + βGDP GAPt + γT OTt + θSt−1 + εt

(13)

where: St refers to the central government’s overall budget surplus as a percentage of GDP(obtained from the World Bank’s Global Development Network Growth Database (GDNGD), based on data originally from the International Monetary Fund’s Government Financial Statistics); GDP GAPt is
the output gap, defined as the log deviation of GDP from its Hodrik-Prescott
14

trend; T OTt is a measure of the gap in terms of trade, also defined as the
logarithmic deviation from a Hodrick-Prescott-filtered series. The source for
the GDP and terms of trade series is the World Development Indicators
(WDI). A negative coeﬃcient on GDP GAP implies that a cyclical boom is
associated with a decrease in the budget surplus, meaning that the behavior
of fiscal policy is procyclical. We also consider the same specification but
redefine the dependent variable as either spending or tax revenue as a share
of GDP, rather than the budget surplus. In choosing the specification for our
computation of procyclicality we had to be parsimonious, to have as large a
sample of countries as possible. We have data on 87 countries, in a sample
that goes from 1960 to 1999 but, despite the parsimonious specification, only
for a small number of countries we have data for the whole period, with a
few countries having as little as five years of data. As a robustness check, we
have also run the regressions limiting the sample to those countries with at
least ten years of data, and the results are similar.
Table 1 reports our estimate of the parameter β in our 87 countries; the
fiscal policy variable in the left hand side of (13) is the budget surplus. Our
estimates confirm previous results by others. In the OECD countries fiscal
policy is countercyclical: in all but three countries the coeﬃcient beta has
the correct (i.e. positive sign) and so does the average β for the OECD. In
36 out of 64 non-OECD countries in the sample the coeﬃcient β has the
incorrect sign (i.e. it is negative). The two regions with the most procyclical
fiscal policy are Sub-Saharan Africa and (especially) Latin America, which
is the “worst” region. This is in fact the region that had originally attracted
the interest of economists about procyclicality of fiscal policy (see Gavin and
Perotti (1997), for instance). Note that most countries in Eastern Europe
have very few years of observations, so results on this region have to be taken
cum grano salis.9
Table 2 reports the β coeﬃcient obtained in regressions where on the left
hand side of (13) we have spending and tax revenues as a percentage of GDP.
Here, procyclicality corresponds to β > 0 for expenditures, and β < 0 for
9

We have dropped from our sample two outlier countries: Israel and Yemen. These
countries have coeﬃcients that exceed 1 in absolute value (Israel negative, Yemen positive). Note that Israel is a country with relatively low corruption and a very procyclical
fiscal policy (according to the estimated coeﬃcient). Therefore excluding Israel would help
finding the relationship between procyclicality and corruption derived from the model. The
same applies to Yemen in the opposite direction. Including both countries in our sample
does not aﬀect the results.

15

revenues. In OECD countries most of the counter-cyclical “action” is on the
spending side. In Latin America both the spending side and the revenue
side are procyclical, with the size of the spending side being twice as large in
absolute value. In Sub-Saharan Africa all the procyclicality comes from the
spending side. Thus, in these two regions which are especially procyclical
the “incorrect” timing of fiscal policy seems to be driven almost exclusively
by spending.
Many of the β coeﬃcients have large standard errors and are not significantly diﬀerent from zero. However, in OECD countries the positive coeﬃcients in the surplus regression and the negative one on spending are almost
all significantly diﬀerent from zero. In Latin American and Sub-Saharan
Africa several of the coeﬃcients with the wrong sign are statistically different from zero, but a majority of the coeﬃcients in non-OECD countries
are not statistically diﬀerent from zero. To cope with likely measurement
error, below we also report regressions were we weight observations with the
(inverse of) the estimated standard errors of the β coeﬃcients.
4.2.2

Control of corruption

To measure the degree of corruption, we use the Control of Corruption index
from Kaufman, Kraay and Mastruzzi’s (2004) aggregate governance indicators, which aggregates several scores and ratings from diﬀerent sources on a
scale of −2.5 to 2.5. This index is decreasing in the amount of corruption
and it is available for 1996, 1998, and 2000, and we take the average of the
three years. We repeated the exercise using data on perceptions from corruption from ICRG (available for the whole period years 1982-97) and from
Transparency International (available from 1996 onward). The results were
very similar, since these corruption indicators are highly correlated with each
other and move slowly over time. In the end, we only report results using
the Kaufman, Kraay and Mastruzzi (2004) data, since they are available for
a larger number of countries.
4.2.3

Other regressors

We also control for other regressors that may determine the cyclical response
of fiscal policy (the variable X in (12)). To allow for diﬀerences in the level
of economic development, we control for real per capita income; we measure
it as real GDP per capita in international prices (PPP adjusted) in the first
16

year of the sample over which the measure of procyclicality of fiscal policy is
computed for each country. The source is the WDI. This variable is called
Initial GDP (per capita). To capture how democratic a country is, we rely on
the variable Polity2, which subtracts the country’s score in an ”Autocracy”
index from its score in a ”Democracy” index (resulting in a range from −10
to 10), from the Polity IV Project database. We average this variable over
the sample used to compute the fiscal policy measure, and use the result to
construct two diﬀerent measures: a coarser Democracy dummy, which equals
one if the average Polity2 score is strictly positive, and zero otherwise; and
the average Polity2 measure itself.
The cyclical properties of fiscal policy may diﬀer across countries because
the size of government spending is diﬀerent. Hence we also control for this
feature of a country’s public sector, with a variable Government size defined
as the share of central government’s expenditure in real GDP, also from the
GDNGD.
Finally, as others have noted (e.g. Gavin and Perotti 1997), procyclical
fiscal policy may also result from tight credit constraints. We make use of two
variables to proxy for the degree of financial constraints facing a country’s
government. One of them is an average of the existing sample of ratings attributed by Standard & Poor’s to a country’s long-term foreign-denominated
sovereign debt (S&P Rating).10 We interpret this average as an inverse measure of the degree of financial constraints facing a country’s government. The
other variable is the logarithm of the spread (in basis points) of a country’s
sovereign debt over U.S. Treasury bonds at the time of issuance (Spread),
which comes from Capital Data Bondware and SDC Platinum.11 This constitutes a direct measure of financial constraints. It should be noted that
both of these variables are limited in terms of the number of countries in
our sample for which they are available (70 and 47, respectively) and of the
10

Adapting Cantor and Packer’s (1996) approach, we attribute numbers from 0 to 6 to
S&P’s letter-based system: C (default or selective default); B (high-risk obligations); BB
(likely to fulfill obligations, ongoing uncertainty); BBB (adequate payment capacity); A
(strong payment capacity); AA (high quality); AAA (highest quality). Countries rated at
BBB or better are said to have ”investment-grade” ratings.
Since changes in ratings occur at irregular intervals, we computed the average by weighing a given rating by the first integer greater than the number of years over which it was
kept.
11
Similarly to the case of ratings, the issuance of new debt occurs at irregular intervals.
We thus use a similar weighting system to compute the average spread, taking into account
the length of of the period between emissions.

17

period over which they are available: for most countries the sample starts in
the 1990s, which means that, unlike the democracy variables, the average is
not taken over the sample used to compute the fiscal policy variable.

4.3

Procyclicality and corruption

We now examine the correlation between the cyclical properties of fiscal policy and political corruption. Table 3 reports some simple statistics. Latin
America and Sub-Saharan Africa have the lowest score on control of corruption and they are the most procyclical regions.
Table 4 presents some multivariate regressions estimated by OLS. The
dependent variable is the estimated beta coeﬃcient on the budget surplus
reported in Table 1. Columns 1 and 2 show a strongly significant relationship
between Control of corruption and procyclicality: more corrupt countries are
more procyclical, even after controlling for initial GDP per capita in log (column 2).12 Column 3 shows that the estimated coeﬃcient on the variable
Democracy is not statistically significant, but Column 4 highlights the interaction between Democracy and Control of corruption: when the two variables
are interacted, the estimated coeﬃcient on corruption alone drops and becomes statistically insignificant, while the interaction term has a positive and
significant estimated coeﬃcient (of about the same size as the coeﬃcient of
corruption alone in Column 3). Thus, the eﬀect of corruption on procyclicality is apparent only among democracies, as predicted by the theory. Columns
5 and 6 repeat the same experiment using the continuous Polity2 variable to
measure democracy; the results are very similar.
We repeated all these regressions adding the variable Government size on
the right hand side, where this variable is averaged for the period in which
the left hand side is defined. This new variable was never statistically significant, and the sign and significance of all the other estimated coeﬃcients
was unchanged relative to Table 4. We also ran these regressions excluding
Eastern European countries, where the number of observations available to
construct the beta coeﬃcients were relatively small. The results are qualitatively unchanged.13 In Table 5 we use the Probit method and we define the
12

Initial GDP is more exogenous to cyclicality of fiscal policy than per capita income
measured in the middle or at the end of the sample period. In any event, we repeated the
regressions using per capita income measured in the middle of the sample period available
for each country and the result are virtually unchanged.
13
All these results are available upon request.

18

left hand variable (beta) as a zero-one variable (1 if positive, zero if negative).
The results of this table confirm the previous one; if anything they make it
even clearer that the eﬀect of corruption on procyclicality is present only in
democracies, a result consistent with the spirit of the model.
Our dependent variable (the estimated beta coeﬃcients) is likely to be
measured with error. Moreover, measurement error could vary across countries, and be larger in the countries where procyclicality is estimated from
a shorter time series. To cope with this problem, in Table 6 we estimate
the same specifications as in Table 4, but we weight observations by the (inverse of) the standard error of the estimated β coeﬃcients. The estimated
coeﬃcient on Control of corruption is now a bit smaller, but the pattern of
significance and the inferences we can draw remain the same as in Table 4.
Finally, Table 7 repeats the same exercise as in Table 4, but now the
dependent variable is the β coeﬃcient estimated from government spending
regressions (and reported in Table 2). Here a positive β denotes procyclicality. Hence we expect Control of corruption to have the opposite sign as in
Table 4: more Control of corruption should be associated with less procyclicality, and hence we expect a negative coeﬃcient. This is indeed what we
find. The pattern of significance is the same as in Table 4. In particular, the
eﬀect of corruption on cyclicality of spending is stronger in democracies (the
interaction term between Democracy or Polity2 and Control of corruption
has a negative and significant estimated coeﬃcient). Here we also find that
the estimated coeﬃcient on the variable Democracy (or Polity2 ) in isolation
is positive and significant, suggesting that, aside from the interaction with
corruption, democratic government on its own leads to more countercyclical
government spending. This might also reflect the composition of government
spending in democracies, that is likely to be more leaning towards social insurance. Repeating the same experiment for the cyclicality of tax revenues
leads to inconclusive results. When the dependent variable is defined as
the β coeﬃcient on tax revenues in per cent of GDP, no robust pattern of
correlations emerges, and the R2 of the regression is of the order of 0.02:
essentially we cannot explain the observed patterns of cyclicality of tax revenues. These results on taxation and spending suggest that the procyclicality
of fiscal policy is driven by spending, not by taxation.

19

4.4

The role of borrowing constraints

The major alternative explanation of a procyclical fiscal policy, diﬀerent from
our own, is that of borrowing constraints. If a country is credit rationed,
it can spend only in booms; moreover, in downturns the credit constraint
could become more binding and the government is forced to rein in fiscal
policy. How can we discriminate between these two explanations, corruption
vs borrowing constraints?
The key diﬃculty in addressing this issue is that corruption and credit
ratings are very highly correlated. As shown in Table 8, the correlation
coeﬃcient between the variables S&P Rating and Control of corruption is
0.92. Control of corruption is also highly correlated with available data on
interest rate spreads (Spread), a correlation of -0.82. Needless to say the two
variable measuring credit rationing are highly correlated between each other
(-0.89). In fact, some of these variables are correlated by construction. For
instance Standard and Poor may look (directly or indirectly) to perception
of corruption as one of their input in assigning ratings to countries. And
perceptions of corruption may be influenced by foreigners’ views of a country
credit worthiness. The credit variable and corruption are all correlated with
the expected sign with our measure of procyclicality.
The first observation relates to the results on the interaction between
democracy and corruption. As discussed in the previous subsection, the
correlation between corruption and procyclicality is stronger in democracies.
This is a direct implication of our model. To be also consistent with a borrowing constraint story, corrupt democracies would have to be worst borrowers
than corrupt dictatorships (while less corrupt governments would be equally
trustworthy in democracies and autocracies). A priori one can think of many
reason why it might be the opposite, or at least why the interaction between democracy and corruption would not be relevant in determining credit
worthiness.14
The second rough test we performed is the following. In Table 9 we
report the β on the budget surplus estimated on two sub-samples: pre and
post 1982, the year of the Mexican debt crises that opened up two decades
of debt crises, defaults etc. It is fair to say that, before 1982, concerns about
default and credit worthiness were much less important than afterwards. In
14
We repeated the same procedure using the probit specification for the left hand side
variable. The general picture of the results that we obtained is similar to the one presented
in the text.

20

general this table shows no evidence that procyclicality increased after 1982.
In fact the opposite seems to be the case; in Latin America and Sub-Saharan
Africa, the two most procyclical regions, we observe less procyclicality after
1982 than before. This seems rather inconsistent with a purely borrowing
costs story.
This interpretation is also confirmed by re-estimating the regressions of
procyclicality on corruption with the beta coeﬃcients estimated before 1982.
As shown in Table 10, Control of corruption retains a positive and statistically estimated coeﬃcient even when the measure of cyclicality refers to
the pre-1982 period (although here the interaction between Democracy and
Control of corruption is no longer statistically significant). These regressions
ought to be interpreted with caution, both because cyclicality is likely to be
measured with error (the sample is rather short for many countries), and
because our measure of corruption refers to a rather distant period in time.
Nevertheless, these estimates suggest that the correlation between procyclicality and corruption is a robust feature that pre-dates the years of sovereign
debt crises.15
We have also added the measure of Standard & Poor’s credit worthiness
into our basis regressions of Table 4. The results are displayed in Table 11.
In Column 1, where control of corruption and credit rating are introduced
together, they are both insignificant given how highly correlated they are.
Column 2 however highlights a suggestive result: the interaction of Control
of corruption with democracy is still significant and positive even when we
control for the S&P Rating variable. Columns 3 and 4 repeat the same experiments of Columns 1 and 2 with two other measure of democracy (Polity
2)with similar results. Columns 5 to 8 repeat the same regressions from
Columns 1 to 4 using the Spread measure of credit rating rather than the
S&P Rating variable. What we find here is that the Spread measure is statistically significant but so is the interaction of democracy with the measure of
control of corruption. We have also repeated the same regressions weighting
observations by the (inverse of) the standard errors of the β coeﬃcients, and
using the Probit method, obtaining similar results.
Note also that if credit constraints were the main cause of procyclicality,
the latter should be especially evident in recessions, when governments can15
In all these regressions we have excluded the outliers of Israel and Yemen but none of
our result depend on including or excluding them. Also we have excluded any country with
fewer than 5 observations usable to compute the β coeﬃcient. The variable Democracy
has been redefined to correspond to the pre-1982 period.

21

not borrow and thus have to tax more or spend less in order to overcome
recession-induced deficits. In booms instead the governments have resources,
and not only can they be anticyclical (i.e. reduce spending as a share of
GDP or increase tax revenues as a share of GDP) but, expecting constraints
in recessions, they should be especially keen on accumulating surpluses in
booms; thus they should be especially anticyclical in booms. It turns out
that governments are more procyclical in booms than in recessions; in fact
in more than 2/3 of the countries that are procyclical they are more so in
booms than in recessions. This observation casts some doubts on a simple
borrowing constraint interpretation of procyclicality.
In fact, we have reestimated equation (13) separately for each country,
allowing the β coeﬃcient to take on diﬀerent values in positive vs negative
output gaps. Our agency model predicts no asymmetry: there is no reason
why fiscal policy ought to react very diﬀerently in booms vs recessions. According to the credit market imperfection hypothesis, instead, if anything
procyclicality should be stronger during recessions, as discussed above. Table 12 lists the 39 countries with procyclical fiscal policy (i.e. with negative
estimated β coeﬃcients in Table 1). The first column (Beta Recession) reports the estimated β coeﬃcient during recessions; the second column (Beta
Boom) reports the estimated β coeﬃcient during booms. Remember that
the beta coeﬃcients should be positive both in recessions (GDPGAP negative) and in booms (GDPGAP positive). In 21 out of 39 countries, Beta
Boom is negative and Beta Recession positive, indicating that only in booms
we observe procyclicality. Moreover in 28 out of 39 countries Beta Boom
is lower algebraically than Beta Recession. In other words, only in 11 out
of 39 countries procyclicality seems to be driven mostly by recession periods. Given the large standard errors, the diﬀerence between Beta Boom and
Beta Recession is almost never statistically significant, but nevertheless this
evidence is suggestive, since the credit constraint hypothesis would imply
a significant diﬀerence in which procyclicality emerges especially or only in
recessions.
As a further check, in Table 13 we have regressed Beta Recession (i.e. the
reaction of the surplus to recessions) against our variables of interest. According to the credit market imperfection hypothesis, the variables measuring
credit constraints (S&P Rating and Spread) should have more explanatory
power in these regressions than against the overall measures of procyclicality,
and conversely the variable Control of corruption should have less explanatory power here: as argued above, credit market imperfections are more likely
22

to lead to distorted fiscal policy at the time of recession than during booms.
But this is not what we find. In column 1, Control of corruption is generally
highly significant and with the expected sign. Columns 2 and 3 show that
also the measures of Spread and S&P Rating are significant, but the last
two columns show that when control of corruption and the credit market
variables are entered together the Control of Corruption variable dominates.
In column 4 it is the only one which is significant, in the last one it is borderline insignificant but much closer to significance that the credit constraint
variable.
In summary, it is diﬃcult to disentangle clearly the eﬀects of credit constraints per se from political variables such as measure of corruption. However the tests presented above suggest at least tentatively that corruption
and political imperfections play a major role in explaining procyclicality of
fiscal policy, and perhaps more so than credit constraints.

5

Conclusions

In many developing countries fiscal policy is procyclical. Our explanation is
that voters do not trust corrupt government with resources and demand tax
cuts or increase in productive government spending or transfers when positive shocks hit the economy. Otherwise they fear that the available resources
would be “wasted” in rents. For the same reasons the voters do not “allow”
government to accumulate reserves of assets, on the contrary they demand a
level of government debt that forces the government to use resources to pay
interest rather than steal them. Therefore this political distortion, related to
the “starve the Leviathan”argument, leads to a higher-than-first-best accumulation of government debt and procyclical fiscal policy.
Credit constraints come into play indirectly because the political distortion may push the government towards levels of debt that are at the limit of
what they can repay and therefore at the limit of what borrowers can lend.
The literature that focuses on credit constrains reviewed above, implicitly
or explicitly suggests that the “malfunctioning” of credit markets makes it
hard or impossible for developing countries to borrow exactly when they
need it more, in bad times. But this argument fails to explain why welfare
maximizing governments don’t take this into account, building up reserves in
good times, so as to avoid being credit constrained in bad times. Moreover,
our evidence suggests that procyclicality is more often driven by a distorted
23

policy reaction to booms, rather than to recessions. And whatever procyclical policy response there is to recessions, does not seem to be explained by
available measures of credit constraints.

6

Appendix

Proof of Proposition 2
Now consider the case in which the upper bound on rents is a decreasing
function of debt outstanding: Rt = R(bt ), with Rb , Rbb < 0. Going through
the same steps as in section 3, in equilibrium the government must be indiﬀerent between pleasing the voters and being reappointed (taking into account
the future equilibrium continuation value), or grabbing as many rents as possible today. This indiﬀerence condition (the analogue of (9) in section 3) here
can be written as:
v(r) + βv(R(b0 )) = v(R(b))
(14)
Hence, equilibrium rents are determined jointly with equilibrium government debt. Repeating the steps of Section 3, a government seeking reappointment chooses public debt so as to maximize (11). But here, EV (b0 , y 0 ) =
v(R(b0 )). Hence, equilibrium public debt is determined by the following optimality condition:
vr (r) = −vr (R(b0 ))Rb (b0 )
(15)
the left hand side of (15) is the marginal benefit of borrowing, namely the
additional rents that the government can grab today with the debt proceeds.
The right hand side is the marginal cost of issuing debt, namely the reduction
in the upper bound of rents tomorrow, which in turn reduces the value of
the incumbent’s future out-of-equilibrium threat. Together, (9) and (15)
determine the equilibrium time paths of rents and public debt.
The steady state is obtained imposing b0 = b = b∗ in (14), to yield an expression for equilibrium rents that closely resembles equation (10) in Section
3:
v(r∗ ) = v(R(b∗ ))(1 − β)

(16)

By (16), equilibrium rents are below the upper bound in the steady state:
r∗ < R(b∗ ). With strictly concave preferences, equation (15) then implies
that the steady state is at an interior optimum (i.e. b∗ < b̄) only if Rb (b∗ ) > 1.
Intuitively, for the government to borrow less than the maximum b̄, the cost
24

of issuing government debt must be high enough. With r∗ < R(b∗ ), the
marginal utility of current rents is higher than the marginal utility of rents
evaluated at the upper bound; hence the government finds it optimal not to
issue more debt only if the upper bound on rents shrinks more than one for
one as more debt is issued: Rb (b∗ ) > 1. Assuming that this condition holds
for some b < b̄, then the steady state can correspond to an interior optimum
for government debt.
0
We now show that the steady state is locally stable (i.e. that db
< 1
db
in a neighborhood of the steady state). Equation (15) implicitly defines
equilibrium rents as a function of government debt: r = F (b0 ). Applying the
implicit function theorem to (15), we also have:
Fb (b0 ) =

vrr (R(b0 ))Rbb (b0 )
<0
vrr (F (b0 ))

(17)

Replacing r = F (b0 ) in (14), the equilibrium law of motion of government
debt is implicitly defined by:
v[F (b0 )] + βv[R(b0 )] − v[R(b)] = 0

(18)

0

Now use (18) to compute db
in a neighborhood of the point b0 = b = b∗ .
db
After some simplifications we have:
db0
1
=
>0
db
β − Fb (b∗ )

(19)

Thus, recalling that Fb (b) < 0, that F (b) < R(b) and that Rbb < 0, and using
0
< 1 provided that vrrr ≥ 0 and that Rbb is not too
(17), we have that db
db
close to 0 in absolute value.
Finally, note that in equilibrium (on and oﬀ the steady state) neither
rents nor public debt depend on income. The budget constraint then implies
that temporary income shocks change consumption one for one.

7

References

References
[1] Alesina Alberto and Roberto Perotti (1995) “The Political Economy of
Budget Deficits” IMF Staﬀ Papers 42: 1-31.
25

[2] Alesina, Alberto and Guido Tabellini (1990) “A Positive Theory of Fiscal
Deficits and Government Debt” Review of Economic Studies 57: 403-14.
[3] Barro, Robert (1973) “The Control of Politicians: An Economic Model”,
Public Choice, 13: 19-42.
[4] Cantor, Richard and Frank Packer (1996). “Determinants and Impact of
Sovereign Credit Ratings,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic
Policy Review, 20: 37-54.
[5] Catao, Luis A. and Bennett W. Sutton (2002). “Sovereign Defaults: The
Role of Volatility,” IMF Working Papers 02/149, International Monetary
Fund.
[6] Ferejohn, John (1986) “Incumbent Performance and Electoral Control”
Public Choice, 50: 5-25.
[7] Gavin, Michael and Roberto Perotti (1997). “Fiscal Policy in Latin
America,” in Bernanke, Ben and Rotemberg, Julio, NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
[8] Global Development Network Growth Database (compiled
by William Easterly and Mirvat Sewadeh), available on:
http://www.worldbank.org/research/growth/GDNdata.htm
[9] Jensen, Michael C., and William H. Meckling (1976), “Theory of the
Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs and Ownership Structure.”
Journal of Financial Economics, 3: 305-360.
[10] Kaminski, Graciela, Carmen Reinhart, and Carlos Vegh (2004) “When
it Rains it Pours: Procyclical Capital Flows and Macroeconomic Policies” in Mark Gertler and Kenneth Rogoﬀ (eds) NBER Macroeconomic
Annual 2004, , Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
[11] Kaufman, Daniel, Aart Kraay and Massimo Mastruzzi (2004), “Governance Matters III: Governance Indicators for 1996-2002,” World Bank
Policy Research Working Paper 3106.
[12] Lane, Philip and Aaron Tornell (1998) “Why Aren’t Latin American
Saving Rates Procyclical?” Journal of Development Economics, 57: 185200.
26

[13] Milesi Ferretti, Gian Maria (2003) “Good Bad or Ugly? On the Eﬀects
of Fiscal Rules on Creative Accounting” Journal of Public Economics,
88: 377-94.
[14] Perotti, Roberto (2004) “Estimating the Eﬀects of Fiscal Policy in
OECD Countries”, mimeo, IGIER-Bocconi.
[15] Persson, Torsten and Lars Svensson (1989) “Why a stubborn conservative would run a deficit: Policy with time-inconsistent preferences”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 104: 325-345
[16] Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (2000) Political Economics: Explaining Economic Policy, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
[17] Polity IV Project, available on: http://www.cidcm.umd.edu/inscr/polity/#data
[18] Rogoﬀ, Kenneth (1990) “Equilibrium Political Budget Cycles” American Economic Review, 80: 21-36.
[19] Rogoﬀ, Kenneth and Ann Siebert (1988), “Elections and Macroeconomic
Policy Cycles”, Review of Economic Studies 55: 1-16.
[20] Satyanath, Shanker and Arvind Subramanian (2004) “What Determines
Long-Run Macroeconomic Stability? Democratic Institutions”, IMF
Working Paper No. 04/215, International Monetary Fund.
[21] Standard
and
Poor’s
Credit
http://www2.standardandpoors.com/

Ratings,

available

on:

[22] Tabellini, Guido and Alberto Alesina (1990), “Voting on the budget
deficit”, American Economic Review 80: 37-49.
[23] Talvi, Ernesto and Carlos Vegh (2005) “Tax Base Variability and Procyclicality of Fiscal Policy” Journal of Development Economics, forthcoming.
[24] Tornell, Aaron and Philip Lane (1999) “Voracity and Growth” American
Economic Review, 89: 22-46.
[25] Von Hagen, Jurgen and Jan Harden (1994) “National Budget Process
and Fiscal Performance” European Economy Reports and Studies 3: 31144.
27

Table 1
Beta Coefficients
Country

Beta

Initial Year

Final Year

Australia

0.319

1970

1996

Austria

0.192

1970

1996

Belgium

0.120

1970

1996

Canada

0.359

1969

1996

Denmark

0.840

1970

1996

Finland

0.264

1960

1996

France

0.401

1972

1996

Germany

-0.086

1991

1996

Greece

0.136

1960

1996

Iceland

0.240

1972

1996

Ireland

-0.333

1960

1996

Italy

0.419

1960

1996

Japan

0.278

1960

1993

Luxembourg

-0.267

1975

1996

Netherlands

0.209

1960

1996

New Zealand

0.206

1960

1996

Norway

0.536

1972

1996

Portugal

0.425

1975

1996

Spain

0.265

1962

1996

Sweden

0.788

1960

1996

Switzerland

0.078

1960

1996

United Kingdom

0.216

1960

1996

United States

0.389

1960

1996

OECD

0.261

Bulgaria

0.432

1988

1997

Croatia

0.001

1991

1996

Hungary

0.248

1981

1997

Romania

0.140

1989

1997

Turkey

-0.262

1987

1997

Eastern Europe

0.112

India

-0.019

1965

1998

Indonesia

0.181

1972

1997

Malaysia

-0.003

1960

1997

Nepal

0.013

1973

1999

Pakistan

0.095

1973

1998

Papua New Guinea

-0.094

1975

1993

Philippines

0.043

1960

1998

Singapore

-0.027

1975

1995

South Korea

0.002

1972

1996

Thailand

0.129

1960

1997

Asia and Pacific

0.032

Egypt

-0.028

1975

1997

Iran

0.145

1974

1990

Country (continued)

Beta

Initial Year

Final Year

Morocco

-0.032

1972

1995

Tunisia

0.021

1972

1999

Middle East and North Africa

0.027

Botswana

0.224

1982

1996

Burkina Faso

-0.071

1973

1993

Burundi

0.016

1974

1999

Cameroon

0.017

1975

1998

Chad

-0.044

1972

1991

Congo

-0.124

1980

1998

Ethiopia

-0.021

1981

1992

Gabon

-0.384

1973

1991

Gambia

0.012

1966

1993

Ivory Coast

-0.219

1979

1998

Madagascar

0.139

1972

1996

Mali

0.064

1977

1988

Mauritius

-0.313

1974

1999

Namibia

-0.243

1986

1993

Rwanda

-0.035

1973

1993

Senegal

0.035

1972

1984

Seychelles

-0.413

1985

1997

South Africa

0.133

1972

1998

Togo

-0.739

1977

1987

Zambia

0.166

1972

1988

Zimbabwe

0.280

1976

1996

Sub-Saharan Africa

-0.072

Argentina

-0.011

1973

1996

Belize

-0.262

1977

1997

Bolivia

0.278

1980

1997

Brazil

-0.104

1960

1997

Chile

-0.060

1960

1999

Colombia

0.087

1960

1999

Costa Rica

-0.264

1970

1997

Dominican Republic

0.048

1960

1998

Ecuador

-0.098

1960

1997

El Salvador

0.023

1960

1999

Guatemala

-0.461

1960

1998

Haiti

0.188

1979

1987

Honduras

0.033

1960

1997

Jamaica

-0.517

1975

1985

Mexico

-0.094

1971

1997

Nicaragua

-0.145

1960

1996

Panama

-0.164

1980

1998

Paraguay

-0.038

1960

1993

Peru

-0.037

1965

1999

St. Lucia

-0.058

1980

1991

St. Vincent & Grenadines

-0.515

1980

1996

Country (continued)

Beta

Initial Year

Final Year

Trinidad & Tobago

-0.801

1976

1995

Uruguay

-0.041

1965

1999

Venezuela

-0.144

1974

1999

Latin America and Caribbean

-0.132

Regression: ∆Surplust = α + βOutputGapt + γTOTGapt + θSurplust-1 + ɛt

Table 2
Beta Coefficients – Expenditures and Revenues
Country

Beta (exp.)

Beta (rev.)

Australia

-0.105

0.104

Austria

0.256

0.260

Belgium

-0.488

-0.314

Canada

-0.136

0.173

Denmark

-0.469

0.354

Finland

-0.285

-0.071

France

-0.267

0.034

Greece

0.107

-0.067

Iceland

0.105

0.182

Ireland

0.137

-0.193

Italy

-0.322

-0.022

Japan

0.154

0.612

Luxembourg

-0.643

-0.578

Netherlands

-0.528

-0.263

Norway

-0.299

0.371

Portugal

0.195

0.167

Spain

-0.217

-0.127

Sweden

-0.760

0.635

Switzerland

-0.166

-0.071

United Kingdom

-0.803

-0.304

United States

-0.270

0.098

OECD

-0.229

0.047

Bulgaria

0.544

0.561

Croatia

0.002

0.003

Hungary

-0.155

0.207

Romania

-0.560

0.158

Turkey

0.316

-0.015

Eastern Europe

0.029

0.183

India

-0.029

0.077

Indonesia

-0.119

0.029

Malaysia

-0.022

0.174

Nepal

0.005

0.025

Pakistan

0.270

0.108

Singapore

-0.163

0.245

South Korea

0.013

0.089

Thailand

-0.092

0.231

Asia and Pacific

-0.017

0.122

Egypt

-0.116

0.014

Iran

0.004

0.050

Morocco

-0.157

-0.050

Tunisia

0.003

-0.008

Middle East and North Africa

-0.066

0.001

Country

Beta (exp.)

Beta (rev.)

Burkina Faso

-0.039

-0.106

Burundi

0.159

0.061

Cameroon

0.108

0.078

Chad

-0.333

-0.078

Congo

0.878

0.152

Ethiopia

0.252

0.172

Gabon

0.200

-0.022

Gambia

0.495

0.154

Ivory Coast

0.105

-0.205

Madagascar

-0.161

0.090

Mali

-0.321

-0.090

Mauritius

0.136

-0.047

Namibia

0.517

0.172

Rwanda

-0.115

0.012

Senegal

-0.180

-0.008

Seychelles

0.517

-0.063

South Africa

-0.027

0.022

Togo

0.516

0.275

Zambia

0.044

0.243

Zimbabwe

-0.122

0.005

Sub-Saharan Africa

0.132

0.041

Argentina

0.016

0.015

Belize

0.179

-0.142

Bolivia

0.389

-0.315

Brazil

0.265

0.161

Chile

0.037

0.047

Colombia

-0.211

-0.088

Costa Rica

0.206

0.010

Dominica

3.270

0.061

Dominican Republic

0.056

0.033

Guatemala

0.553

0.080

Haiti

0.155

-0.196

Honduras

-0.424

-0.084

Jamaica

-0.199

-0.323

Mexico

-0.086

-0.121

Nicaragua

0.073

-0.035

Panama

0.203

0.116

Paraguay

0.033

-0.002

Peru

-0.081

-0.092

St. Lucia

-0.104

-0.094

Trinidad & Tobago

0.482

0.143

Uruguay

0.265

-0.036

Venezuela

0.141

-0.073

Latin America and Caribbean

0.093

-0.047

Table 3
Beta Coefficients and Control of Corruption
Region
OECD
Eastern Europe
Asia and Pacific
Middle East and North Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa
Latin America and Caribbean

Beta

Beta (exp.)

Beta (rev.)

Control of Corruption

0.261
0.112
0.032
0.027*
-0.072
-0.132

-0.229
0.029
-0.017
-0.133
0.132
0.093

0.047
0.183
0.122
-0.038
0.041
-0.047

1.813
-0.056
-0.008
-0.073
-0.339
-0.237

Table 4
OLS Estimates: cyclicality of budget surplus
(1)
Control of Corruption

0.107***
(0.027)

Initial GDP (per capita)

(Dependent variable: Beta of budget surplus)
(2)
(3)
(4)

(5)

(6)

0.149***
(0.037)

0.142***
(0.040)

0.024
(0.034)

0.145***
(0.044)

0.076**
(0.036)

- 0.062
(0.040)

- 0.049
(0.039)

- 0.059
(0.041)

- 0.048
(0.038)

- 0.055
(0.041)

- 0.013
(0.057)

0.022
(0.046)

- 0.002
(0.006)

- 0.001
(0.006)

Democracy

0.146***
(0.046)

Democracy*Control of
Corruption
Polity2

0.011**
(0.004)

Polity2*Control of
Corruption
R-squared
n

0.17
87

0.20
83

Robust standard errors in parenthesis; intercepts not reported.
* significant at 10%
** significant at 5%
*** significant at 1%

0.21
81

0.24
81

0.21
81

0.25
81

Table 5
Probit Estimates: cyclicality of budget surplus
(1)
Control of Corruption

0.289**
(0.130)

Initial GDP (per capita)

(Dependent variable: Probability of Beta>0)
(2)
(3)
(4)

(5)

(6)

0.486**
(0.205)

0.446**
(0.210)

- 0.288
(0.388)

0.418*
(0.226)

- 0.037
(0.272)

- 0.298
(0.236)

- 0.290
(0.245)

- 0.352
(0.248)

- 0.310
(0.254)

- 0.369
(0.256)

0.139
(0.371)

0.362
(0.382)

0.019
(0.037)

0.024
(0.035)

Democracy

0.927**
(0.413)

Democracy*Control of
Corruption
Polity2

0.080***
(0.030)

Polity2*Control of
Corruption
Pseudo R-squared
n

0.04
87

0.06
83

Robust standard errors in parenthesis; intercepts not reported.
* significant at 10%
** significant at 5%
*** significant at 1%

0.06
81

0.10
81

0.06
81

0.12
81

Table 6
Weighted Estimates: cyclicality of budget surplus
(1)
Control of Corruption

0.093***
(0.021)

Initial GDP (per capita)

(Dependent variable: Beta of budget surplus)
(2)
(3)
(4)

(5)

(6)

0.118***
(0.029)

0.115***
(0.030)

0.017
(0.060)

0.110***
(0.033)

0.065
(0.042)

- 0.038
(0.033)

- 0.037
(0.033)

- 0.050
(0.033)

- 0.039
(0.033)

- 0.050
(0.033)

0.013
(0.051)

0.051
(0.054)

0.002
(0.005)

0.004
(0.005)

Democracy

0.124*
(0.066)

Democracy*Control of
Corruption
Polity2

0.008*
(0.004)

Polity2*Control of
Corruption
R-squared
n

0.19
87

0.21
83

0.23
81

0.26
81

0.23
81

Robust standard errors in parenthesis; intercepts not reported. The weights are the inverse of the standard errors of the estimated beta coefficients.
* significant at 10%
** significant at 5%
*** significant at 1%

0.26
81

Table 7
OLS Estimates: cyclicality of government spending
(1)
Control of Corruption

- 0.117***
(0.029)

Initial GDP (per capita)

(Dependent variable: Beta on central government spending)
(2)
(3)
(4)

(5)

(6)

- 0.144***
(0.041)

- 0.171***
(0.048)

- 0.086**
(0.036)

- 0.179***
(0.052)

- 0.107***
(0.037)

0.038
(0.047)

- 0.010
(0.044)

- 0.003
(0.046)

- 0.004
(0.045)

0.005
(0.048)

0.243***
(0.087)

0.222***
(0.077)

0.015**
(0.008)

0.015**
(0.007)

Democracy

- 0.109*
(0.058)

Democracy*Control of
Corruption
Polity2

- 0.012**
(0.005)

Polity2*Control of
Corruption
R-squared
n

0.15
83

0.16
79

Robust standard errors in parenthesis; intercepts not reported.
* significant at 10%
** significant at 5%
*** significant at 1%

0.24
77

0.25
77

0.19
77

0.22
77

Table 8
Partial correlation coefficients
Beta (surp.)

Beta (exp.)

Control of
Corruption

S&P Rating

Beta (surp.)

1

Beta (exp.)

-0.50

1

Control of Corruption

0.26

-0.39

1

S&P Rating

0.40

-0.45

0.92

1

Spread

-0.49

0.39

-0.82

-0.89

Spread

1

Table 9
Beta Coefficients (budget surplus)– pre- and post-1982
Country

Beta pre-82

Beta post-82

Australia

0.015

0.662

Austria

0.135

0.188

Belgium

0.469

-0.320

Canada

0.635

0.174

Denmark

0.379

1.539

Finland

0.056

0.731

France

0.437

0.243

-

-0.086

Greece

0.086

-0.896

Iceland

0.329

0.339

Ireland

-0.361

-0.037

Italy

0.478

0.086

Japan

0.216

1.232

Luxembourg

0.335

-0.473

Netherlands

0.110

0.147

New Zealand

0.023

0.538

Germany

Norway

-0.054

0.787

Portugal

-0.081

0.332

Spain

0.139

1.075

Sweden

0.009

2.128

Switzerland

0.048

0.204

United Kingdom

-0.099

0.589

United States

0.426

0.169

OECD

0.170

0.407
0.271

India

-0.027

-0.111

Indonesia

0.002

0.292

Malaysia

-0.270

0.101

Nepal

-0.062

0.552

Pakistan

0.900

-0.045

Papua New Guinea

-0.152

-0.152

Philippines

-0.226

0.100

Singapore

0.569

0.080

South Korea

0.181

-0.035

Thailand

0.043

Asia and Pacific

0.096

0.163
0.095

Bulgaria

-

0.432

Croatia

-

0.001

Hungary

-

0.254

Romania

-

0.140

Turkey

-

-0.262

Eastern Europe

-

0.113

(excluding Denmark, Sweden)

Beta pre-82

Beta post-82

Egypt

1.435

-1.135

Iran

-0.093

0.497

Morocco

-0.409

-0.005

Tunisia

0.203

0.110

Middle East and North Africa

0.284

-0.133

Country (continued)

Botswana

-

0.329

Burkina Faso

-0.221

0.048

Burundi

-0.214

0.082

Cameroon

-0.020

0.045

Chad

-

-0.223

Congo

-

-0.476

Ethiopia

-

-0.028

Gabon

-0.594

-0.157

Gambia

-0.034

-

Ivory Coast

-

-0.098

Madagascar

-

0.232

Mali

0.338

-0.015

Mauritius

-0.160

-0.058

Namibia

-

-0.243

Rwanda

-0.014

-

Senegal

-0.180

-

-

-0.413

Seychelles
South Africa

-0.350

0.525

Togo

-1.808

-0.274

Zambia

0.163

2.539

Zimbabwe

1.087

0.204

Sub-Saharan Africa

-0.154

0.112
-0.031

-0.140

0.079

Belize

-

-0.345

Bolivia

-

1.210

Brazil

0.005

-0.343

(excluding Zambia)
Argentina

Chile

-0.100

0.235

Colombia

-0.163

0.334

Costa Rica

-0.374

-0.206

Dominican Republic

-0.035

-0.004

Ecuador

0.005

0.041

El Salvador

-0.109

0.097

Guatemala

-0.651

-0.064

-

3.293

Honduras

-0.019

0.356

Jamaica

0.248

-

Mexico

-0.218

0.047

Haiti

Country (continued)

Beta pre-82

Beta post-82

-0.123

-0.280

-

-0.100

Paraguay

-0.054

0.174

Peru

-0.168

0.032

-

-0.442

-

-0.535

Nicaragua
Panama

St. Lucia
St. Vicent & Grenadines
Trinidad & Tobago

-1.350

-

Uruguay

0.010

0.013

Venezuela

-0.428

-0.020

Latin America and Caribbean

-0.204

0.162
0.013
(excluding Haiti)
“Excluded” countries are those with a coefficient with absolute value greater than 1.500.

Table 10
OLS estimates: cyclicality of budget surplus (Pre-1982)
(1)
Control of Corruption

0.088**
(0.038)

Initial GDP (per capita)

(Dependent variable: Beta on budget surplus, Pre-1982)
(2)
(3)
(4)

(5)

(6)

0.148***
(0.056)

0.153***
(0.057)

0.258***
(0.078)

0.159**
(0.064)

0.180**
(0.071)

- 0.097
(0.078)

- 0.089
(0.079)

- 0.079
(0.080)

- 0.085
(0.073)

- 0.081
(0.076)

- 0.046
(0.135)

- 0.075
(0.126)

- 0.005
(0.012)

- 0.005
(0.011)

Democracy
Democracy*Control of
Corruption

- 0.131
(0.088)

Polity2
Polity2*Control of
Corruption
R-squared
n

- 0.004
(0.008)
0.05
75

0.07
74

Robust standard errors in parenthesis; intercepts not reported.
* significant at 10%
** significant at 5%
*** significant at 1%

0.07
73

0.08
73

0.07
73

0.07
73

Table 11
OLS estimates with S&P Ratings and Spread as additional regressors
(Dependent variable: Beta on budget surplus)
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Control of Corruption

0.055
(0.079)

- 0.074
(0.061)

0.059
(0.080)

- 0.011
(0.070)

0.047
(0.053)

- 0.048
(0.042)

0.049
(0.057)

- 0.014
(0.040)

S & P Rating

0.061
(0.037)

0.057
(0.037)

0.063*
(0.037)

0.053
(0.037)
**

Spread
Initial GDP
(per capita)

- 0.062
(0.048)

- 0.070
(0.050)

Democracy

- 0.016
(0.058)

- 0.007
(0.045)

- 0.053
(0.045)

- 090
(0.052)

-0.116
(0.052)

**

- 0.090
(0.051)

- 0.044
(0.060)

- 0.055
(0.064)

- 0.025
(0.058)

- 0.023
(0.059)

0.004
(0.064)

- 0.022
(0.056)

- 0.006
(0.008)

- 0.012
(0.008)

***

Polity2

*

- 0.004
(0.007)

- 0.007
(0.006)
***

0.014***
(0.005)

0.013
(0.004)

Polity2*Control of
Corruption
0.26
63

0.30
63

Robust standard errors in parenthesis; intercepts not reported.
* significant at 10%
** significant at 5%
*** significant at 1%

*

0.142**
(0.054)

0.161
(0.041)

Democracy*Control of
Corruption

R-squared
n

- 0.055
(0.047)

- 0.113
(0.051)

0.26
63

0.31
63

0.33
45

0.36
45

0.39
45

0.39
45

Table 12
Beta Coefficients - “Recession” and “Boom”
Country

(Procyclical Countries only)
Beta Recession

Argentina
Belize
Brazil
Burkina Faso
Chad
Chile
Congo
Costa Rica
Ecuador
Egypt
Ethiopia
Gabon
Germany
Guatemala
India
Ireland
Ivory Coast
Jamaica
Luxembourg
Malaysia
Mauritius
Mexico
Morocco
Namibia
Nicaragua
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Rwanda
Seychelles
Singapore
St. Lucia
St. Vicent & Grenadines
Togo
Trinidad & Tobago
Turkey
Uruguay
Venezuela

Beta Boom

- 0.175
- 0.183
0.444
0.500
0.733
- 0.019
0.660
0.140
0.120
0.843
0.145
- 0.208
0.150
- 0.200
0.025
- 0.384
0.107
- 1.354
- 0.087
- 0.148
- 0.461
- 0.071
0.053
0.408
- 0.027
- 0.023
0.016
0.040
0.254
- 0.037
1.650
0.355
0.034
- 0.814
0.549
- 2.962
- 0.473
- 0.088
- 0.421

Note: Countries where “Beta Boom” < “Beta Recession” in bold.

0.173
- 0.530
- 0.603
- 0.472
- 0.376
- 0.095
- 0.430
- 0.878
- 0.388
- 0.434
- 0.392
- 0.397
- 0.165
- 0.791
- 0.126
- 0.259
- 0.554
2.478
- 0.659
0.174
- 0.263
- 0.128
- 0.093
- 1.161
- 0.316
- 0.645
- 0.274
- 0.078
- 0.242
- 0.033
- 4.790
- 0.607
- 0.122
- 0.223
- 1.503
- 0.277
- 0.031
- 0.014
0.186

Table 13
OLS estimates: corruption and credit constraints in recessions
(Dependent variable: Beta on budget surplus in recessions)
(1)
Control of Corruption

(2)

(3)

0.266**
(0.109)
- 0.305**
(0.140)

Spread

(4)

(5)

0.299**
(0.148)

0.259
(0.165)

- 0.138
(0.147)
0.184**
(0.073)

S&P Rating

0.065
(0.077)

Initial GDP

- 0.133
(0.126)

- 0.185
(0.186)

- 0.184
(0.162)

- 0.340
(0.207)

- 0.247
(0.178)

R-squared
n

0.10
82

0.16
45

0.14
63

0.21
45

0.16
63

(Robust standard errors in parenthesis. Intercepts not shown.)
* significant at 10%
** significant at 5%
*** significant at 1%

