                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                INSURANCE AND INNOVATION IN
                                    HEALTH CARE MARKETS

                                            Darius Lakdawalla
                                              Neeraj Sood

                                          Working Paper 11602
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11602


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2005




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Darius Lakdawalla and Neeraj Sood. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Insurance and Innovation in Health Care Markets
Darius Lakdawalla and Neeraj Sood
NBER Working Paper No. 11602
September 2005
JEL No. I1, O3

                                           ABSTRACT


Innovation policy often involves an uncomfortable trade-off between rewarding innovators
sufficiently and providing the innovation at the lowest possible price. However, in health care
markets with insurance for innovative goods, society may be able to ensure efficient rewards for
inventors and the efficient dissemination of inventions. Health insurance resembles a two-part
pricing contract in which a group of consumers pay an up-front fee ex ante in exchange for a fixed
unit price ex post. This functions as if innovators themselves wrote efficient two-part pricing
contracts, where they extracted sufficient profits from the ex ante payment, but still sold the good
ex post at marginal cost. As a result, we show that complete, efficient, and competitive health
insurance for innovative products - such as new drugs, medical devices, or patented procedures - can
lead to perfectly efficient innovation and utilization, even when moral hazard exists. Conversely,
incomplete insurance markets in this context lead to inefficiently low levels of innovation. Moreover,
optimally designed public health insurance for innovative products can solve the innovation problem
by charging ex ante premia equal to consumer surplus, and ex post co-payments at or below marginal
cost. When these quantities are unknown, society can usually improve static and dynamic welfare
by covering the uninsured with contracts that mimic observed private insurance contracts.


Darius Lakdawalla
The RAND Corporation
1776 Main Street
Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138
and NBER
darius@rand.org

Neeraj Sood
The RAND Corporation
1776 Main Street
Santa Monica, CA 90407
and NBER
sood@rand.org
        A. Introduction

The difficulty of encouraging innovation is well-appreciated (Nordhaus, 1969; Wright,

1983). Innovators need to reap profits in the event of a successful innovation, but profits for

a producer often are at odds with social efficiency. Society must make a difficult choice

between rewarding today’s patients with lower prices, or rewarding tomorrow’s patients by

inducing more innovation. In many respects, this is viewed as a zero-sum game that requires

trading off the welfare of one group for the welfare of the other.

However, in the particular context of health care innovation, society may be able to achieve

efficiency for both today’s and tomorrow’ patients.          The unique and important role of

insurance in these markets explains why. Health insurance resembles a two-part pricing

contract, in which a group of consumers pays an upfront fee in exchange for lower prices in

the event of illness.    Such two-part pricing contracts can guarantee both the efficient

utilization of a product for today’s patients, and a sufficient level of profit to induce

innovation on behalf of tomorrow’s patients (see the seminal paper by Oi, 1971). While this

is well-understood, two-part pricing is rarely feasible on a large-scale. In the context of

medical care innovations, however, the existence of health insurance as a two-part pricing

strategy changes the terms of the debate between today’s patients and tomorrow’s patients.

Clearly, encouraging innovation is somewhat less important in the delivery of well-

established, routine care, but is quite important for a wide range of medical goods and

services, such as prescription drugs, devices, and patentable procedures.1



1
 Total sales of medical devices were about half drug sales in the US. (This result is based on
calculations from 1997 SIC output statistics; since 1997, updated industrial classification makes it
harder to isolate medical devices.) Patented procedures are growing increasingly less important.
Since 1952, the US has granted patents to medical procedures, but all patents granted after 1996
cannot be enforced against a physician who infringes them while performing surgery or
                                                 2
The efficient solution to the innovation problem requires both that the innovation be sold at

marginal cost ex post, and that the innovator receive ex post profits equal to the net consumer

surplus associated with the innovation. When it is feasible, two-part pricing by innovators

can accomplish both those goals simultaneously. An innovator can charge an upfront fee

equal to net consumer surplus, a fee that then allows consumers to buy as much of the

innovation as they like at marginal cost. The analogy to health insurance is fairly direct. A

health insurance plan with a co-payment equal to marginal cost, and an ex ante premium

equal to net consumer surplus would achieve efficiency. This allows health insurers to

extract the full value of consumer surplus. When the insurance industry is competitive,

innovators will end up with the entire surplus; they will be able to extract it either by writing

their own two-part pricing contract with insurers, or simply by negotiating a price and

quantity with competitive insurers, who will earn zero profits for themselves in equilibrium.

The mechanics of the insurance contract are similar to a two-part pricing contract, and the

uncertain demand for a health-care innovation plays a fundamental role. It is often difficult

to find and contract with groups of potential consumers ex ante, but group health insurance

provides a natural and practical way to do so. Moreover, when consumers differ, it is

necessary but very difficult to extract ex ante payments that accurately reflect the varying

levels of surplus each consumer derives. However, uncertain demand facilitates this process,

because a great deal of heterogeneity emerges ex post, after the contract is written.

Consumers may thus be induced to pay their expected surplus ex ante, at which point there is

more similarity among them.




delivering medical care. Therefore, the only effective patents in the US are those issued between
1952 and 1996 (World Medical Association, 1999).

                                               3
Relying on the idea of health insurance as a two-part pricing contract, we show that complete

and competitive health insurance markets ensure efficiency in both utilization and innovation,

because they deliver the efficient two-part pricing strategy. Therefore, completing insurance

markets can help improve the efficiency of both discovery and utilization. Even when moral

hazard exists, competitive insurance markets yield the second-best allocation of resources

that represents the best outcome achievable by society.

This suggests that distortions in the insurance market — e.g., monopoly power, distortionary

subsidies or taxes, or asymmetric information — have dynamic costs in the form of

inefficient innovation. Promoting efficiency in insurance markets for innovative goods can

thus improve static and dynamic efficiency. In and of themselves, insurance markets never

lead to the over-provision of innovation, even when moral hazard exists. Moreover, patent

monopolies introduce static inefficiency to the extent that health insurance markets are

distorted.

In some cases, the government may be unable to ensure efficiency in the private market for

insurance. If so, there is a unique justification for public health insurance, as a means of

ensuring ex ante and ex post efficiency in the market for health care. Our model also

provides guidance for the optimal design of a public health insurance scheme for drugs or

other innovative products: co-payments ought to be set to marginal cost, while premia ought

to equal consumer surplus. When regulators cannot observe one or both of these quantities, a

practical and often welfare-improving strategy is to mimic observed private health insurance

contracts for the same goods and services.

We develop our argument by analyzing three progressively less ideal contexts, and showing

how health insurance markets can lead to first-best or second-best efficiency in all these

different settings. As a benchmark, we begin with first-best efficiency, where all consumers


                                              4
are identical ex ante, and all ex post heterogeneity is fully observable to the innovator and to

insurance companies.      In this classical setting, the first-best is achievable with price-

discrimination, or equivalently with an efficient health insurance market that yields the

optimal two-part pricing contract. We then move to the case of moral hazard: while

innovators and insurers know the distribution of demands ex ante, they cannot observe ex

post which consumers are the heaviest demanders. Incomplete information bars us from the

first-best outcome, but competitive health insurance contracts markets still match the second-

best efficient outcome. Finally, we consider the case in which a new innovator must compete

with an incumbent. This can lead to rent-seeking behavior, where a new entrant invests

excessively in innovation simply to secure some of the incumbent’s profits. Here, we show

that unregulated and competitive health insurance markets remain optimal, and that any

necessary policy intervention ought to take the form of a lump-sum tax on the ex post profits

of the new innovator.


        B. First-Best Insurance and Innovation

It is well-known that ex post and ex ante efficiency are often at odds in the case of

innovation. On the one hand, the inventor ought to receive the full social surplus associated

with his invention. Internalizing the full value leads to efficient investments in innovation ex

ante. However, efficient utilization of the product requires that it be sold at marginal cost.

This leaves little room for profit.

There are a few important cases where ex post and ex ante efficiency can be reconciled. The

traditional case is that of perfect price-discrimination.       When heterogeneity is fully

observable by all parties in the economy, the first-best allocation is achievable simply by

granting a patent monopoly and ensuring the existence of a competitive insurance market.

The monopolist engages in perfect price discrimination ex post, and consumers insure
                                               5
themselves fully so that consumption is equal across all types. While this case is rarely

observed, it serves as a benchmark of perfect efficiency. As a result, we begin by analyzing

the joint determination of innovation and insurance when information about demand is

perfect. We also show that an efficient health insurance market can equivalently attain the

first-best, even without price-discrimination, by offering the efficient two-part pricing

contract.


        B.1 The Pareto Optimum

Suppose society is deciding how much to spend researching a new innovation. Spending r

resources yields the probability of discovery ρ(r). Consumers vary in their health and in

their demand for the new innovation. To represent this, suppose they are indexed by i and

distributed uniformly over [0,1]. Ex ante, individuals do not know what value of i will be

realized for them; ex post, i measures the extent of the individual’s illness. Expected utility

is the uniform average of utility across i ∈ [0,1].

The fraction of consumers σ falls ill: if i ≤ σ , the consumer is sick, and vice-versa. Sick

consumers experience a loss of consumption L . The health-care innovation can partially

restore health, but its effectiveness varies. Define its utility value to consumer i as v(i),

where v falls with i . If W is the wealth of the consumer then utility in each state i is

defined as follows:

                            u (W ), if healthy
                            u (W − L) + v(i ), if sick and uses innovation                 (1)
                            u (W − L), if sick but does not use innovation




                                                  6
Assume that: (1) Every consumer is endowed with wealth W , (2) The innovation can be

produced ex post at marginal cost MC , and (3) The social marginal utility of resources is µ .

The efficient allocation of resources maximizes expected social surplus according to:2

                                   1                   q
            maxq,c(i),r ρ(r)           (u(c(i)))di +       (v(i))di + (1 − ρ(r))u(W − r − σL)
                                   0                   0
                                                                                                     (2)
                   1
            s.t. c(i)di + σL + MC * q ≤ W − r
                   0



The solution to this problem is the familiar one of: (1) Full insurance for the innovation, (2)

Utilization of the innovation until marginal cost equals marginal willingness to pay, and (3)

The marginal cost of research equals the expected increment to social surplus associated with

the innovation. The first order conditions are:



ρ(r)u'(c(i)) = λ, ∀i
ρ(r)v(q) = λ * MC
            1                  q
ρ'(r)          (u(c(i)))di +       (v(i))di − u(W − r − σL) = λ + (1 − ρ(r))u'(W − r − σL)
           0                   0

                                                                              (3)

We can simplify these expressions as follows:




          v(q *)
                          = MC
u'(W − r − MC * q * − σL)
c(i) = c = W − r − MC * q * − σL, ∀i
ρ(r)u'(c) + (1 − ρ(r))u'(W − r − σL)                                                q*
                                     = u(W − r − MC * q *) +                             v(i)di − u(W − r − σL)
                ρ'(r )
                    *                                                               0

                                                          (4)




2
    In the absence of discovery, there is full indemnity insurance for health.

                                                           7
These three equations embody the three conditions above — efficient utilization, full

insurance, and a research decision that internalizes the full increment to social surplus.


        B.2 The Competitive Equilibrium

Consider the case where a patent monopoly is granted to the innovator in the second period.

Assume further that there exists a perfectly competitive insurance market. The monopolist

sets quantity and prices, while consumers decide how much insurance to purchase. To close

the economy, suppose also that consumers own equal shares in the innovating firm, which

earns ex post profits π .

Without an innovation, the consumer chooses full indemnity insurance. In the event of an

innovation, she solves:

                                                      1                          q*
                                   max c (i )             u (c (i ))di +              v(i )di
                                                      0                         0
                                                                                                              (5)
                                              1                  q*
                                   s.t.           c(i )di +           p(i )di + σ L ≤ W − r + π
                                              0                  0



Optimal behavior results in full insurance, according to:

                                                                            q*
                                     c(i ) = W − r + π −                            p( x)dx − σ L, ∀i         (6)
                                                                            0



The net transfer to each state i can be written as:

                                                                        q*
                          τ (i ) = p* (i ) + (1 − σ ) L −                       p* ( x)dx, if sick and user
                                                                        0
                                                            q*
                            τ (i ) = (1 − σ ) L −                p* ( x)dx,if sick and non user               (7)
                                                            0
                                          q*
                            τ (i ) = −            p* ( x)dx − σ L,if healthy
                                          0



Insurers and the innovator must respect consumers’ optimal decisions regarding insurance

and utilization. Therefore, the monopolist maximizes expected profits, but subject to: (1)




                                                                        8
Optimal insurance demand, and (2) Optimal utilization, which requires that consumers using

the innovation cannot do better by rejecting its use:

                                                     q
                       max r , p (i ),q ρ (r )           p(i )di − MC * q − r
                                                 0                                               (8)
                                                 *                              *
                       s.t. u (W − p(i ) + τ (i ) − L) + v (i ) ≥ u (W + τ (i ) − L), ∀i ≤ q


This has the first order conditions:

                         p(q* ) = MC
                                     q
                         ρ'
                          (r )           p(i )di − MC * q = 1                                    (9)
                                    0

                         v(i ) = u (W + τ * (i ) − L) − u (W − p (i ) + τ * (i ) − L), ∀i ≤ q


The competitive equilibrium defined by these conditions is equivalent to the Pareto-Optimum

in equation 4. First, observe that the ability of the monopolist to extract full consumer

                                         v(i)                                          v(q *)
surplus implies that: p(i) ≈                  . Therefore, in competitive equilibrium,        = MC ,
                                        u'(c)                                          u'(c)

which matches the condition for first-best efficiency.

Second, in competitive equilibrium, consumption in each state is equal to:

                                                     q
                         c =W +π − r −                   p( x)dx − σ L = W − r − MC * q − σ L   (10)
                                                     0



This is identical to Pareto optimal consumption.

Finally, taking a first-order approximation to the condition for first-best research yields:3

                                       1                   q   v(i)
                                           =                          di − MC * q               (11)
                                     ρ'(r)                 0 u'(c)




3
  Full insurance implies that the marginal utility of consumption is equal across illness states, in
the event of an innovation. Moreover, in a world with many simultaneous innovations, the event
of discovery will not affect marginal utility, because simultaneous research functions as
insurance. Therefore, we assume that marginal utility is equal across the discovery and no-
discovery states.

                                                                 9
                 v(i)
Since p(i) ≈          , this condition is met in competitive equilibrium, according to the
                u'(c)

consumer’s first order conditions in 9.


        B.3 The Competitive Equilibrium Without Price Discrimination

Notice that the competitive equilibrium with a monopolist patent holder and indemnity

insurance only produced the first-best outcome when the monopolist was allowed to price

discriminate. The ability to set prices based on the health (willingness to pay) of consumers

was the key to achieving dynamic efficiency. However, it is likely that legal, political and

social restrictions impede the monopolist’s ability to price discriminate, especially when

sicker consumers have higher willingness to pay. This naturally raises the question: Can the

first-best be achieved when legal, social or political restrictions prohibit price discrimination?

In this section we show that the first-best can be achieved even with restrictions on price

discrimination. Health insurance enables the monopolist to solve the dynamic efficiency

problem even in the absence of classic price-discrimination. If structured efficiently, an

insurance contract can function as a two-part pricing scheme, where an insurer allows its

insureds to pay marginal cost for drugs in the form of a co-payment, but then transfers an

upfront payment to the drug manufacturer that is equal to the drug’s total social value. This

scheme leads to the first-best level of innovation and the first-best level of drug utilization4.

The key to the success of this scheme is that consumers do not know their willingness to pay

ex-ante. This makes drug purchase a risky decision and thus creates a demand for insurance.

The insurance market in turn enables the monopolist to extract consumer surplus.



4
  This result only holds when the consumption of the innovation has no external effects.
Intervention in this market might be warranted when the innovation has consumption
externalities. Philipson and Mechoulan (2005) discuss appropriate market interventions in the
presence of technological change and consumption externalities.
                                               10
Consider a health insurance contract where consumers are charged a premium I and pay

copay m for the purchase of the innovation. Consumers also receive insurance pay-outs

K ( i ) depending upon their health i . We assume that the health insurance market is

competitive and insurers make zero profits. The monopolist charges a fixed fee F to supply

the innovation to insurers and an ex-post price p . We show that this market produces the

first-best outcome with the following insurance contract and fixed fee:

                                                         q*
                       u (W − r * − MC * q* − σ L) +          v(i )di − u (W − r * − σ L)
              *
           I =                                           0
                                                                                                 + σ L + MC * q*
                  ρ (r * )u '
                            (W − r * − MC * q* − σ L) + (1 − ρ (r * ))u '
                                                                        (W − r * − σ L )

           p* = m* = MC                                                                                            (12)
                       L if i ∈ (q* , σ ]
           K (i ) =
                       L + MC if i ∈ [0, q* ]
           F * = I * − σ L − MC * q*


Under this contract insurers make zero profits as they pass their entire surplus to the

monopolist as a fixed fee and ex-post price for purchasing the innovation. Moreover, the co-

payment equals marginal cost under the insurance contract. Therefore, consumers with

i < q* consume the product. This is the condition for first-best utilization, where consumers

with willingness to pay below marginal costs are excluded from the market for the

innovation.

The profits of the monopolist under this contract are:

                      π * = F * + p* * q* − MC * q*
                                                                     q*
                                  u (W − r * − MC * q* − σ L) +           v(i )di − u (W − r * − σ L)              (13)
                                                                    0
                          =
                              ρ (r * )u '
                                        (W − r * − MC * q* − σ L) + (1 − ρ (r * ))u '
                                                                                    (W − r * − σ L)



Equation (13) shows that under this insurance contract and fixed fee the monopolist is able to

extract the entire social surplus due to the innovation. Clearly, this contract maximizes profits

                                                              11
from the production of the innovation, as the social surplus from the innovation is the

maximum profit that can be extracted from the innovation.

The risk-neutral monopolist chooses r to maximizes profits from R&D:

                                       max π R & D = ρ ( r ) π * − r                         (14)
                                         r



The first order condition for the monopolist is:

                                                         1
                                                π* =                                         (15)
                                                       ρ′(r )


Substituting for π * in equation (15) reveals that the first order condition for the monopolist is

exactly identical to the first order condition for maximizing dynamic efficiency. Note that

innovators could just as easily replicate this outcome by writing a price-quantity contract

                                q*
(p, q *), such that pq * =           p(i)di .    When health insurance functions as a two-part
                               0


pricing contract, the innovator herself does not need to write a two-part contract: all the

surplus extracted by the insurer will end up with the innovator, when the insurance industry is

competitive.

Finally, consumption in each health state given this insurance contract is:

                              W − r + π * − I * , if i ∈ (σ ,1)

                                                                  (
                              W − r + π * − I * + K ( i ) , if i ∈ σ ,q*   )                 (16)

                                                                       (
                              W − r + π * − I * + K ( i ) − m* , if i ∈ 0,q*   )
Substituting the insurance contract from equation (12) and the monopolist profits from

equation (13) in the above equation yields that consumption in each health state i is:

                            c(i ) = W − r − σL − MC * q *, ∀i                                (17)




                                                    12
Thus, this insurance contract and fixed fee also yields full insurance for consumers,

consequently maximizing consumer surplus. Therefore the insurance contract and fixed fee

schedule characterized in equation (12) yields the first best outcome as:

    •   Utilization of the innovation is optimal

    •   Investment in R&D is optimal

    •   The monopolist maximizes profits, consumers maximize expected utility, and a

        competitive insurance industry earns zero profits


        C. Second-Best With Hidden Information

Often, and particularly in the case of health, it is very difficult to verify the extent of illness

or the true demand for a health care innovation (Arrow, 1963). However, it is extremely easy

to verify whether a consumer chooses to use an innovation. Not surprisingly, one often

observes health insurance contracts that reimburse consumers when they use an innovation,

but it is very rare to find a “true indemnity” contract where consumers are reimbursed based

on their underlying health state. As a result, we now consider the case where use, but not

underlying disease, is observable.      This leads to contracts that can be contingent on a

consumer’s decision to purchase the innovation, but not on the true state i .                 The

incompleteness of information means that we will no longer attain the first-best Pareto

Optimum, but we can analyze the second-best efficient allocation and its associated

competitive equilibrium.


        C.1 The Pareto Optimum

Define cD as the consumption of a demander (gross of health losses L ), and cN as

consumption for a non-demander (also gross of health losses). Insurance contracts can be

written on the basis of observed demand, but not on the basis of type i . The second-best
                                                13
efficient allocation of resources maximizes expected utility for consumers, subject to

resource constraints, and the incentive compatibility of the chosen allocation.                    The

incompleteness of information means that contracts must be self-enforcing. The marginal

sick demander must be exactly as well off as the marginal non-sick demander; otherwise,

there are incentives for marginal consumers to “cheat” by picking the other group’s

allocation. The second-best allocation thus solves:5

                                                                                  q
    maxq,cD ,cN ,r ρ(r) qu(cD − L) + (σ − q)u(cN − L) + (1 − σ )u(cN ) +              (v(i))di +
                                                                                  0

    (1 − ρ(r))[σu(W − r − L) + (1 − σ )U(w − r)]                                                   (18)
    s.t. qcD + (1 − q)cN + MC * q ≤ W − r
      u(cD − L) + v(q) = u(cN − L)

In addition to the two constraints (at equality), the second-best efficient allocation is

characterized by four first-order conditions, where ρ(r)λ and ρ(r)µ are the (scaled)

Lagrange multipliers associated with the resource and incentive compatibility constraints,

respectively:

    [q] : (u(cD − L) − u(cN − L) + v (q )) = λ (MC + cD − cN ) − µv'(q)
    [cD] : (qu'(cD − L)) = λq − µu'(cD − L)
    [cN ] : [(σ − q)u'(cN − L) + (1 − σ )u'(cN )] = λ(1 − q) + µu'(cN − L)                         (19)
                                                                             q
                  qu(cD − L) + (σ − q)u(cN − L) + (1 − σ )u(cN ) +               (v(i))di −
    [r] : ρ'(r)                                                              0                 =
                  [σu(W   − r − L) + (1 − σ )u(W − r)])
    (1 − ρ(r))[σu'(W − r − L) + (1 − σ )u'(W − r)] + ρ(r)λ

While it is not possible to solve for an explicit equilibrium without imposing functional form

restrictions, several qualitative results can be proven from the equilibrium conditions. The



5
  Notice that the absence of indemnity insurance lowers utility in the no-discovery state relative to
the first-best. Technically, this raises society’s incentive to innovate, compared to the full
information case, because innovation functions as an insurance technology. This incentive is not
very meaningful in practice, since indemnity health insurance contracts exist largely in theory.

                                                 14
second-best equilibrium involves: (1) Partial but incomplete insurance, (2) More than first-

best utilization of the innovation, but (3) Less than first-best investment in research.6

Incomplete Insurance. The incentive-compatibility constraint proves there cannot be

complete insurance, since the constraint requires that cD < cN . However, there is some

insurance provided to the demanders of the innovation.

First note that the expected marginal utility of wealth must by necessity be less than the

marginal utility of consumption in the poorest state, or λ < u'(cD − L).7 As a result, the

multiplier µ must be negative, according to the first order condition for cD . Some algebraic

manipulation of the six equilibrium conditions allows us to express the resource constraint

multiplier in terms of equilibrium quantities:

                                  λ(MC + cD − cN ) = µv'(q)                                 (20)

This condition implies that the marginal social value of the innovation is equal to the

effective price paid by the marginal consumer. Since λ > 0 and µ < 0 , it must be true

that cD + MC > cN , so that demanders do not bear the full cost of the innovation.




6
  Technically, the result that first-best research exceeds second-best research may fail, since
indemnity insurance is possible in the no-discovery state when there is full information, but not
when there is incomplete information. Given the rarity of indemnity insurance, however, we
abstract from this effect.
7
    Using     the    conditions      for    cD    and     cN     to  solve      for   λ   yields:
                                      u'(cN )
                   σ + (1 − σ )
                                   u'(cN − L)                           u'(cD − L)
λ = u'(cD − L)                                  .    Since C D < c N ,                 > 1.    In
                                   u'(cD − L)                           u' (c     − L)
                   q + (1 − q )                                               N
                                   u'(cN − L)
            u'(cN )
addition,                < 1 . Therefore, the numerator is strictly less than unity, while the
          u'(cN − L)
denominator is strictly greater than unity. The result then follows.

                                                 15
Excessive Utilization. The latter result also implies that utilization exceeds the first-best

level. Incentive compatibility requires that private marginal cost equals private marginal

benefit, in the sense that v(q) = u(cN − L) − u(cD − L). Insurance implies that private

marginal cost is less than social marginal cost. As a result, we end up with over-utilization.

This is the classic moral hazard that results when underlying demand is unobservable.

Less than First-Best Innovation. Due to hidden information, second-best maximum social

surplus will be strictly less than the first best, and so will the returns to innovation. The result

is less innovation, even though (and indeed because) moral hazard induces inefficient over-

utilization compared to the first-best.8


        C.2 The Competitive Equilibrium

Since information is hidden, the monopolist cannot practice perfect price-discrimination.

However, since consumers are ex ante identical, it can engage in two-part pricing, which can

also lead to the extraction of consumer surplus. Suppose there is a perfectly competitive

insurance industry. The innovator charges each insurer an upfront license fee F in return for

the right to purchase its invention, but then sells each unit of output for a constant price p .

Insurers sell insurance policies to consumers for the ex ante insurance premium I , which

entitles the consumer to purchase the innovation from the insurer at the co-payment m .

Markets arranged in this way will produce the second-best efficient outcome with hidden

information.

Note that this arrangement is equivalent to one in which the innovator charges an ex ante

license fee and an ex post unit price to consumers, who can then purchase insurance contracts



8
  As discussed in footnotes 5 and 6, this abstracts from the fact that utility in the no-discovery
state is higher under full information, because of the possibility of indemnity insurance for health.

                                                 16
that pay out contingent on purchase of the drug. We choose to model the insurer as an

intermediary because it is closer to the way health care markets actually function, and

because insurance markets can play a real role in limiting the costs of contracting with groups

of consumers.

      C.2.1 Second-Best Efficiency of Utilization
In competitive equilibrium, the consumer chooses the states of the world in which to

purchase the innovation, taking as given the insurance contract offered by the insurance

industry.9

                                                                                                       q
maxq qu(W + π − L − m − I) + (σ − q)u(W + π − L − I) + (1 − σ )u(W + π − I) +                              v(i)di
                                                                                                       0
                                               (21)

The consumer’s optimal utilization decision sets the marginal benefit of the innovation equal

to the private marginal cost:

                   v(q) = u(W + π − L − I) − u(W + π − L − m − I)                              (22)

This is equivalent to the second-best utilization condition: v(q) is equal to the difference in

utility across the consuming and non-consuming states of illness.

       C.2.2 Second-Best Efficiency of State-Specific Consumption
Taking as given the offer of the innovator, the representative insurer maximizes profits by

choosing its contract parameters and its purchases of the good from the innovator, subject to

consumers’ participation in the insurance market, ex post incentive compatibility,10 and

demand function d(m).



9
 Without loss of generality, if the consumer decides to purchase the innovation in state j , he will
also decide to do so for all states i ≤ j .
10
  Consumers purchasing the invention must be better off purchasing than not purchasing, from
their ex post point of view.

                                                17
maxI,m I + md(m)* − F − pd(m)*
                                                                                                    d(m)
s.t. d(m)u(W + π − L − m − I) + (σ − d(m))u(W + π − L − I) + (1 − σ )u(W + π − I) +                     v(i)di
                                                                                                    0
≥ σu(W + π − L) + (1 − σ )u(W + π )
u(W + π − L − I) − u(W + π − L − m − I) ≤ v(q)
                                                                      (23)

Maximizing profits subject to a reservation utility condition is equivalent to maximizing

utility subject to a nonnegativity constraint on profits (i.e., a “reservation profits level”).11

Moreover, choosing a co-payment subject to a demand function is equivalent to choosing a

level of quantity subject to remaining on the demand function. Finally, defining willingness

to pay as T(q) (a scalar multiple of v(q)), staying on the demand function requires that

m = T(q) in equilibrium.       With these three observations in mind, we can rewrite the

problem as one whose notation conforms more closely to the second-best Pareto problem.



maxq ,I qu(W + π − L − T(q) − I) + (σ − q)u(W + π − L − I) + (1 − σ )u(W + π − I) +
 q
     v(i)di
 0
s.t. F + pq ≤ I + qT(q)
u(W + π − L − I) − u(W + π − L − T(q) − I) ≤ v(q)
                                                                      (24)

In addition to the two constraints at equality, the first order conditions for this problem are:




11
   This problem is associated with an equilibrium condition that sets the consumer’s expected
utility equal to her reservation utility level. Note that the profit-maximizing version of the
problem is analogously associated with a zero profit condition in equilibrium.

                                                18
[I] : λ − µ[u'(W + π − L − T(q) − I) − u'(W + π − L − I)] =
qu'(W + π − L − T(q) − I) + (σ − q)u'(W + π − L − I) + (1 − σ )u'(W + π − I)
[q] : T'(q)[µu'(W + π − L − v(q) − I) + qu'(W + π − L − v(q) − I) − λq ] + λ(p − T(q))
 = µv'(q)
                                                        (25)

The competitive condition for I in 25 matches the sum of the second-best efficiency

conditions for cN and cD .

As long as the innovator prices at marginal cost, the competitive condition for q in 25

matches the second-best efficiency condition in equation 20. While this latter result is not

immediate, it follows once we observe that the sum of the second-best efficiency conditions

for q and cD imply the term in square brackets is zero.

It remains to show only that the innovator will choose to price at marginal cost, in

competitive equilibrium.     Intuitively, marginal cost pricing by the innovator allows the

insurer to pass the same along to consumers; since this strategy maximizes the consumer

surplus available for extraction, it represents the profit-maximizing strategy for the innovator.

Formally, the innovator’s ex post decision involves maximizing her profits subject to the

participation of insurance companies. Define π I(F, p) as the maximum profits earned by

the representative insurer when faced with the fixed fee F and supply price p . The

innovator’s problem can be expressed as:

                                max p,F F + pq(p) − MCq(p)
                                                                                            (26)
                                s.t. π I(F, p) ≥ 0

This has the first order conditions:

                       [F] : 1 + λπ FI = 0
                                                                                            (27)
                       [p] : q(p) + pq'(p) − MCq'(p) + λπ Ip = 0


                                               19
Applying the envelope theorem to the insurer’s profit function yields the results that

π Ip = −q and π FI = −1 . This then implies that p = MC .


       C.2.3 Second-Best Efficiency of the Innovation Decision
Innovators demand that insurers extract every bit of consumer surplus. When insurers earn

zero profits, all this surplus returns to the innovator. Since this allows the innovator to

extract all the surplus associated with her invention, the result is efficient innovation.

The innovator invests in research to maximize ex ante profits, according to:

                            max p,F ,r ρ(r)[F + pq(p) − MCq(p)] − r
                                                                                             (28)
                            s.t. π I(F, p) ≥ 0

Competitive innovation is characterized by:

                      ρ'(r)[F + q(p − MC)] = ρ'(r)[I + q (m − MC )] = 1                      (29)

Since the consumer’s receives only her reservation utility level, the insurer extracts all her

surplus.       This implies that I is equal to net consumer surplus at the co-payment, or

           q
                v(i)di
I =        0
                          − mq . Therefore, competitive ex post profits satisfy:
                 λ
                                           q
                                              v(i)di
                                   π =    0
                                                        − MC * q                             (30)
                                               λ

The private return to innovation shown above matches the social return, given in the first

order condition for r , in equations 19. Once again, the innovator need not explicitly employ

two-part pricing if she can set prices and quantity in negotiations with insurers.

The (monetized) social return to a successful innovation is equal to:

           (Utility With Innovation)      − (Utility Without Innovation)
                                                                                             (31)
                               Marginal Utility of Wealth



                                                   20
In competitive equilibrium, this can be written as:12



                                                                                          q
1     − qv(q) + σu(W − (m − MC)q − r − L) + (1 − σ )u(W − (m − MC)q − r) +                    (v(i))di
                                                                                         0
λ
     − [σu(W − r − L) + (1 − σ )u(W − r)]
                                                                         (32)

We can simplify this expression by taking first-order approximations of the differences in

                                  v(q)
utility, and by noting that m ≈          . The result is the final simplification:
                                   λ

                                                       q
                                                        v(i)di
                         Social return =            0
                                                                 − MC * q                      (33)
                                                           λ


This is the same as the private return to innovation and guarantees that the competitive level

of research is second-best.


        C.3 The Competitive Equilibrium Without Ex Ante Pricing

In addition to its usual static inefficiencies, incompleteness in the insurance market has

adverse effects on dynamic efficiency in innovation. If some people are uninsured, or if

insurers have market power, monopolists may not be able to write and enforce efficient

pricing contracts with insurers. It is infeasible for innovators to write contracts with every

potential consumer ex ante. Therefore, if some consumers do not participate in an insurance

pool, they are not open to such two-stage contracts. More generally, innovators may worry



12
   We have simplified this expression with the help of three results: (1) The consumer
indifference condition; (2) Zero profits in the insurance industry; and (3) Equal marginal utility
across the “discovery” and “non-discovery” states. In a world with many simultaneous
innovation projects underway, there is minimal social risk posed by the success or failure of any
single innovation project. Therefore, we can safely regard marginal utility as invariant to the
success or failure of any one innovation; this is the implication of condition (3).

                                                  21
about the threat of price regulation if they attempt to extract the full value of consumer

surplus from insurers. For these and related reasons, two-stage contracting may be infeasible.

The alternative is for the monopolist to sell directly to consumers at a fixed price, while

consumers can purchase insurance payable in the event of purchase.13 The result is the

under-provision of innovation and a decline in social surplus. Utilization may be greater or

less than second-best utilization, depending on the relative size of the monopolist’s incentive

to restrict quantity versus consumers’ willingness to subsidize ex post consumption of the

innovation through an insurance premium.

Consider an environment where an insurer can reimburse a consumer if he purchases a

product, but not otherwise. However, the product is sold directly by the innovator to the

consumer, at the single price p . Insurers sell contracts that reduce the ex post price in

exchange for an actuarially fair ex ante payment; reducing the ex post price by τ costs

I = τq ex ante. The consumer chooses a level of insurance and ex post consumption

maximize utility. She chooses from an array of actuarially fair insurance contracts, and she

can choose only time-consistent insurance contracts, where she has no incentive to deviate ex

post. The latter requirement implies that ex ante consumption decisions must maximize

utility ex post.

                                                                                                  q
maxq ,τ ,I qu(W + π − L − (p − τ ) − I) + (σ − q)u(W + π − L − I) + (1 − σ )u(W + π − I) +            v(i)di
                                                                                                  0
s.t. I ≥ τq
    u(W + π − L − (p − τ ) − I) + v(q) ≥ u(W + π − L − I)
(34)



13
  Gaynor, Haas-Wilson and Vogt (2000) consider this case and show that despite moral hazard
induced by competitive health insurance markets, a reduction in the price of medical care is
always welfare enhancing. However they do not consider the role of higher prices in encouraging
innovation.

                                              22
The consumer’s optimality conditions are given by:



[q] : λτ = µv'(q)
[τ] : λq = (q + µ)u'(W + π − L − (p − τ ) − I)
[I] : λ + µ (u'(W + π − L − I) − u'(W + π − L − (p − τ ) − I)) = qu'(W + π − L − (p − τ ) − I) +
(σ − q)u'(W + π − L − I) + (1 − σ )u'(W + π − I)
                                                                       (35)

In this environment, the consumer’s decisionmaking is efficient, even though the innovator’s

might not be. Formally, the consumer’s first-order conditions match the conditions for social

efficiency, provided that they face efficient pricing (i.e., at marginal cost): the condition for

q matches the second-best efficiency condition for q ; the condition for τ matches the

second-best condition for cD ; the condition for I matches the sum of the second-best

conditions for cD and cN .

Departures from the second-best originate in the innovator’s problem, when she is unable to

extract consumer surplus through a two-stage pricing strategy. The monopolist maximizes

profits, taking as given the consumer’s optimal insurance and utilization decisions.

Approximating the marginal utility of consumption for sick demanders as γ , the monopolist

solves:

                                      maxq , p pq − MC * q
                                                     v(q)                                   (36)
                                      s.t. p =              + τ
                                                      γ

This has the first order condition:

                                 v'(q)q       v(q)
                                          +               + τ   = MC                        (37)
                                      γ          γ

The innovator has the standard incentives of a monopolist. Price exceeds marginal cost,

because of the incentive to raise price by restricting quantity. However, unlike the standard
                                                 23
monopoly problem, utilization may be above or below the first- or second-best level, because

                            v(q)
consumers face the price           = p − τ < p . The relationship between utilization and its
                             γ

efficient level depends on the shape of the willingness to pay function and the consumer’s

desire for insurance.     It is not possible to determine this in general without specific

assumptions on functional form (Garber, Jones, and Romer, 2005).

However, it is clear that consumer welfare in every state of the world is lower than in the

second-best, because the monopolist charges a unit price that is higher than marginal cost.14

It is also clear that the monopolist’s profits are lower than when she has access to two-stage

pricing. The absence of two-stage contracting thus leads to inefficiently low levels of

innovation, consumer welfare, and social surplus, even though it can sometimes raise

utilization.

Moreover, it is also clear that adding an insurance market improves consumer welfare,

increases the profits of the innovator, and raises the level of innovation, compared to the

equilibrium that would exist without such a market. This leads to the following welfare-

ordering:15

                         No Insurance <W
                         Insurance + Monopoly pricing <W
                                                                                                (38)
                         Insurance + Two − Stage pricing =W
                         Pareto Optimum




14
   The first-order effect of this is to lower utility in every state of the world: even non-consuming
states face higher insurance premia.
15
   As discussed in footnotes 5 and 6, we abstract here from the presence of health indemnity
insurance in the no-discovery, full information state.

                                                 24
        D. Incremental Innovation

Above, we considered the case of a brand-new innovation. In practice, new innovations must

compete with existing innovations for customers, and monopolistic competition is the norm.

Competition among innovators creates market failures that we now explore. Our basic

results are unchanged if the incumbent’s profits remain the same after the entry of the new

firm.   However, in cases where the new entrant is able to cannibalize some of the

incumbent’s profits, the result is too much innovation, because the entrant spends on

innovation simply to initiate a transfer of resources, rather than a creation of wealth.

Efficiency can be maintained if the entrant is made to pay an ex post tax on profits that is

equal to the decline in profits of the incumbent. The key point for our purposes is that

efficient health insurance markets still improve incentives for utilization and innovation.


        D.1 The Pareto Optimum

An incremental innovation can be thought of in the context of the spatial model of consumers

developed earlier. The case where a new innovation supplants an older innovation entirely is

very straightforward and behaves exactly as the earlier single-innovator case. Consider the

more complex case with a new innovation that is an improvement for some consumers, but

not for other consumers.16 The new innovation thus splits up the market with the original

innovation. Recall that the utility value of the original innovation was v(i). Define v N(i) as

the value of the new innovation, where there exists iN such that v N(i) > v(i) for i < iN

and v N(i) ≤ v(i) for i ≥ iN . To ensure that this point is unique, we also assume that




16
  We confine our attention to sequential innovation investments, rather than simultaneous “races”
between several innovators.

                                               25
v'N < v'O < 0 . Without loss of generality, suppose that iN < q , so that some consumers

will use the original innovation even after the new one enters the market.17

Sick consumers now have three choices: purchase the original innovation O, purchase the

new innovation N, or purchase nothing at all. The utility function can now be written as:

                      u(cD − L), i ≥ σ
                      u(cDO − pO ) − L + v(i), i ≤ σ , purchase O
                                                                                             (39)
                      u(cDN − p N ) − L + v N(i), i ≤ σ , purchase N
                      u(cD − L), i ≤ σ , purchase nothing

Suppose that the marginal cost of producing the new innovation is the same as the old, so that

the value of the new innovation lies purely on the demand side. Define rN as research into

the new innovation, q N as the quantity of the new innovation sold, and q O as the quantity of

the old innovation sold if the new one is discovered. Finally, define U(r) as the level of

expected utility enjoyed if research fails to yield a new innovation, but the old innovation is

available. This is the level of utility yielded by the earlier, single-innovation equilibrium; it

involves two-part pricing by the innovator and partial insurance for consumers. Maximum

social surplus is obtained as the solution to:18




17
   Failure of this assumption necessitates analysis of another case whose results are largely
similar.
18
  Note that there is also a third, non-binding, incentive compatibility constraint that guarantees
that the marginal user of the new innovation is better off than the marginal non-user of either
innovation.

                                                   26
maxr,q              N   O       ρ(r){q N u(cDN − L) + q Ou(cDO − L) + (σ − (q N + q O ))u(cN − L) + (1 − σ )u(cN ) +
           N ,q O ,cD ,cD ,cN

 qN                         q N + qO
         v N(i)di +                    v O(i)di + (1 − ρ(r))U(r)
 0                         qN

s.t. q N cDN + q OcDO + (1 − (q N + q O ))cN + MC * (q O + q N ) ≤ W − r [ρ(r)λ]
u(cDN − L) + v N(q N ) = u(cDO − L) + v O(q N ) [ρ(r)µ N ]
u(cOD − L) + v O(q N + q O ) = u(cN − L) [ρ(r)µO ]
                                                                                        (40)

Equilibrium is characterized by the following first order conditions:




           (                              )           (
[q N ] : −λ cDN − cN + MC + µN v'N(q N ) − v'O(q N ) + µOv'O(q N + q D) = 0)
[q ] : −λ (c
     O
                     O
                     D   − cN +        MC ) +   µO   (v (q
                                                       '
                                                       O     N       )
                                                                 + qO ) = 0
[cDN ] : q Nu'(cDN − L) − λq N + µNu'(cDN − L) = 0
[cOD ] : q Ou'(cDO − L) − λq O − µNu'(cDO − L) + µOu'(cDO − L) = 0
[cN ] : (σ − (q N + q O ))u'(cN − L) + (1 − σ )u'(cN ) − λ(1 − (q N + q O )) − µOu'(cN − L) = 0
                  {
[r] : ρ'(r)q Nu(cDN − L) + q Ou(cDO − L) + (σ − (q N + q O ))u(cN − L) + (1 − σ )u(cN ) +
                  qN                      q N + qO
                         v N(i)di +                  vO(i)di − U         = ρ(r)λ − (1 − ρ(r))U'(r)
                 0                        qN

                                                                                        (41)

The key difference between this case and the earlier case lies in the level of optimal research

spending. When other inventions are present, the efficient return to research is equal to the

increment in social surplus induced by the new innovation. As a result, optimal research

spending is lower when other inventions are present, because the incremental gain in social

surplus from the innovation is less.

At the second-best allocation: (1) More insurance is provided for the newer innovation,

because it confers more value on its users than the original innovation; (2) Partial insurance is

provided to users of both innovations; (3) Both inventions are over-utilized relative to the

first-best; and (4) Innovation is less than first-best.



                                                                    27
More insurance is provided for the newer innovation. This is not a generic result, but follows

here because the new innovation provides more value to its users than the old innovation.

The general result is that more insurance will be provided for the higher value innovation.

We prove this by contradiction. Suppose that cDN ≤ cOD . Since the marginal utility of ex

post wealth must necessarily be less than the marginal utility in the most impoverished state,

it must be true that λ < u'(cDN − L).19 The first order condition for cDN then implies that

µN < 0 .           Adding     up   the   first   order   conditions       for   qN   and   qO   yields

λ(cDN − cDO ) = µ N(v'N(q N ) − v'O(q N )). Therefore, since v'N(q N ) − v'O(q N ) < 0 , it must be

true that cDN > cDO , but this contradicts our original assumption and proves the claim.

In this particular case, the equilibrium users of the new innovation have a higher average

willingness to pay for the innovation than the users of the old innovation. Therefore, they are

more willing to transfer resources to the states in which the new innovation is used than those

in which the old innovation is used.

Partial insurance is provided for both innovations. The incompleteness of information again

precludes full insurance, but some insurance continues to be welfare-improving.                 Since

cDN < cDO      and λ(cDN − cDO ) = µ N(v'N(q N ) − v'O(q N )), it must be true that µN < 0 .



19
     Using the conditions for cN , cDO , and cDN to solve for λ yields:

                                                 σu'(cN − L) +(1 − σ )u'(cN )
λ = u'(cDN − L)
                                                                                           u'(cDN − L)
                     (1 − (q N + q O ))u'(cDN − L) + q N u'(cN − L) + q Ou'(cN − L)
                                                                                           u'(cDO − L)
By assumption, u'(cDN − L) ≥ u'(cDO − L).                 Moreover, the incentive compatibility

constraints require that cN > cDN .          Therefore, the denominator is strictly greater than

u'(cN − L), but the numerator is strictly smaller than this quantity. This implies the result.


                                                    28
Moreover, since λ < u'(cOD − L), the condition for cDO implies that µN > µO , which

ensures that µO < 0 as well.           Since µO < 0 , the condition for q O implies that

MC > cN − cOD , which implies partial insurance for the old innovation. Since µO , µN < 0 ,

the condition for q N implies that MC > cN − cDN , which implies partial insurance for the

new innovation as well.

This finding implies the last two results.       Since partial insurance is provided for both

innovations, both inventions are over-utilized in the sense that some individuals use them

whose benefit is less than marginal cost. Finally, since incomplete information lowers the

total ex post consumer surplus, innovation will be less than the first-best in this context.


        D.2 The Competitive Equilibrium

With more than one firm present, the efficiency of the competitive equilibrium depends on

how the incumbent innovator responds to the new innovator’s entry. The two-stage pricing

contract yields the second-best allocation of resources if the incumbent’s profits are

unaffected. If, however, the new innovator captures some of the incumbent’s profits, the

result is excessive innovation, as the new innovator seeks to capture some of the incumbent’s

rents. Efficiency can be restored if the new innovator is charged a lump-sum tax on ex post

profits, equal to the change in the incumbent’s profits.

Insurers now sell two insurance contracts. The first transfers resources to the insured when

she buys innovation O, and the second transfers resources if innovation N is purchased.

Since the contracts can be offered separately, insurers must make zero profits on each of

them.   In turn, insurers contract with the innovators to purchase the right to buy the

innovation. Innovators employ a two-part pricing strategy, where they charge an ex ante fee

coupled with an ex post unit price.


                                               29
      D.2.1 Second-Best Efficiency of Utilization
In competitive equilibrium, the consumer chooses the states of the world in which she

purchases an innovation, and which innovation she purchases.           She takes as given the

insurance contracts offered by the insurance industry. The contract associated with the new

innovation N is defined by the premium, copayment pair ( IN , mN ), while ( IO , mO ) defines

the contract for the old innovation. The consumer solves:

maxq N ,q O q Nu(W + π − L − mN − IN − IO ) + q Ou(W + π − L − mO − IN − IO ) +
(σ − (q N + q O ))u(W + π − L − IN − IO ) + (1 − σ )u(W + π − IN − IO ) +                   (42)
 qN                q N + qO
      v N(i)di +              vO(i)di
 0                 qN



The consumer’s optimal utilization decision sets the marginal benefit of the innovation equal

to the private marginal cost:



[q O ] : vO(q N + q O ) = u(W + π − L − IN − IO ) − u(W + π − L − mO − IN − IO )
[q N ] : v N(q N ) = u(W + π − L − IN − IO ) − u(W + π − L − mN − IN − IO ) + vO(q N ) − vO(q N + q O )
                                                             (43)

The first condition is identical to the second-best incentive compatibility condition for q O .

The second is identical to a linear combination of the two second-best incentive-compatibility

conditions for q O and q N .


        D.2.2 Second-Best Efficiency of State-Specific Consumption
Insurers now sell two insurance contracts, one for each of the innovations available. Taking

as given the offers of the innovators, the representative insurer decides how to price its

contracts by maximizing its profits, subject to a reservation utility level U R for consumers, ex

post incentive-compatibility, and the consumer’s demand function. The reservation utility

level U R is the level of utility the consumer obtains from contracting only with the incumbent




                                               30
monopolist.20 Since any insurer has the option of providing a single insurance contract, this

constraint must be satisfied. This yields the insurer’s problem:



maxI ,IO ,m N ,mO IN + IO + mN d(mN ) + mOd(mO ) − FN − FO − pN FN − pOFO
s.t. EU(IN , IO, mN , mO ) ≥ U R
u(W + π − L − TN(q N ) − IN − IO ) + v N(q N ) ≥ u(W + π − L − TO(q N + q O ) − IN − IO ) + vO(q N )
u(W + π − L − TO(q N + q O ) − IN − IO ) + vO(q N + q O ) ≥ u(W + π − L − IN − IO )
                                                               (44)

In equilibrium, profits on each of the types of insurance contracts will be zero.

Analytically, it helps to rewrite the problem as we did in Section C.2.2. In and of itself, the

profit-maximization problem is equivalent to maximizing the consumer’s utility subject to a

nonnegativity constraint on profits. In this case, there are two nonnegativity constraints, one

for each contract offered by the insurer. In addition, the insurer must respect ex post

incentive-compatibility and optimal demand choices by consumers.                    Satisfying the

consumer’s demand conditions requires that the copayment rate equal the marginal person’s

willingness to pay. Finally, the solution must satisfy the equilibrium condition that the

consumer’s utility be equal to U R .

Defining TN(q N ) and TO(q N + q O ) as the willingness to pay functions, we can use the

arguments above to rewrite the representative insurer’s problem as:




20
  Without loss of generality, we assume that this level of utility is higher than contracting
exclusively with the new entrant, and higher than utility from no insurance at all.

                                               31
maxq N ,I N ,q O ,IO q Nu(W + π − L − TN(q N ) − IN − IO ) + q Ou(W + π − L − TO(q N + q O ) − IN − IO ) +
                                                                                       qN                q N + qO
(σ − q N − q O )u(W + π − L − IN − IO ) + (1 − σ )u(W + π − IN − IO ) +                     v N(i)di +              vO(i)di
                                                                                       0                 qN

s.t. IN + q NTN(q N ) − FN − pN q N ≥ 0
   IO + q OTO(q N + q O ) − FO − pOq O ≥ 0
u(W + π − L − TN(q N ) − IN − IO ) + v N(q N ) ≥ u(W + π − L − TO(q N + q O ) − IN − IO ) + vO(q N )
u(W + π − L − TO(q N + q O ) − IN − IO ) + vO(q N + q O ) ≥ u(W + π − L − IN − IO )
                                                               (45)

In addition to the four constraints, and an equilibrium condition that guarantees consumer

utility U R , the first order conditions for this problem are:




[I N ] : λN − µ N[u'(W + π − L − TN(q N ) − IO − I N ) − u'(W + π − L − TO(q N + q O ) − IO − I N )]
− µO [u'(W + π − L − TO(q N + q O ) − I N − IO ) − u'(W + π − L − I N − IO )] =
q N u'(W + π − L − TN(q N ) − I N − IO ) + q Ou' (W + π − L − TO(q N + q O ) − I N − IO ) +
(σ − q N − q O )u'(W + π − L − I N − IO ) + (1 − σ )u'(W + π − I N − IO )
[IO ] : λO − µ N[u'(W + π − L − TN(q N ) − IO − I N ) − u'(W + π − L − TO(q N + q O ) − IO − I N )]
− µO [u'(W + π − L − TO(q N + q O ) − I N − IO ) − u'(W + π − L − I N − IO )] =
q N u'(W + π − L − TN(q N ) − I N − IO ) + q Ou' (W + π − L − TO(q N + q O ) − I N − IO ) +
(σ − q N − q O )u'(W + π − L − I N − IO ) + (1 − σ )u'(W + π − I N − IO )
[q N ] : TN'(q N )[µ N u'(W + π − L − TN(q) − I) + q N u'(W + π − L − TN(q N ) − I N − IO ) − λN q N ] +
                     − µ N u'(W + π − L − TO(q N + q O ) − I N − IO ) + µOu'(W + π − L − TO(q N + q O ) − I N − IO
TO'(q N + q O )
                     q Ou'(W + π − L − TO(q N + q O ) − I N − IO ) − λN q O
λN(p N − TN(q N ))
       (                      )      (
= µ N v'N(q N ) − v'O(q N ) + µO v'O(q N + q O )   )
                             µOu'(W + π − L − TO(q N + q O ) − I N − IO ) +
[q O ] :   TO'(q N   + q O ) q Ou'(W + π − L − TO(q N + q O ) − I N − IO ) − λO q O   + λO(pO − TO(q N + q O ))
                             − µ N u'(W + π − L − TO(q N + q O ) − I N − IO )
= µO v'O(q N + q O )
                                                                         (46)

The presence of the second innovator does not affect the functioning of the insurance market.

Therefore, it is not surprising that these competitive first order conditions are simply linear



                                                   32
combinations of the efficiency conditions. In isolation, the insurance market continues to

behave efficiently.

Note first that the conditions for I N and IO imply that λN = λO , so that the first two

competitive first order conditions are identical. It is also easily confirmed that the

competitive conditions for the insurance premium are both equivalent to the sum of the

efficiency conditions for cDN , cDO , and cN . Moreover, provided that the competitive price p

equals marginal cost, the other two competitive conditions are equivalent to their efficiency

counterparts. Examining the condition for q N , the two terms in square brackets are zero

according to the efficiency conditions for cDN and cDO , respectively. The remaining terms

match the efficiency condition for q N , provided that price equals marginal cost. Similarly, in

the condition for q O , the term in square brackets is zero according to the condition for cDO ,

and the remaining terms match the efficiency condition for q O , provided price equals

marginal cost.

It remains to verify that both innovators will choose unit prices that are equal to marginal

cost. Each innovator’s ex post decision involves maximizing her profits subject to the

participation of insurance companies. Define π I(F, p) as the maximum profits earned (on a

particular contract) by the representative insurer when faced with the fixed fee F and supply

price p . Each innovator’s problem can be expressed as:

                                 max p,F F + pq(p) − MCq(p)
                                                                                               (47)
                                 s.t. π I(F, p) ≥ 0

This has the first order conditions:

                        [F] : 1 + λπ FI = 0
                                                                                               (48)
                        [p] : q(p) + pq'(p) − MCq'(p) + λπ Ip = 0


                                                33
Applying the envelope theorem to the insurer’s profit function yields the results that

π Ip = −q and π FI = −1 . This then implies that p = MC .


       D.2.3 Second-Best Efficiency of the Innovation Decision
Incremental innovation does not affect the efficiency of consumers’ or insurers’ decisions,

but it has a direct impact on the efficiency of innovation investments. The new innovator

invests in research to maximize ex ante profits, according to:

                       max pN ,FN ,r ρ(r)[FN + pN q N(pN ) − MCq N(pN )] − r
                                                                                         (49)
                       s.t. π I(FN , pN ) ≥ 0

Competitive innovation is characterized by:

                           ρ'(r)FN = ρ'(r)[I N + q (m N − MC N )] = 1                    (50)

By comparison, the second-best social return can be written as:21



1
     (q Nu(W   + π − L − mN − IN − IO ) + q Ou(W + π − L − mO − IN − IO ) +
λ
                                                                               qN                q N + qO
(σ − q N − q O )u(W + π − L − IN − IO ) + (1 − σ )u(W + π − IN − IO ) +             v N(i)di +              vO(i)di
                                                                               0                 qN

− U)
                                                                      (51)

Using the consumer’s incentive-compatibility constraints and the insurer’s zero-profit

conditions, we can simplify this as:




21
   We once again employ the assumption that the marginal utility of wealth λ is the same
regardless of whether this particular innovation is discovered.

                                                34
1
     (q N (vO(q N ) −   v N(q N )) − (q O + q N )(vO(q N + q O )) +
λ
σu(W − L − q N(MC − mN ) − q O(MC − mO )) + (1 − σ )u(W − q N(MC − mN ) − q O(MC − mO )) +
 qN                     q N + qO
      v N(i)di +                   vO(i)di − U
 0                      qN

                                                                            (52)

Using what we learned about U (which is equal to maximum utility with the original

innovation alone) in the earlier analysis, this can be further simplified:



1
     (q N (vO(q N ) −   v N(q N )) − (q O + q N )(vO(q N + q O )) +qv(q)
λ
σu(W − L − q N(MC − mN ) − q O(MC − mO ) − r) + (1 − σ )u(W − q N(MC − mN ) − q O(MC − mO ) − r) −
  σu(W − L − q(MC − m) − r) − (1 − σ )u(W − q(MC − m) − r)
      qN                     q N + qO               q
+          v N(i)di +                   vO(i)di −       v(i)di
      0                      qN                     0

                                                                            (53)

Using a first-order approximation to utility, and relying on the fact that λ is the marginal

utility of wealth ex post, we can write this as:



1                                                                                              q N + qO
      q N (vO(q N ) − v N(q N )) − (q O + q N )(vO(q N + q O )) + qv(q) +
                                                                             qN                                       q
                                                                                  v N(i)di +              vO(i)di −       v(i)di
λ                                                                           0                  qN                     0

+ (q(MC − m) − q N(MC − mN ) − q O(MC − mO ))
                                                                            (54)

Under the assumption that vO ≡ v , or that the new innovation does not change the value of

the old innovation, the marginal user of the old innovation will be the same person, or

q O + q N = q .22 This allows the further simplification:




22
   Departures from the second-best will occur if there are complementarities between the two
innovations. In this case, the new innovator may not be able to capture the enhancement in value
                                                            35
       1
           q N (vO(q N ) − v N(q N )) +            (v N(i) −   vO(i))di + (q N mN + q O mO − qm )
                                          qN
                                                                                                    (55)
       λ                                  0



Using the consumer’s incentive compatibility constraint for q N to derive the approximation

vO(q N ) − v N(q N ) ≈ λ(mO − mN ) allows us to write:

                                    1
                                                   (v N(i) −    vO(i))di
                                              qN
                                                                                                    (56)
                                    λ      0



To a first-order approximation, the social return to the innovation is equal to the direct

increment in consumer surplus enjoyed by the consumers of the new innovation.

We now consider the conditions under which this equals the new innovator’s competitive

return. In competitive equilibrium, the innovator earns ex post profits:

                                          IN + q N(mN − MC)                                         (57)

The consumer’s reservation utility condition implies that EU(IN , IO , mN , mO ) − U R = 0 .

Taking first-order expansions around the points IN + IO = I = 0 yields:

                                     1
                                                    (v N(i) −   vO(i))di   − q N [mN − mO ]
                                              qN
               IN + IO − I ≈                                                                        (58)
                                     λ        0



Defining ∆π O as the change in the profits of the original innovator, we can write:

                                IO − I = ∆π O + q N(mO − MC)                                        (59)

Therefore, the profits of the new innovator can be written as:

                                    1
                                                   (v N(i) −    v O(i))di − ∆π O
                                           qN
                           πN =                                                                     (60)
                                    λ     0



The new innovator has efficient incentives, as long as the profits of the incumbent remain

unchanged. If, however, his profits fall, the new innovator has incentives to over-innovate.


of the old innovation from the other monopolist, unless of course there is a single monopolist
inventing both products.

                                                        36
In this case, the entrant is inheriting some of the incumbent’s profits. Since this is just a

transfer rather than a real creation of resources, it gives rise to inefficient rent-seeking

behavior. The result is too much innovation. An appropriate policy response is to tax the ex

post profits of the entrant by exactly the amount of profit lost by the incumbent. This

corrects the tendency of the new innovator to over-invest in innovation.

There is a corresponding danger that a firm entering a brand-new market will under-invest

because a potential entrant might “steal” some of its profits. To address this problem as well,

the tax on the new innovator can be refunded to the incumbent. Transfers among innovators

can solve the efficiency problems that arise with multiple firms producing similar inventions.

It is important to note that the insurance market can be left alone, as the innovation market is

the source of the inefficiency.


        E. Implications for Innovation and Insurance Policy

Departures from the first- or second-best outcomes occur if: (1) A new innovator is able to

“poach” some of the profits of the incumbent; (2) The market for health insurance fails to be

competitive; or (3) The market for health insurance is incomplete. The analysis above

suggests the policy remedies most appropriate to these various failures. In general, policy

ought to focus on intervening in the innovation market to ensure that the private return to

innovation does not exceed the social return, and on completing the insurance market or

making it competitive.


        E.1 Innovation Market Intervention

Intervention in the market for innovation can be called for when the entry of a new innovator

reduces the profits of an incumbent. In this case, the new innovator can extract both the

additional consumer surplus he creates, plus some of the surplus that previously accrued to

                                              37
the original inventor. The latter portion of the private return is socially excessive, since it

involves nothing more than a transfer, rather than a real creation of social wealth. As such,

Pigovian taxes on ex post profits, equal to the incumbent’s decline in profits, can restore first-

or second-best efficiency. Note that the Pigovian tax is superior to price regulation, because

it does not distort outcomes in the goods market.


        E.2 Insurance Market Intervention

Market power or other incompleteness in the insurance market can compromise the

efficiency of innovation investments. In the presence of market power, insurers will share

some of the rents from innovation and thus depress the returns to research. Moreover, market

power or other imperfections can lead to less than full insurance. Uninsured consumers do

not have access to the two-part pricing contract afforded by insurance. The innovator will

charge them the standard monopoly price for her invention. This leads to under-utilization in

that segment of the market, and under-innovation for the entire market.

Correcting either of these static failures in the insurance market can raise the level of

innovation and improve the efficiency of utilization.        Aggressively promoting anti-trust

policy against insurers when they cover patented innovations seems important, as does

promoting access to health insurance.


        E.3 Methods For Redistribution

The equilibria constructed above involve the first-best levels of innovation and health-care

utilization. However, since consumers receive no surplus, it is possible that consumers do

not prefer these equilibria to other, less efficient outcomes. Theoretically, it is always

possible to solve distributional problems through appropriate transfers. Any such transfer




                                               38
would have to be made from innovators to consumers, but the method of funding such a

transfer cannot affect the margins of either the innovator or the consumer.

A feasible way to achieve redistribution along the Pareto frontier is to tax the innovators

expected profits. Efficient incentives are achieved when the innovator faces expected profits

d(r)CS − r .   If, instead, the innovator receives (1 − τ )[d(r)CS − r], the allocation of

resources is unchanged. This requires a τ -percent tax on eventual profits, coupled with a τ -

percent subsidy for research and development expenditure. The proceeds of the tax could

then be disbursed to consumers. This could achieve any desired distribution of resources

across innovators and consumers, without affecting research effort or the utilization of the

new innovation.


       E.4 Public Health Insurance

Our analysis suggests that the optimal design for public health insurance involves a co-

payment at marginal cost minus the degree of insurance, coupled with a premium payment

that equals consumer surplus plus the actuarial cost of insurance. The key implementation

problem is determining these quantities accurately.

A workable alternative is to mimic observed private insurance contracts. While this may not

guarantee first- or even second-best efficiency, increasing the availability of insurance at

competitive prices improves ex ante and ex post welfare. Ex post welfare increases as long

as people receive some insurance and utilization rises; this will always be satisfied. Ex ante

welfare will increase as long as costs paid to innovators do not exceed consumer surplus.

Following observed competitively determined contracts ensures that this condition will be

satisfied: in a competitive market, consumers would opt out of insurance contracts that paid

innovators an amount greater than consumer surplus, since the associated premium would

also exceed the value of the insurance to the consumer.
                                              39
The Medicare Drug Benefit is an example of a public health insurance scheme that must at

least be welfare-improving according to this logic. Medicare solicits competitive bids from

insurers for drug insurance. This may not yield the first- or even second-best outcome,

because competitively determined prices will reflect market power or other imperfections in

the insurance market. Nonetheless, it is certain that the payment made to innovators will

increase their profits, but will not lead to excessive returns on their investments. Moreover,

the increase in insurance and utilization will also increase static efficiency from the point of

view of today’s patients.


        F. Conclusions

Uncertainty in the demand for health care innovation provides leverage with which to solve

the nagging problem of encouraging efficient innovation ex ante while still permitting

efficient utilization ex post. An insurance contract can function as a two-part pricing scheme

that yields efficient outcomes, where an innovator sells his product at marginal cost, but

receives an ex ante payment equal to the full value of expected consumer surplus. This

analysis reveals how static failures in insurance markets can lead to dynamic inefficiencies in

the market for innovation, and it also points to the importance of maintaining efficient

insurance markets. Indeed, patent monopolies in and of themselves are not socially harmful

if they coexist with an efficient market for health insurance.

The optimal design of a public health insurance scheme ought to couple co-payments at or

below marginal cost (depending on the level of insurance desired), along with premium

payments equal to actuarial cost plus the consumer surplus associated with the goods being

purchased. Since these quantities are difficult to observe, a practical, welfare-improving

alternative is for a public insurance system to follow the reimbursements and premium

schedules determined by competitive insurers.
                                               40
The link between innovation and insurance is crucial to the ex ante and ex post efficiency of

health care markets. Many have argued that the presence of moral hazard in health insurance

contracts can help offset the incentives for quantity-restriction faced by monopolists. In fact,

the relationship between insurance and innovation is much more fundamental and less

coincidental.    Competitive insurance markets can structurally remove inefficiencies

associated with patent monopolies, regardless of the extent of moral hazard present in

preferences and information.




                                              41
References

Arrow, K. J. (1963). "Uncertainty and Medical Care." American Economic Review 53: 941 - 973.
Garber, A. M., C. I. Jones, and P. M. Romer (2005). "Pricing and the Value of Medical
        Innovations." Stanford University Working Paper. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University.
Gaynor, M., D. Haas-Wilson, and W. B. Vogt (2000). "Are Invisible Hands Good Hands? Moral
        Hazard, Competition, and the Second-Best in Health Care Markets." Journal of Political
        Economy 108(5): 992-1005.
Nordhaus, W. (1969). "Invention, Growth and Welfare." Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Oi, W. Y. (1971). "A Disneyland Dilemma: Two-part Tariffs for a Mickey Mouse Monopoly."
        Quarterly Journal of Economics 85: 77-96.
Philipson, T., and S. Mechoulan (2005). "Intellectual Property & External Consumption
        Effects:
Generalizations from Pharmaceutical Markets." University of Chicago Department of Economics.
        University of Chicago Department of Economics.
World Medical Association (1999). "World Medical Association Statement on Medical Process
        Patents." http://www.wma.net/e/policy/m30.htm. Accessed: August 10, 2005.
Wright, B. D. (1983). "The Economics of Invention Incentives: Patents Prizes and Research
        Contracts." American Economic Review 73: 691-707.




                                             42
