NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHAT DID MEDICARE DO
(AND WAS IT WORTH IT)?
Amy Finkelstein
Robin McKnight
Working Paper 11609
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11609
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2005

We are grateful to Susan Athey, Jeff Brown, David Cutler, Jonathan Gruber, Adriana Lleras-Muney, Ellen
Meara, Ben Olken, Jonathan Skinner, and participants at the NBER Summer Institute for helpful comments
and discussions, to Sarah Levin for outstanding research assistance, and to the Harvard Milton Fund for
financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Amy Finkelstein and Robin McKnight. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

What Did Medicare Do (And Was It Worth It)?
Amy Finkelstein and Robin McKnight
NBER Working Paper No. 11609
September 2005
JEL No. H51, I11, I18
ABSTRACT
We study the impact of the introduction of one of the major pillars of the social insurance system
in the United States: the introduction of Medicare in 1965. Our results suggest that, in its first 10
years, the establishment of universal health insurance for the elderly had no discernible impact on
their mortality. However, we find that the introduction of Medicare was associated with a substantial
reduction in the elderly’s exposure to out of pocket medical expenditure risk. Specifically, we
estimate that Medicare’s introduction is associated with a forty percent decline in out of pocket
spending for the top quartile of the out of pocket spending distribution. A stylized expected utility
framework suggests that the welfare gains from such reductions in risk exposure alone may be
sufficient to cover between half and three-quarters of the costs of the Medicare program. These
findings underscore the importance of considering the direct insurance benefits from public health
insurance programs, in addition to any indirect benefits from an effect on health.
Amy Finkelstein
MIT Department of Economics
50 Memorial Drive
E52-262F
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
afink@mit.edu
Robin McKnight
Department of Economics , 435 PLC
University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403
and NBER
robinm@uoregon.edu

“No longer will older Americans be denied the healing miracle of modern
medicine. No longer will illness crush and destroy the savings that they have so
carefully put away over a lifetime”
Lyndon Johnson, July 30 1965, at the Medicare
signing ceremony in Independence, Missouri

A major economic rationale for social insurance is its potential to redress the consequences of market
imperfections in private insurance markets. Public health insurance offers two potential benefits: direct
risk-reduction benefits and indirect health benefits. As the above quotation highlights, both of these
potential benefits figured prominently in the motivation for the establishment of the U.S. Medicare
program.
Analysis of the impact of health insurance has focused primarily on only one of these potential
benefits – the impact of insurance on health outcomes. In general, for the non-infant population, the
evidence points strongly to no or only very modest health benefits (see e.g. Levy and Meltzer 2004 for a
review of this literature). By contrast, the risk-reducing properties of health insurance, while at the core of
any theoretical analysis of the benefits from insurance, have received comparatively little empirical
attention.
In this paper, we demonstrate empirically that even in the apparent absence of health benefits, public
health insurance can have important benefits from reducing risk exposure. These results suggest that the
near-exclusive focus on health benefits in empirical analyses of the impact of health insurance can
substantially understate the total benefits from health insurance provision.
We study the impact of the introduction of Medicare, which provides nearly universal public health
insurance coverage to the elderly. The introduction of Medicare in 1965 was, and remains to date, the
single largest change in health insurance coverage in U.S. history. Its introduction was followed by a
substantial and prolonged decline in elderly mortality (see Figure 1). Nevertheless, using several different
empirical strategies, we find no compelling evidence that, in its first 10 years, Medicare reduced overall
elderly mortality. Our evidence suggests the explanation for this finding is that, prior to Medicare, elderly

1

individuals with life-threatening, treatable health conditions sought care even if they lacked insurance, as
long as they had legal access to hospitals.
However, although we detect no impact of the introduction of Medicare on overall elderly mortality,
we estimate that its introduction is responsible for a striking and substantial decline in the large right-tail
of the distribution of out of pocket medical expenditures for the elderly. Specifically, we estimate that
Medicare is associated with a forty percent decline in out of pocket spending for the top quartile of the out
of pocket medical expenditure distribution; for the top decile of this distribution, the decline associated
with Medicare is close to fifty percent.
Within a stylized expected utility framework, we simulate the welfare gains associated with this
change in risk bearing and compare it to the costs associated with Medicare (both the moral hazard costs
and the marginal cost of public funds). The results suggest that the magnitude of the welfare benefits from
Medicare’s impact on consumption-smoothing may be considerable relative to the costs of the Medicare
program; we estimate that the consumption-smoothing benefits may cover between one half and three
quarters of Medicare’s cost. This finding underscores the importance of considering risk reducing effects
in any evaluation of the impact of health insurance.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 provides some brief background on Medicare.
Section 2 analyzes the 10-year impact of Medicare on elderly mortality. Section 3 investigates the impact
of Medicare on the distribution out of pocket expenditures. Section 4 uses these estimates to perform a
cost-benefit analysis. The last section concludes.

Section 1: Background on Medicare
The U.S. Medicare program is one of the largest public health insurance programs in the world. With
annual spending of $260 billion per year, it constitutes about 17 percent of all U.S. health expenditures,
one-eighth of the federal budget, and 2 percent of GDP (National Center for Health Statistics 2002,
Newhouse 2002, US Congress 2000).
Medicare was enacted in July 1965 and implemented essentially nationwide in July 1966. It provided

2

virtually universal public health insurance to individuals aged 65 and older (coverage for the disabled was
added in 1973). Individuals aged 65 and over are automatically enrolled in Medicare Part A, which covers
up to 90 days of inpatient hospital expenses after an initial deductible and a 25 percent co-payment for
days 61 – 90; it is funded by a payroll tax. The elderly can choose to enroll in Medicare Part B, which
covers physician costs after an initial deductible and 20 percent (uncapped) co-pay; it is funded partly by
general revenues and partly by individual premiums which were designed to cover 50 percent of the
program costs (Somers and Somers, 1967). Medicare’s cost-sharing provisions and uncapped potential
out of pocket spending make the extent of its consumption smoothing properties a priori uncertain.
Medicare’s impact on health insurance coverage for the elderly was enormous, increasing by 75
percentage points the proportion of the elderly with any meaningful health insurance (Finkelstein 2005).
Recent empirical work has shown that the introduction of Medicare was associated with a substantial
increase in health care utilization (Dow 2002, Cook et al. 2002, Finkelstein 2005) and spending
(Finkelstein 2005). In more recent times, Medicare coverage is also associated with a substantial increase
in health care utilization (Lichtenberg 2002, Decker and Rappaport 2002, McWilliams et al., 2003, Card
et al., 2004.)
Section 2: Medicare and Mortality
In this section, we examine the impact of the introduction of Medicare on elderly mortality through
1975. Mortality is, of course, only one measure of health. Our focus on mortality is motivated both by its
importance and by the striking decline in elderly mortality rates that began shortly after the introduction
of Medicare (see Figure 1). From a practical standpoint, mortality is also one of the few objective, wellmeasured health outcomes; as a result, it is the focus of many of the studies examining the impact of
health insurance on health (Levy and Meltzer, 2004).
We use annual age- and state-specific mortality data from 1952 – 1975. Data from 1959 to 1975 are
from the NCHS Multiple Causes of Death micro-data, which include the universe of death certificates;
prior to that, we use aggregate published death statistics (Vital Statistics, various years). Alaska and
Hawaii are excluded from the analysis since they do not enter the data until 1959. We look up to 10 years

3

after Medicare’s introduction for any impact of Medicare on mortality; since health is a stock, the impact
of a change in health insurance coverage on mortality might occur only with a lag.
Previous work on the impact of Medicare on health outcomes has used the age-variation in Medicare
coverage to identify its effect, exploiting the fact that Medicare covers individuals over 65 but not under
65. This work points to, at best, very modest health benefits from Medicare, both at the time of its
introduction (Dow 2002, Cook et al., 2002) and in more recent times (Card et al., 2004). Using the same
age-based identification strategy, we also find no compelling evidence of an impact of the introduction of
Medicare on elderly mortality (section 2.1). We explore two alternative sources of variation to further
investigate Medicare’s impact. In Section 2.2, we exploit geographic variation in the increase in insurance
coverage associated with Medicare’s introduction. In Section 2.3, we exploit variation in the timing of
Medicare’s implementation in certain Southern counties.
These additional empirical strategies serve two purposes. First, each of the three approaches has its
own strengths and weaknesses, which we discuss below. Our finding of similar results from the three
different empirical strategies therefore increases our confidence in the conclusion that Medicare appears
to have had no impact on overall elderly mortality in its first 10 years. Second, the combined evidence
from the three strategies helps shed light on why Medicare appears to have had only modest health
benefits at best; we discuss this in more detail in section 2.3 below.
2.1 Mortality estimates based on Medicare’s coverage by age
Figure 2 shows trends in mortality rate for the “young elderly” (aged 65-74) who become covered by
Medicare in 1966 and the “near-elderly” (aged 55-64), who do not. The mortality decline for the young
elderly begins several years before Medicare’s introduction, while that for the near-elderly begins slightly
after. Not surprisingly, therefore, formal regression analysis does not indicate any impact of the
introduction of Medicare on the mortality rate of the young elderly relative to the near elderly.
Specifically, we estimate:

4

ln(deaths) ast = β1 ln(pop'n) ast + β2 elderlya +α s *1(states ) +δ t *1(Yeart )
+

t =1975

∑λ (elderly )*1(Year) + X

t =1952

t

a

t

st

(1)

β + ε ast

Our dependent variable is the log of the number of deaths in state s and year t in age group a. For the right
hand side population variable, we construct annual, state- and age-group-specific population estimates by
fitting separate cubics to the 1950 through 1980 census data for each state-age group cell. In practice, the
results are not sensitive to using the log of the death rate or the death rate as the left hand side variable.
We include an indicator variable ( elderly a ) for whether the deaths are for the young-elderly rather than
the near-elderly, and a series of state and year fixed effects (1(States ) and 1(Yeart ) respectively).
The key variables of interest are the series of year fixed effects interacted with the elderly indicator
variable ( (elderly a ) * 1(Yeart ) ). The pattern of coefficients on these variables (the λt ' s ) show the
flexibly estimated trend in ln(deaths) over time for the Medicare-eligible elderly population relative to the
non-eligible non-elderly. Under the assumption that changes in the time pattern of mortality for the young
elderly relative to the near elderly around 1966 reflect the effect of Medicare, the change in the pattern of

λt ' s after the introduction of Medicare should provide an estimate of the effect of Medicare on
ln(deaths).
Medicaid, the public health insurance program for the indigent was, like Medicare, also enacted in
July of 1965. However, the timing of Medicaid implementation – unlike that of Medicare – was left up to
the individual states (see Gruber, forthcoming for details). We control for any impact of Medicaid on
health outcomes by including a series of indicator variables ( X st ) for the number of years since (or
before) the implementation of a Medicaid program in state s. In practice, the results are not sensitive to
these controls, which is not surprising given that the relative impact of Medicaid (compared to Medicare)
on the elderly was quite small (National Center for Health Statistics 2002 and Holahan 1975).
We report results from weighted estimation of equation (1) by OLS. The weights are the square root
of the population of age group a in state s and year t. Unweighted estimates (not reported) are very

5

similar. We calculate robust standard errors, allowing for an arbitrary variance-covariance matrix within
each state. Our empirical framework is quite similar to that of Dow (2002); we differ mainly in our
adoption of a substantially more flexible functional form, and our controls for Medicaid implementation.
Figure 3 shows the λt ' s from estimating equation (1). The level of the graph is arbitrary; we set it at
0 in 1966, the omitted year. It indicates that although mortality for the young elderly is declining relative
to that of the near-elderly after Medicare, this decline begins in 1962, four years before Medicare is
implemented; moreover, this relative mortality decline for the young elderly reverses in the mid 1970s.
The visual impression of no compelling evidence of an impact of Medicare on young elderly mortality
relative to near elderly is confirmed by statistical tests (not shown). We also found no evidence of an
impact of Medicare for specific diseases – such as cardiovascular disease – or for sub-populations where
we might expect a bigger impact of Medicare on health: non-whites – who are among the most vulnerable
in the population – and individuals in urban areas – where availability and access to medical care is much
greater than in rural areas (not shown).
2.2 Mortality estimates based on geographic variation in insurance prior to Medicare
The age-based identification strategy is not well-suited to examining the impact of Medicare on
mortality for the oldest of the elderly, for whom Medicare might conceivably have a larger mortality
impact. In addition, the age-based strategy will be biased against finding an impact of Medicare if the
treatment of individuals just under age 65 is affected by the insurance coverage Medicare provides to all
individuals over age 65. Physician practice norms, concerns about malpractice liability, or joint costs of
the production of health care could all contribute to “health insurance spillovers”; Baker (1997),
Hellerstein (1998) and Glied and Zivin (2002) present evidence consistent with such spillovers.
We therefore employ an alternative strategy based on the substantial geographic variation in private
health insurance coverage among the elderly prior to the introduction of Medicare. Table 1 shows the
variation across sub-regions in the percent of the elderly without any hospital insurance or the percent

6

without Blue Cross hospital insurance. The data are from the 1963 National Health Survey.1 Using the
Blue Cross measure, the increase in insurance coverage for the elderly associated with the introduction of
Medicare ranged from a high of 88 percentage points in the East South Central United States to a low of
49 percentage points in New England.
Elderly insurance coverage rates are clearly not randomly assigned and are in fact highly correlated
with socio-economic status. Our empirical approach is therefore to look for a break in any pre-existing
level or trend differences in mortality rates at the time of Medicare’s introduction in areas where
Medicare had more of an effect on insurance coverage relative to areas where it has less of an effect.
Using this same identification strategy, Finkelstein (2005) demonstrates a substantial impact of Medicare
on hospital spending and utilization.
The basic estimating equation is:

ln(deaths) st = β 1 ln( pop' n st ) + α s * 1( State s ) + δ t * 1(Yeart )
+

t =1975

∑ λ ( pctuninsured )

t =1952

t

z

* 1(Yeart ) + X st β + ε st

(2)

The variables are defined as in equation (1), except that the key coefficients of interest – the λt ' s -- are
now the coefficients on the variable ( pctuninsured ) z * 1(Yeart ) , the interaction between year effects
and the percentage of the elderly population in sub-region z without private health insurance in 1963. We
estimate equation (2) by OLS using the square root of the population in state s and year t for weights.
Unweighted estimates (not reported) are very similar. We adjust our standard errors to allow for an
arbitrary covariance matrix within each state over time.
We present results using the Blue Cross measure since, unlike most other forms of health insurance
for the elderly, Blue Cross insurance provided meaningful coverage. In addition, Medicare benefits were

1

For more information on the data, see National Center for Health Statistics, 1964.The survey also contains
information on coverage by surgical insurance. Surgical and hospital insurance coverage are highly correlated
(correlation = 0.92); for simplicity, we focus on hospital insurance, since hospitals constitute the largest portion of
expenditures.

7

explicitly modeled after these plans (Anderson et al. 1963, Ball 1995, Newhouse 2002). In practice the
results are not sensitive to the choice of health insurance measure (not shown).2
Figure 4 shows the λt ' s from estimating equation (2). Panel A shows that, for individuals aged 65
and over, mortality rates were rising in areas with less insurance relative to the areas with more insurance
prior to the introduction of Medicare; this is not surprising since areas with less insurance are also poorer.
The identifying (or, counterfactual) assumption is that, absent Medicare, the differential trend in mortality
improvements would have continued. Any systematic divergence from this differential trend after 1966
would suggest an impact of Medicare. However, there is no indication of any divergence. In results not
reported, we implemented statistical tests that confirm this visual impression. Again, we also found no
evidence of an impact of Medicare for specific diseases – such as cardiovascular disease – or for two subpopulations where health insurance might have been expected to have more of an impact on health: nonwhites or individuals living in urban areas (not shown). 3
One of the advantages of using the geography-based identification strategy instead of the age-based
identification strategy is the ability to look at the effect of Medicare separately for different age groups.
Panels B and C of Figure 4 therefore report results separately for, respectively, individuals aged 65-74
and individuals aged 75 and over. For neither age group is there evidence of any differential decline in
mortality rates in areas where insurance coverage increased more as a result of Medicare’s introduction.
Indeed, the results for individuals aged 65-74 suggest that Medicare is associated with an increase in
mortality rates, while results for individuals aged 75+ indicate no impact of Medicare in either direction.
Statistical tests (not reported) confirm this visual impression.
A concern with using geographic variation in private insurance coverage to identify the impact of
Medicare is that the mid-1960s through early 1970s were a period of innovation in the treatment of

2

In principle, the impact of Medicare varies not only according to the percent of the elderly without insurance but
also the percent of the elderly in the area. In practice however, there is very little variation even across counties in
the percent elderly.
3
The results are also robust to a number of other specifications such as a linear rather than log-linear model,
estimating the model separately by gender, excluding one subregion at a time, excluding all four Southern subregions at once, and excluding the Medicaid control variables (not shown).

8

cardiovascular disease, including new information about the risks of smoking and the development of
anti-hypertensives (Cutler and Kadiyala 2003). If individuals in richer areas were more likely to adopt
these health care innovations, this would bias our estimates of the mortality benefits of Medicare
downward, since richer areas also had higher pre-Medicare insurance rates and thus a lower estimated
impact of Medicare. To address this issue, we performed a triple-difference analysis by combining the
age-based variation in the previous subsection with the geographic identification strategy used in this subsection. This analysis also yields no statistical or substantive impact of Medicare on mortality (results not
shown).
2.3 Why did Medicare have no overall effect on mortality in its first 10 years? Evidence from the
segregated South
The above evidence suggests that – at least in its first 10 years – Medicare played essentially no role
in the dramatic decline in mortality rates for the elderly that began in the late 1960s. Since Medicare was
associated with a substantial increase in the elderly’s use of hospital care (Dow 2002, Cook et al. 2002,
Finkelstein 2005), this implies that the Medicare-induced increase in health care consumption was
ineffective, at least for mortality. Our third empirical approach sheds some light on why this was the case.
This third approach is based on the fact that for a hospital to be eligible to receive Medicare funding,
it had to be racially desegregated. As a result, the implementation of Medicare increased non-whites’
access to hospitals in segregated parts of the South (Smith, 1999; Almond et al., 2003). It also resulted in
some staggered timing in the introduction of Medicare in parts of the South that had not desegregated
their hospitals by the start of Medicare. Using the American Hospital Association’s Annual Survey of
Hospitals, we estimate that only three-quarters of counties in the entire South – and only one quarter of
counties in the Mississippi Delta – had a Medicare certified hospital by the end of 1966.
Using this variation in timing of Medicare implementation, Almond et al. (2003) show that, in the
Mississippi Delta, counties that had a Medicare-certified hospital by February 1969 – and had therefore
desegregated by that point – experienced dramatic declines in non-white post-neonatal mortality from
diarrhea and pneumonia in the late 1960s relative to counties that did not have Medicare-certified

9

hospitals. We follow Almond et al.’s (2003) empirical strategy and estimate the impact of Medicare on
elderly mortality in the Mississippi Delta:

y ct = α c * 1(county c ) + δ t * 1( yeart ) + λCertified ct + ε ct

(3)

The dependent variable is a measure of deaths in county c and year t. The regression includes a series of
county fixed effects and year fixed effects ( 1(county c ) and 1( yeart ) respectively). The key coefficient
of interest is λ , which represents the change in elderly mortality associated with having at least one
Medicare-certified hospital in county c at time t. We adjust our standard errors to allow for an arbitrary
covariance matrix within each county over time.
We estimate equation (3) separately by race, and within race by disease. As a result of this fine
cutting of the data, a reasonably high proportion of counties has no deaths in a given year. We therefore
report results in which the death rate (in levels) is the dependent variable as well as results in which
ln(deaths) is the dependent variable and ln(population) is included on the right hand side.
Table 2 reports the results. The first two columns indicate that the introduction of Medicare had no
discernible impact on overall elderly mortality in the Mississippi delta, either for non-whites (Panel A) or
whites (Panel B). However, the next two columns suggest that the introduction of Medicare is associated
with a statistically significant decline in non-white elderly pneumonia mortality rates. There is no
evidence of comparable effects for whites, or for other diseases. For example, the last two columns
indicate no impact of Medicare on a decline in mortality from cardiovascular disease, which accounted
for two-thirds of elderly deaths in 1965; improvements in cardiovascular disease mortality were also the
primary cause of the decline in elderly mortality starting in the late 1960s (Cutler and Kadiyala 2003).
Although statistically significant, the impact of Medicare on non-white elderly pneumonia mortality
is substantively small. The point estimates suggest that Medicare is associated with a 35 percent (loglinear specification) or 0.1 percentage point (linear specification) decline in non-white elderly pneumonia
deaths. Only 3.3% of elderly deaths in 1965 were from pneumonia; therefore even the larger estimate
suggests that Medicare reduced non-white elderly overall mortality in these counties by only 1 percent.

10

By contrast, pneumonia-related deaths were over one-quarter of infant deaths. This explains why Almond
et al. (2003) estimate a substantially larger impact of Medicare on non-white post-neonatal mortality than
we do for non-white elderly mortality, even though Medicare provided insurance coverage to the nonwhite elderly in addition to the access to hospitals it provided to non-whites of all ages.
More generally, these findings help explain our estimates that Medicare appears to have had little or
no effect on overall elderly mortality. At the time of Medicare’s introduction, hospitals were primarily
effective at treating short-term acute illness, rather than chronic disease (Somers and Somers 1961). Our
findings suggest that – apart from non-whites who were denied access to hospital care in some places
prior to Medicare – individuals with pneumonia and other infectious diseases that hospitals could treat
effectively at the time were likely to seek medical care regardless of insurance status. This explains why
we find evidence of an impact of Medicare’s introduction on the elderly non-white pneumonia mortality
rate in the segregated South – where the introduction of Medicare opened up access to hospitals for these
individuals – but not for whites in the same areas (despite their low insurance coverage prior to
Medicare), since whites already had legal access to these hospitals. It also explains why we find no
discernable impact of Medicare’s introduction on the elderly pneumonia mortality rate for either race
using either the age-based or geography-based identification strategy (not shown).
If, prior to Medicare, individuals sought hospital care where it was likely to be effective regardless of
insurance coverage, they must have paid out of pocket and/or relied on charity care. Consistent with this,
the next section documents a large amount of out of pocket medical spending by the elderly prior to
Medicare.
Section 3: Medicare and Exposure to Out-Of-Pocket Medical Expenditure Risk
To examine the impact of Medicare on out of pocket expenditure risk, we use data on health care
expenditures from the 1963 and 1970 Surveys of Health Service Utilization and Expenditures. These data
contain information on health care expenditures for 7,802 individuals in 1963, and 11,619 in 1970. For

11

much of the analysis, we limit the sample to the 3,030 individuals aged 55-74 in either year.4 The data
contain detailed information on medical spending both by type of spending (e.g. hospital, physician, drug)
and by source of payment (out of pocket, private insurance, public insurance, and total).5
Table 3 provides some descriptive statistics on the medical spending by the elderly in 1963, prior to
the introduction of Medicare. All dollar estimates in this and subsequent tables are converted to 2000
dollars using the CPI-U. At $844, average annual per capita medical spending by the elderly in 1963
represented over 10 percent of income. Over 90 percent of this spending was paid out of pocket, and 60
percent of these out of pocket expenditures were for medical services that subsequently became covered
by Medicare (i.e. doctor and hospital expenditures); the rest were for drugs, primarily prescription drugs.6
Figure 5 indicates that there was a substantial right tail to the distribution of elderly out of pocket medical
expenditures in 1963 that would subsequently be covered by Medicare, a finding that to our knowledge
has not been previously demonstrated. This right tail also persists when we examine the distribution of
out of pocket medical spending as a percentage of income (not shown).
Our empirical strategy is to compare changes in spending for individuals over age 65 to changes in
spending for individuals under age 65 between 1963 and 1970. To increase the plausibility of the
identifying assumption that, absent Medicare, changes in various types of spending for individuals above
and below age 65 would have been the same, we focus primarily on changes in spending for the young
elderly (ages 65 to 74) relative to that for the near elderly (ages 55 to 64). For all of the spending
categories we examine, mean spending in 1963 is substantively quite similar and statistically
indistinguishable for the two age groups.

4

The surveys were conducted by the Center for Health Administration Studies and the National Opinion Research
Center. Neither includes usable population weights, so all of our estimates are unweighted. The 1970 survey oversampled the elderly, as well as individuals in rural areas and the urban poor. The institutionalized population is not
surveyed in either year.
5
We construct out of pocket spending as the difference between total spending and total insurance spending. Out of
pocket spending is reported directly only in 1970 (but not in 1963). We compared the reported measure to our
constructed measure in 1970 and found them to be the same in 92 percent of cases.
6
We have not classified home health care as Medicare-eligible because Medicare covered only a very limited
amount of home health care at that time (Somers and Somers 1967). In practice, given how small home health care
expenditures were, including it in Medicare-covered expenditures has little effect on any of the analysis.

12

The confounding effect of the introduction of Medicaid likely biases down our estimates of the
impact of Medicare on increasing total spending and reducing out of pocket spending. Medicaid was also
introduced between 1963 and 1970, and Medicaid spending is higher for the near-elderly (our control
group) than the young-elderly (our treatment group); unlike in the mortality analysis, we do not have
geographic identifiers and therefore cannot exploit the variation across states in the timing of Medicaid
introduction; we also cannot use the geographic variation in Medicare’s impact on insurance to identify
its effects on out of pocket medical expenditure risk.
3.1 Impact of Medicare on mean spending
Although our primary interest is in the impact of Medicare on the distribution of out of pocket
spending, we begin with a brief analysis of the impact of Medicare on average spending of different
types. Our basic estimating equation is:

spend iat = γX iat + β1elderlya + β 2 year1970t + β 3 (elderlya * year1970t ) + ε iat

(4)

In this standard difference-in-differences framework, the coefficient of interest is β 3 ; it indicates the
differential change in spendiat between 1963 and 1970 for individuals aged 65 to 74 relative to individuals
aged 55 to 64. The covariates (Xiat), consist of age, age squared, and indicator variables for male, married
and education group (6 years of school or less, between 6 and 12 years, or 12 or more years of school); in
practice, the results are virtually identical without these controls (not shown). We estimate equation (4) by
OLS and calculate Huber-White robust standard errors.7
Table 4 reports the results for various Medicare-eligible spending categories. The first column
indicates that the introduction of Medicare is associated with a decline in mean out of pocket spending of
$117. This represents a one-quarter decline from the out of pocket spending by the young elderly in 1963,
but is not statistically significant. The estimated decline in mean out of pocket spending on physicians
shown in the third row is statistically significant and corresponds to about a one-third decline. These
estimates are somewhat smaller than estimates of the impact of other social insurance programs on risk
7

In results not reported, we found that the p-values are essentially unaffected if we instead implement the
randomized inference approach of Bertrand, Duflo and Mullainathan (2004).

13

reduction. For example, Gruber (1997) estimates that the public unemployment insurance system reduces
the fall in consumption associated with an unemployment spell by about two-thirds. However, we will
show below that these estimates of the impact of Medicare on average out of pocket spending mask
Medicare’s real impact, which is concentrated in the right tail of out of pocket spending.
The remaining three columns suggest that Medicare is associated with declines in private insurance
spending, and increases in total insurance spending and total spending. Although the increase in total
spending is not statistically significant, the point estimate implies that Medicare was associated with a 28
percent increase in total medical spending. Interestingly, the estimates from the RAND health insurance
experiment would also predict that the introduction of Medicare would be associated with a 28 percent
increase in medical spending (Newhouse 1993, Finkelstein 2005).In results not reported, we also found
no evidence of an impact of Medicare on drug spending, which Medicare does not reimburse.
The possibility, discussed above, that the introduction of Medicare may have spillover effects on
health spending of the non-elderly could bias downward our estimates of the impact of Medicare on the
increase in total health spending, as the control group of near-elderly could also experience some
increased spending associated with Medicare. Of course, such spillovers could also bias upward our
estimate of the impact of Medicare on reducing out of pocket spending of the elderly if the spillovers
induced increased out of pocket spending by the near-elderly. While we cannot rule out this possibility,
we note that the time series evidence does not seem to suggest such an effect: there is no statistical or
substantive change in mean out of pocket spending for the near elderly. Figure 6 similarly indicates that
the distribution of out of pocket spending did not change for the near elderly between 1963 and 1970.
The difference-in-difference estimates of the impact of Medicare on out of pocket spending by the young
elderly are thus virtually identical to the simple time series difference.
3.2 Effect of Medicare on the out of pocket spending distribution: centile treatment estimates
Figure 6 also conveys the impact of Medicare on the distribution of out of pocket spending. The
distribution of out of pocket spending for the near elderly in 1963 and 1970 as well as for the young
elderly in 1963 all lie close to each other. By contrast, the distribution of out of pocket spending for the

14

young elderly in 1970 (i.e. after Medicare) lies substantially below the other three distributions in the top
quartile of the distribution.
To estimate the impact of Medicare on the distribution of out of pocket spending more formally, we
estimate quantile treatment effects for each centile of the spending distribution, following the approach
outlined in Bitler at al. (2003). The quantile treatment effect for quantile q is estimated as follows:

∆ q = {spend q (1970, elderly = 1) - spend q (1963, elderly = 1)}
- {spend q (1970, elderly = 0) - spend q (1963, elderly = 0)}

(5)

To adjust for covariates, we replace the centile from the spending distribution with the centile from the
distribution of spending residuals from a linear regression of spending on the covariates described above.
We calculate confidence intervals for our estimates using the empirical standard deviation of 200
bootstrap replications of the quantile treatment estimates.
The results are shown without covariate adjustment (Figure 7a) and with covariate adjustment (Figure
7b). The results are striking. There is no evidence of an impact of Medicare on out of pocket spending
until the top quartile of the out of pocket spending distribution. For this top quartile, the declines are
dramatic, and increase monotonically throughout the quartile. Table 5 reports the point estimates – and
statistical significance – of the 75th through 99th centiles in columns 3 and 4. They indicate that, on
average, Medicare is associated with a 40 percent decline in out of pocket spending for the top quartile of
the distribution.8 The declines are even larger for the top decile, where Medicare is associated with an
almost 50 percent decline in out of pocket spending, or an average decline of about $1,200 per person.
Figures 7c and 7d show that the quantile treatment estimates look similar if we expand the elderly sample
to include all those aged 65 – 90. Because we will use these estimates from the larger sample for the
welfare analysis below, these point estimates are also reported in columns 5 and 6 of Table 5.
The quantile treatment estimator in equation (5) uses as a proxy for the change in spending that would
have occurred for spending quantile q in the treatment group absent the introduction of Medicare, the

8

These estimates are based on the covariate-adjusted specification. The estimates without covariates would suggest
an almost 50 percent decline in out of pocket spending for the top quartile.

15

change in spending that did occur for the same quantile q in the control group. An alternative estimator
suggested by Athey and Imbens (2003) uses as a proxy for the change in spending that would have
occurred for spending level y in the treatment group absent the introduction of Medicare, the change in
spending that did occur in the control group at the quantile in the control group that corresponds to that
same level y. Given the similarity of the treatment and control distributions in the pre-period (see Figure
6), we find, not surprisingly, that the two approaches yield very similar results (not shown).
A potential concern with the foregoing analysis is that it assumes that, absent the introduction of
Medicare, out of pocket spending at the top of the distribution would not have declined for the youngelderly relative to the near-elderly. We provide some indirect support for this identifying assumption.
Figure 8 examines how spending changed between 1963 and 1970 for adjacent age groups who both
experienced the same change in Medicare coverage over this period. Figure 8a shows that out of pocket
spending in the top decile of the distribution actually increased for individuals aged 60-64 relative to
individuals aged 55-59 (neither of whom became covered by Medicare), although the increase is not
statistically significant. Figure 8b indicates a decrease in out of pocket spending at much of the top end of
the distribution for individuals aged 70-74 relative to individuals aged 65-69 (both of whom became
covered by Medicare). However, the decreases are statistically insignificant and are about half the
magnitude of the estimated decreases for individuals aged 65-74 relative to individuals aged 55-64.
These findings suggest that our main analysis comparing 65-74 year olds to 55-64 year olds is not merely
picking up an underlying change in the spending distribution that differs systematically by age.
Section 4: Cost benefit analysis
We use a stylized expected utility framework to simulate the insurance value of the estimated
reduction in risk exposure associated with Medicare and compare this to the estimated costs of Medicare,
which consist of the moral hazard costs of any induced health care consumption as well as the marginal
cost of public funds for Medicare expenditures.9 Estimation of the insurance value of Medicare requires

9

Our analysis assumes that the elderly were underinsured prior to Medicare and therefore that reductions in risk
exposure are welfare improving. This was the premise behind the Medicare legislation (Ball 1995). The considerable

16

that we make a number of modeling assumptions. While we therefore consider our findings here more
speculative than the results in the previous section, we believe they provide a useful way to gauge the
likely magnitude of the welfare benefits associated with Medicare’s reduction in risk exposure.
4.1 The insurance value of Medicare
Our analysis of the insurance value of Medicare is similar in spirit to McClellan and Skinner (1997),
who analyze the relative insurance value of Medicare for individuals at different parts of the income
distribution. However, while McClellan and Skinner (1997) use the expected utility model and parametric
assumptions about the price and income elasticity of demand for medical care to solve for the optimal
consumption of medical care in the presence and absence of Medicare, we instead use our empirical
estimates of the distribution of medical expenditures before and after Medicare as inputs into the expected
utility framework.
We assume the individual’s utility u (c) is a function of his non-health consumption (c) . We assume
the individual must satisfy a period-by-period budget constraint:

c = y−m
where y is his per-period income (such as from Social Security) and m is his out of pocket medical
expenditures. m is a random variable with probability density function f (m) and support [0, m ] . f (m)
depends both on the distribution of random health shocks, and on the nature of any health insurance held.
The individual’s expected utility is given by:
m

∫ u ( y − m) f (m)dm
0

To calculate the welfare gain associated with increased health insurance coverage, we follow the
general approach used in the existing literature that calculates the welfare gains associated with other
insurance products (e.g. Mitchell et al. 1999, Brown and Finkelstein, 2004 and Feldstein and Gruber,

empirical evidence of adverse selection in private health insurance markets also supports our assumption of underinsurance (Cutler and Zeckhauser 2000). We do not consider the distributional impact of Medicare, which is
analyzed by McClellan and Skinner (1997) and Bhattacharya and Lakdawalla (2002).

17

1995). Specifically, we compute the individual’s risk premium under both the pre- and post-Medicare
spending distributions. The risk premium (π) is the maximum amount that a risk averse individual would
be willing to pay to completely insure against the random variable m . The risk premium π is therefore
defined implicitly by:
m

u ( y − π ) = ∫ u ( y − m) f (m)dm
0

A decrease in risk exposure in the post-Medicare world relative to the pre-Medicare world will appear as
a decline in the risk premium; this decline provides a measure of the insurance value (and hence welfare
gain) of the Medicare coverage.
We assume a constant relative risk aversion utility function. For our central estimate, we follow a
long line of simulation literature of the value of social insurance for the elderly and assume a coefficient
of relative risk aversion of 3 (see e.g. Hubbard, Skinner and Zeldes 1995, McClellan and Skinner 1997,
Mitchell et al. 1999). However, in recognition of the range of plausible parameters, we also report results
for coefficients of risk aversion of 1 and of 5.
Our analysis is based on the sample of 658 individuals aged 65 and over in 1963. We construct
individual income by dividing the household income reported in the data by the number of individuals in
the household. For each individual, we make 50 random draws without replacement from his potential out
of pocket spending distribution. Since pre-Medicare out of pocket medical expenditures are strongly
positively correlated with household income, we divide our individuals into income terciles and make the
50 draws for a given individual from the out of pocket expenditure distribution of his income tercile.10
The first column of Table 6 shows the average risk premium when each individual faces the original
out of pocket expenditure distribution that existed prior to Medicare. For a coefficient of relative risk
10

Even with tercile-specific draws, it is still possible to get a draw that is very high relative to (or higher than)
income, which is unrealistic relative to actual spending patterns. Empirically, the 95th percentile of the distribution of
out of pocket spending as a share of income for individuals in the bottom tercile of the income distribution is 80%,
so we cap out of pocket spending as a fraction of income for each draw at 80%. Using this approach, roughly onethird of individuals have at least one draw capped. As a result, the mean out of pocket Medicare-eligible
expenditures as a percent of income in our simulation is somewhat lower than in the actual distribution (0.06
compared to 0.08), which suggests that we may underestimate the risk reduction associated with Medicare.

18

aversion of 3, the risk premium is $953, indicating that this individual would be willing to pay up to $953
to avoid any future out of pocket medical expenditure risk. This willingness to pay is more than double
the reduction in average out of pocket spending ($412).11
The second column shows the decrease in risk premium associated with moving from the original,
pre-Medicare distribution to the out of pocket spending distribution the individual faces once the quantile
treatment estimates of Medicare’s impact are applied. We make this adjustment based on our quantile
treatment estimates of the reduction in out of pocket medical spending associated with Medicare for
individuals aged 65 and over (see Figure 7c). For a coefficient of relative risk aversion of 3, the results
indicate a welfare gain of $411 from facing the post-Medicare spending distribution instead of the preMedicare spending distribution.
Of course, Medicare coverage reduces not only the variance but also the mean of the out of pocket
spending distribution. For the first generation of Medicare recipients, the decline in mean out of pocket
spending was an almost complete windfall gain, since Medicare hospital expenditures are funded out of
payroll taxes paid by working individuals, and Medicare Part B premiums were subsidized 50 percent.
To separate out the insurance value from the windfall intergenerational transfer, we recalculate the postMedicare risk premium under the assumption that individuals must “pay for” the actuarial expected value
of Medicare. Specifically, we subtract from the individual’s income the average difference in out of
pocket expenditures between his 50 draws for the original pre-Medicare distribution and his 50 draws
from the post-Medicare distribution. Column 3 shows the change in risk premium associated with moving
from the pre-Medicare distribution to the post-Medicare distribution when this insurance is “actuarially
fair”; for a coefficient of relative risk aversion of 3, the results in column 3 indicate a welfare gain of
$236 per person, or just over half the welfare gain without accounting for the windfall (column 2).
These results understate the decline in risk exposure associated with Medicare coverage because they
incorporate the behavioral response to Medicare. Both the income and substitution effect from Medicare

11

The $412 reduction in out of pocket spending is slightly less than the $448 in Medicare-eligible out of pocket
spending in Table 3 because of the capping procedure described above.

19

lead to increased consumption of health care and hence out of pocket spending. This increased out of
pocket risk reflects individual optimization decisions, and therefore should not be counted against the
welfare gain. (Of course, the behavioral response does contribute to the costs of the program, and we
therefore account for these moral hazard costs in the cost-benefit analysis below.)
To abstract from the behavioral response to Medicare in calculating the insurance value, we estimate
the post-Medicare out of pocket spending distribution by mechanically adjusting the pre-Medicare 1963
distribution to account for what Medicare would have covered had Medicare existed in 1963. 12 Figure 9
shows this mechanically adjusted distribution; for comparison, it also shows the pre-Medicare distribution
and the pre-Medicare distribution adjusted using the quantile treatment estimates. As expected, the
mechanical adjustment produces a distribution that lies below that from the quantile treatment adjustment.
Columns 4 and 5 of Table 6 report the welfare benefits using the mechanical adjustment to estimate
the post-Medicare out of pocket spending distribution. Column 4 shows the change in risk premium when
individuals are given Medicare “for free” while column 5 reports the results under the assumption that
individuals must “pay for” the actuarial expected cost of Medicare. In both cases, the decline in risk
premium associated with Medicare is larger than that estimated using the quantile treatment adjustment.
For a coefficient of relative risk aversion of 3, the results in column 5 indicate that the mechanical
introduction of Medicare (at actuarially fair rates) is associated with a welfare gain of $519 per person.
There were about 19 million people aged 65 and over in 1965. This implies that Medicare’s reduction in
risk exposure was associated with $9.9 billion per year in welfare gains.
For several reasons, the estimates in Table 6 may be underestimates of the consumption smoothing
benefits associated with Medicare. The stylized model treats medical expenditures as affecting the budget
constraint only and does not allow for any utility from increased medical expenditures. While some of the
increased spending associated with Medicare may have been socially inefficient, the cost-sharing
provisions ensure that its social marginal benefit was not zero. In addition, to the extent that some of the
12

The details of the Medicare benefits at the time of its introduction are taken from Somers and Somers (1967).
Since the part A co-payment depends on the length of the hospital stay, we draw on the data on the individual’s
length of hospital stay in calculating the part A cost sharing requirements for the individual.

20

elderly’s medical expenditures were paid for by their adult children in the pre-Medicare era, Medicare
may have had additional consumption smoothing benefits for this other group of individuals. Finally, out
of pocket medical expenditures are likely to be positively serially correlated, suggesting that the lifetime
distribution of out of pocket spending for those aged 65 and over may be even more right-skewed than the
annual distribution shown in Figure 5; as a result, Medicare’s reduction in risk exposure may be even
greater when estimated from on a lifetime rather than annual basis.
In one important respect, however, the estimates in Table 6 may overestimate the value of Medicare.
Our analysis assumes that the individual cannot borrow or save across periods but must consume each
period their net-of-medical expenditures income. This may be a reasonable assumption for many elderly
households, since many enter retirement with relatively little financial assets. Indeed, our calculations
from the 1962 Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) suggest that almost one-third of elderly households
had no liquid assets whatsoever, and many of those who do have liquid assets have relatively small
amounts. However, at the high end of the wealth distribution, savings might be an important form of
consumption smoothing and failure to account for them will result in an overstatement of the insurance
value of Medicare for these individuals. Nonetheless, we believe that our per-person welfare estimate is
likely to be a reasonable approximation for much of the wealth distribution.13
4.2 Comparison to estimated costs
Medicare imposes two types of costs. First, there is the cost of raising the revenue to pay for the
public program. In 1970, Medicare spending was (in 2000 dollars) $34 billion. The consensus estimate of
0.3 for the marginal cost of public funds in the US (Poterba, 1996) implies that the annual revenue raising
costs associated with Medicare were $10.2 billion. Second, there are the efficiency costs from the
increased health spending due to the moral hazard associated with health insurance. By treating all of the
increase as a cost, we provide an upper bound on the efficiency costs of Medicare, since part of the moral
13

We re-calculated welfare gains separately for each income tercile to confirm that our estimate of the average perperson welfare gain is not driven by disproportionate gains at the top of the distribution where we are likely to be
over-estimating the gain. Indeed, per-person welfare gains were slightly higher for individuals in the lower portions
of the distribution; for example, we estimated a welfare gain of $482 for the top income tercile for “actuarially fair”
Medicare with risk aversion of 3, compared to a welfare gain of $523 for the bottom tercile.

21

hazard effect comes from the income effect of health insurance, which does not have efficiency costs. The
moral hazard estimates in section 3.1 – which suggest that Medicare is associated with a 28 percent
increase in the elderly’s health spending –imply that Medicare is associated with a moral hazard cost of
$2.8 billion.14 The four-fold larger moral hazard estimates in Finkelstein (2005) imply that Medicare is
associated with a moral hazard cost of $11.2 billion.15
Combining the moral hazard and public funds costs suggests that the annual cost of Medicare was
$13 to $21.4 billion. Using a risk aversion coefficient of 3, we estimated above that the consumption
smoothing benefits from Medicare were worth roughly $9.9 billion annually. Thus, the direct insurance
benefits cover between forty-five and seventy-five percent of the costs of the program. 16
Section 5: Conclusion
This paper has examined the impact of the introduction of Medicare, the single largest change in
health insurance coverage in U.S. history. Using several different empirical approaches, we find no
evidence that the introduction of nearly universal health insurance for the elderly had an impact on overall
elderly mortality in its first 10 years. These results are particularly surprising in light of the fact that the
introduction of Medicare was followed by a period of prolonged and substantial declines in elderly
mortality. The evidence suggests that insurance coverage provided by Medicare did not contribute to this
mortality decline because prior to Medicare lack of legal access, rather than lack of insurance, was the
main barrier to receiving hospital care when individuals had life-threatening, treatable conditions.
We also find that, although Medicare did not produce measurable mortality benefits, it did provide
considerable risk reduction benefits. We estimate that the introduction of Medicare was responsible for a
striking and substantial decline in the right-tail of the out of pocket medical expenditure distribution for
the elderly. For the top quartile of out of pocket medical spending, we estimate that the introduction of
14

There were about 19 million people aged 65 and over in 1965 and their average per capita Medicare-eligible
health spending in 1963 was $518 (see Table 3).
15
One reason for the larger estimates is that estimates – such as those in this paper – based on the age variation in
Medicare coverage will be biased downward if Medicare affects health spending among the “control group” of
individuals aged 55 to 64. See Finkelstein (2005) for a more detailed discussion of this issue.
16
Using data from the Health and Retirement Survey in the 1990s, Khwaja (2005) also estimates substantial riskreducing benefits from Medicare relative to the costs of the program.

22

Medicare is associated with a forty percent decline in out of pocket spending relative to pre-Medicare
levels. A stylized expected utility framework suggests that the welfare gains associated with this
reduction in risk bearing are substantial, and may be sufficient to cover between half and three quarters of
the costs associated with the Medicare program.
Our empirical findings underscore the importance of considering the direct consumption smoothing
benefits of health insurance, in addition to any indirect benefits from the effect of insurance on health.
Relatedly, they suggest that the extensive empirical literature devoted to estimating the health benefits of
health insurance – which has tended to find no or only modest benefits for adults – may be substantially
underestimating the total benefits from health insurance.
The analysis of this paper is done in a static environment in which medical technology is taken as
given. However, Finkelstein (2005) presents evidence that Medicare may have played an important role in
the adoption of new medical technologies. The increase in life expectancy from these new technologies is
extremely large (Cutler, 2003). This raises the interesting and important possibility that, although we
found no compelling evidence of an impact of Medicare on mortality in its first 10-years, the longer-run
impact of Medicare on mortality via induced technological change may be substantially larger. A critical
issue, however, is how the marginal benefits of any new technology use induced by Medicare compare to
the average benefits discussed by Cutler (2003). We consider this an important area for further research.

23

References
Almond, Douglas, Kenneth, Chay, and Michael Greenstone (2003). “Civil Rights, the War on
Poverty, and the Black-White Convergence in Infant Mortality in Mississippi,”
www.nber.org/~almond/mississippi.pdf.
Anderson, O.W., P. Collette, and J.J. Feldman, 1963. Changes in Family Medical Care Expenditures and
Voluntary Health Insurance: A Five-Year Resurvey. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA
Andersen, R. and O.W. Anderson, 1967. A Decade of Health Services: Social Survey Trends in Use and
Expenditure. University of Chicago Press
Athey, Susan and Guido Imbens. 2003. “Identification and Inference in Non-Linear Difference-inDifferences Models.” http://www.stanford.edu/~athey/CIC.pdf
Ball, Robert (1995). “What Medicare’s Architects Had in Mind,” Health Affairs 14(4): pp. 62-72.
Baker, Laurence. 1997. “HMOs and Fee for Service Health Care Expenditures: Evidence from
Medicare.” Journal of Health Economics 16(4): pp. 453-481.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. “How Much Should We Trust
Difference-in-Differences Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(1): 249-275.
Bhattacharya, Jay and Darius Lakdawalla (2002). “Does Medicare Benefit the Poor? New
Answers to an Old Question,” NBER working paper #9280.
Bitler, Marianne, Jonah Gelbach and Hilary Hoynes. 2003. “What Mean Impacts Miss: Distributional
Effects of Welfare Reform Experiments.” Unpublished mimeo.
Brown, Jeffrey and Amy Finkelstein. 2004. “The Interaction of Public and Private Insurance: Medicaid
and the Long-Term Care Insurance Market.” Unpublished mimeo.
Card, David, Carlos Dobkin, and Nicole Maestas (2004). “The Impact of Nearly Universal Insurance
Coverage on Health Care Utilization and Health: Evidence from Medicare,” NBER working paper
#10365.
Cook, Benjamin, Mary Beth Landrum, and Ellen Meara. 2002. “The impact of Medicare on elderly health
and utilization.” Unpublished working paper.
Currie, Janet and Jonathan Gruber (1996). “Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent Expansions
of Medicaid Eligibility for Pregnant Women,” Journal of Political Economy 104: p. 1263-1296.
Cutler, David. 2002. “Public Policy for Health Care” in Auerbach and Feldstein (eds.) Handbook of
Public Economics, Volume 4. Elsevier.
Cutler, David. 2003. Your Money or Your Life: Strong Medicine for America’s Health Care System.
New York: Oxford University Press.

24

Cutler, David and Ellen Meara. 2003. “Changes in the Age distribution of Mortality Over the 20th
Century.” David Wise, ed., Perspectives on the Economics of Aging, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press
Cutler, David and Srikanth Kadiyala. 2003. “The Return to Biomedical Research: Treatment and
Behavioral Effects” in Robert Topel and Kevin Murphy (eds). Measuring the Gains from Medical
Research. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Cutler, David and Richard Zeckhauser. 2000. The Anatomy of Health Insurance, in The Handbook of
Health Economics, Culyer AJ and Newhouse JP (eds)
Decker, Sandra and Carol Rapaport. 2002. “Medicare and disparities in women’s health.” NBER
Working Paper 8761.
Dow, William (2002). “The Introduction of Medicare: Effects on Elderly Health,” unpublished
mimeo.
Feldstein, Martin and Jonathan Gruber. 1995. “A Major Risk Approach to Health Insurance Reform” in
Tax Policy and the Economy, James Poterba (ed.) Volume 9.
Finkelstein, Amy (2005). “The Aggregate Effects of Health Insurance: Evidence from the Introduction of
Medicare.” NBER Working Paper 11619.
Glied, Sherry and Joshua Graff Zivin (2002). “How Do Doctors Behave When Some (But Not
All) of Their Patients are in Managed Care?,” Journal of Health Economics 21(2), pp. 337-353.
Gruber, Jonathan. 1997. “The Consumption Smoothing Benefits of Unemployment Insurance.” The
American Economic Review, Vol 87., No 1: 192-205.
Gruber, Jonathan. Forthcoming. “Medicaid” in Moffit, Robert (ed.) Means Tested Transfer Programs in
the United States.
Hellerstein, Judith (1998). “The Importance of the Physician in the Generic versus Trade-name
Prescription Decision,” RAND Journal of Economics vol(issue): pp
Holahan, John. 1975. “Financing health care for the poor: the Medicaid experience.” Lexington Books,
Lexington MA.
Hubbard, Glenn, Jonathan Skinner, and Stephen Zeldes. 1995. “Precautionary Savings and Social
Insurance.” Journal of Political Economy vol 103, iss 2, pp. 360-99.
Khwaja, Ahmed. 2005. “The Dynamic Trade-off Between Medical Expenditure Insurance, Moral Hazard
and Morality Risk: A Life Cycle Analysis of the Effects of Medicare on Individual Incentives and
Outcomes.” Unpublished working paper.
Levy, Helen and David Meltzer. 2004. “What Do We Really Know About Whether Health Insurance
Affects Health?" In Catherine McLaughlin (ed) Health Policy on the Uninsured: Setting the Agenda.
Urban Institute Press.

25

Lichtenberg, Frank. 2002. “The Effects of Medicare on Health Care Utilization and Outcomes” in
Frontiers in Health Policy Research, Volume 5. Alan Garber, Ed.
McWilliams, Michael, Alan Zaslavsky, Ellen Meara, and John Ayanian. “Impact of Medicare Coverage
on Basic Clinical Services for Previously Uninsured Adults.” Journal of the American Medical
Association 290 (August 13, 2003): 757-764.
McClellan, Mark and Jonathan Skinner (1997). “The Incidence of Medicare,” NBER working paper
#6013.
Mitchell, Olivia S., James M. Poterba, Mark Warshawsky, and Jeffrey R. Brown. 1999. New Evidence on
the money’s worth of individual annuities. American Economic Review, 89(December), pp.1299-1318.
National Center for Health Statistics (1963). Vital Statistics of the United States, 1960: Volume
II, Part A, Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare.
National Center for Health Statistics. 1964. “Health Insurance Coverage: United States, July 1962-June
1963.” August, Number 11. Washington DC: US Department of Health, Education and Welfare.
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/series/sr_10/sr10_011acc.pdf
Newhouse, Joseph. 1993. Free for All? Lessons from the RAND Health Insurance Experiment. Harvard
University Press: Cambridge MA.
Newhouse, Joseph. 2002. Pricing the Priceless: A Health Care Conundrum. MIT Press, Cambridge MA.
Poterba, James. 1996. “Government Intervention in the Markets for Education and Health Care: How and
Why?” in Individual and Social Responsibility Victor Fuchs (ed). University of Chicago Press.
Smith, David Barton. 1999. Health Care Divided: Race and Healing a Nation. University of Michigan
Press: Ann Arbor.
Somers, Herman and Anne Somers. 1961. Doctors, Patients and Health Insurance: The Organization and
Financing of Medicare Care.” The Brookings Institution. Washington DC.
Stevens, Robert and Stevens Rosemary. 1974. Welfare Medicine in America: A Case Study of Medicaid.
The Free Press: New York.
United States Senate Special Committee on Aging. 1963. "Medical Assistance for the Aged: The KerrMills Program 1960-1963," U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., October 1963.
Vital Statistics, various years.

26

.045

.055

.065

.075

Figure 1: Age-adjusted Elderly Mortality Rate

1950

1955

1960

1965

1970

1975
year

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

Note: Graph shows the all-cause mortality rate (deaths per person) for individuals aged 65+. Figure is reproduced
from Cutler and Meara, 2003, Figure 9.4. The mortality rate in each year is the weighted sum of mortality rates for
65-74, 74-85, and 85+ age groups in that year, with weights reflecting the age distribution of the 65+ population in
1990. We are grateful to Ellen Meara for providing us with the data underlying their figure. Vertical line indicates
1966, the year Medicare is first in effect.

.032

.015

.034

Elderly, 65-74
.036
.038

.016
.017
.018
Non-elderly, 55-64

.04

.019

Figure 2: Mortality Rate Trends by Age Group

1950

1955

1960

Elderly, 65-74

year

1965

1970

1975

Non-elderly, 55-64

Source: Authors’ calculation of deaths per person based on mortality data from the NCHS Multiple Causes of Death
micro-data (1959-1975) and Vital Statistics (various years) for 1952-1958. Population estimates are constructed
based on census data as described in text. Vertical line indicates 1966, the year Medicare is first in effect.

27

-.1

-.05

0

.05

Figure 3. Estimates of equation (1), the age identification strategy, for ages 55-74.

1950

1955

1960

Year

1965

1970

1975

Note: Graphs show the coefficients on the interaction of “young elderly” with the year fixed effects (i.e. the

λt ' s )

from estimating equation ( ). Dependent variable is log deaths for age group a in state s and year t. Other covariates
are log population, indicator variable for young-elderly age group (vs. near-elderly), state fixed effects, year fixed
effects, and indicator variables for year since Medicaid implementation in the state. Standard errors are adjusted for
an arbitrary variance-covariance matrix within each state. Vertical line indicates 1966, the year Medicare is first in
effect.

28

Figure 4: Estimates of equation (4), the geographic variation strategy

-.4

-.2

0

.2

Panel A: Ages 65+

1950

1955

1960

Year

1965

1970

1975

1965

1970

1975

1965

1970

1975

-.4

-.2

0

.2

.4

Panel B: Ages 65-74

1950

1955

1960

Year

-.4

-.2

0

.2

Panel C: Ages 75+

1950

1955

1960

Year

Note: Graphs show the coefficients on the interaction of “percent without insurance” with the year fixed effects (i.e.
the λt ' s ) from estimating equation (4). Dependent variable is log deaths in state s and year t. Other covariates are
log population, state fixed effects, year fixed effects, and indicator variables for year since Medicaid implementation
in the state. Standard errors are adjusted for an arbitrary variance-covariance matrix within each state. Vertical line
indicates 1966, the year Medicare is first in effect.

29

Figure 5: Medicare eligible out of pocket spending

0

year 2000 dollars
2000
4000

6000

Individuals aged 65+ in 1963

0

20

40

60

80

100

percentile
Overall
Part B

Part A

Figure 6: Centiles of Medicare−eligible out of pocket spending

0

year 2000 dollars
2000
4000
6000

8000

by age group and year

0

20

40

60

80

percentile
1963 55−64
1963 65−74

1970 55−64
1970 65−74

30

100

Figure 7: Centile Treatment Estimates for Medicare-eligible out of pocket spending

Figure 7a

−4300

year 2000 dollars

0

1100

Ages 55−74 No Covariates

0

20

40

60

80

100

percentile
centile treatment estimate
95% CI upper bound

95% CI lower bound

Note: Based on estimating equation (5) for Medicare-eligible out of pocket spending. Dashed lines indicate 95%
confidence intervals. The 95% confidence interval for the 99th percentile (-7036, 1737) is not shown on the graph.

Figure 7b

−4300

year 2000 dollars

0

1100

Ages 55−74 Covariate−Adjusted

0

20

40

60

80

100

percentile
centile treatment estimate
95% CI upper bound

95% CI lower bound

Note: Based on estimating equation (5) for Medicare-eligible out of pocket spending. The 95% confidence interval
for the 99th percentile (-7036, 1737) is not shown on the graph

31

Figure 7c

−4300

year 2000 dollars

0

1100

Ages 55−90 No Covariates

0

20

40

60

80

100

percentile
centile treatment estimate
95% CI upper bound

95% CI lower bound

Note: Based on estimating equation (5) for Medicare-eligible out of pocket spending. The 95% confidence interval
for the 99th percentile (-9814, 1392) is not shown on the graph

Figure 7d

−4300

year 2000 dollars

0

1100

Ages 55−90 Covariate−Adjusted

0

20

40

60

80

100

percentile
centile treatment estimate
95% CI upper bound

95% CI lower bound

Note: Based on estimating equation (5) for Medicare-eligible out of pocket spending. The 95% confidence interval
for the 99th percentile (-7866, 1206) is not shown on the graph

32

Figure 8: Falsification Exercises.
Centile Treatment Estimates for Medicare Eligible Out of Pocket Spending

Figure 8a Falsification Exercise

−2000

year 2000 dollars
0
2000 4000

6000

Ages 55−64 Covariate−Adjusted

0

20

40

60

80

100

percentile
centile treatment estimate
95% CI upper bound

95% CI lower bound

Note: Based on estimating equation (5) for Medicare-eligible out of pocket spending. Dashed lines indicate 95%
confidence intervals. The 95% confidence interval for the 99th percentile (-7091, 5003) is not shown on the graph.

Figure 8b Falsification Exercise

−4000

year 2000 dollars
−2000
0
2000

4000

Ages 65−74 Covariate−Adjusted

0

20

40

60

80

100

percentile
centile treatment estimate
95% CI upper bound

95% CI lower bound

Note: Based on estimating equation (5) for Medicare-eligible out of pocket spending. The 95% confidence interval
for the 99th percentile (-14088, 26512) is not shown on the graph.

33

0

2000

4000

6000

8000

Figure 9: Distribution of Medicare-eligible out of pocket medical expenditures

0

20

40
60
(max) percentile
actual oop
qte adj oop

80

100

hypothetical oop

Note: Figure depicts distributions in year 2000 dollars. “Actual oop” shows the actual distribution of out of pocket
spending for individuals aged 65 and over in 1963. “qte adj oop” shows the distribution if the actual distribution is
adjusted using the quantile treatment estimates in Figure 7c. “Hypothetical oop” shows the distribution if the actual
distribution is adjusted mechanically to account for what Medicare would have covered had Medicare existed in
1963.

34

Table 1: Percent of Elderly Without Hospital Insurance, 1963 National Health Survey
Sub-Region
Any Insurance
Blue Cross
New England (CT, ME, MA, NH, RI, VT)
Middle Atlantic (NJ, NY, PA)
East North Central, Eastern Part (MI, OH)
East North Central, Western Part (IL, IN, WI)
West North Central (IA, KS, MN, MO, NE, ND, SD)
South Atlantic, Upper Part (DE, DC, MD, VA, WV)
South Atlantic, Lower Part (FL, GA, NC, SC)
East South Central (AL, KY, MS, TN)
West South Central (AR, LA, OK, TX)
Mountain (AZ, CO, ID, MT, NV, NM, UT, WY)
Pacific (OR, WA, CA, AK, HI)

0.37
0.41
0.32
0.42
0.47
0.45
0.50
0.57
0.55
0.50
0.52

0.49
0.60
0.55
0.75
0.81
0.75
0.81
0.88
0.85
0.78
0.87

U.S. National

0.46

0.73

Note: Data on individual’s health insurance are from the 1963 National Health Survey, and national, random sample
of households conducted from July 1962 through June 1963. Through a special request to the government, we
obtained a version of the survey that identifies which of 11 sub-regions the individual is in. We limited the sample to
the 12,757 individuals aged 65 and over. Minimum sample size for a sub-region is 377.

Table 2: Estimated Effect of Having at Least 1 Medicare-Certified Hospital in the County
All Causes
Pneumonia
Cardiovascular disease
Log-Linear Linear Log-Linear
Linear
Log-Linear
Linear
Panel A: Non-White
Certified
0.00024
-0.001
-0.345***
-0.001** 0.060
0.001
(0.027)
(0.002) (0.145)
(0.000)
(0.044)
(0.002)
ln(pop’n)
Mean of
dependent
variable
N

0.446**
(0.218)

Mean of
dependent
variable
N

.190
(0.340)

4.58

0.066

0.937

0.002

4.046

0.039

425

425

304

425

425

425

0.0002
(0.002)

0.025
(0.123)

-0.00013 0.026
(0.00027) (0.042)

Panel B: White
Certified
-0.009
(0.034)
ln(pop’n)

0.341
(1.236)

0.747***
(0.198)

1.464***
(0.543)

0.001
(0.001)

0.642***
(0.191)

4.16

0.061

0.734

0.002

3.709

0.039

425

425

311

425

425

425

Note: Results are from estimating equation (3) on the 25 counties in the Mississippi Delta for non-white and white
elderly. We follow Almond et al. (2003) in their definition of the Mississippi Delta counties. Standard errors in
parentheses; we allow for an arbitrary covariance matrix within each county over time. Data are from 1959 – 1975
only, since data before 1959 are not available at the county level by race. *, **, *** denotes significance at,
respectively, the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent level.

35

Table 3: Summary statistics: 1963 Spending, Ages 65+
Private
Total
Total
Insurance
Spending
(Public +
Spending
Private)
Insurance
Spending
Total
844
75
75

Out-ofpocket
Spending

Total
Out-ofSpending as
pocket
% of Income Spending as
% of Income

770

10.4%

10.1%

Medicare eligible
(Parts A + B)
Hospital (Part A)
Physician (Part B)

518

71

71

448

5.2

4.9

263
255

16
55

16
55

247
201

2.1
3.1

2.2
2.7

Home visits

31

1

1

31

0.6

0.6

Drugs

294

3

3

291

4.6

4.6

Table reports mean spending in year 2000 dollars for individuals aged 65 and over in 1963. N=658. Individual
income is calculated as household income divided by number of individuals in the household. We measures total
insurance spending as private insurance spending in 1963, and as private insurance spending plus Medicare and
Medicaid spending in 1970. The 1963 survey does not collect information on public insurance spending; however,
we know that public assistance for medical spending prior to 1965 was virtually non-existent (Stevens and Stevens,
1974, United States Senate 1963).

Table 4: Changes in average Medicare-eligible expenditures
Out-of-pocket
Private Insurance Total (public +
Spending
Spending
private)
Insurance
Spending
All Spending
-117.3
-507.1***
259.0*
(106.5)
(97.0)
(150.2)
Hospital (Part A)
-44.7
-465.9***
127.5
(89.8)
(87.6)
(133.84)
Physician (Part B)
-72.58**
-41.2*
131.5***
(34.1)
(23.3)
(32.3)

Total Spending

142.3
(204.7)
85.3
(171.1)
57.0
(53.9)

Note: Table reports the coefficient on elderly*year1970 from estimating equation (4) by OLS on a sample of 55 to
74 year olds. Robust standard errors in parentheses. ***, **, * denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent and 10
percent levels respectively. All estimates are in year 2000 dollars. N = 2,834

36

Table 5: Effect of Medicare on Distribution of Out of Pocket Spending
Out of
pocket
Centile spending
(Ages 6574 in 1963)
(2)
(1)
75
304
76
326
77
395
78
422
79
456
80
512
81
563
82
563
83
580
84
675
85
703
86
816
87
844
88
957
89
1002
90
1097
91
1463
92
1304
93
1711
94
2127
95
2324
96
2954
97
3641
98
4637
99
5599

Centile Treatment Estimates
Individuals 55-74
Individuals 55-90
Overall
Overall (no
Overall
Overall (no
(covariate
covariates)
(covariate
covariates)
adjusted)
adjusted)
(6)
(5)
(4)
(3)
-105
-46
-78*
-31
-124*
-74
-94*
-56
-185**
-97
-104*
-64
-185**
-91
-97*
-84
-213**
-99
-154**
-136
-251**
-155
-171**
-129*
-278**
-183*
-201**
-183*
-314**
-191**
-305**
-218**
-279**
-197**
-258**
-178**
-347**
-278**
-280**
-206**
-368**
-341**
-344**
-252**
-452**
-410**
-382**
-310**
-499**
-400*
-454**
-380*
-459**
-347**
-414**
-336**
-447**
-478**
-393**
-363**
-608**
-531**
-587**
-464**
-922**
-771*
-812**
-695**
-937**
-825**
-935**
-785**
-1064**
-951**
-1131**
-1031**
-1291**
-1289*
-1363**
-1349**
-1000*
-1094
-1415**
-1546**
-1274*
-1208
-1384**
-1312**
-1166
-1144
-1246
-1177
-1090
-1309
-932
-1069
-2444
-2527
-2940
-3236

Note: Centile treatment estimates are from equation (5). ** denotes significance at the 5 percent level; * denotes
significance at the 10 percent level. Results below the top quartile tend to be 0 or very close to 0 and statistically
insignificant.

37

Table 6: Per-person Welfare Effect of Medicare’s Change in Medicare-Eligible Out of Pocket
Medical Expenditure Risk
Decrease in Risk Premium Associated with Changing from Original PreMedicare Distribution to
Distribution adjusted using
quantile treatment estimates

Distribution adjusted
“mechanically”

Risk
Aversion
1

Risk Premium,
Original PreMedicare
Spending
(1)
503

Medicare
(no charge)
(2)
192

Medicare
(actuarially fair)
(3)
44

Medicare (no
charge)
(4)
350

Medicare
(actuarially fair)
(5)
86

3

953

411

236

785

519

5

1714

751

558

1524

1256

Note: All estimates are in year 2000 dollars. See text for further details.

38

