NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

“AGGREGATION BIAS” DOES
EXPLAIN THE PPP PUZZLE
Jean Imbs
Haroon Mumtaz
Morten O. Ravn
Hélène Rey
Working Paper 11607
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11607
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2005

This article is a sequel to our paper "PPP Strikes Back: Aggregation and the Real Exchange Rate" (NBER
WP December 2002, final version February 2005) and summarizes the material in Imbs, Mumtaz, Ravn and
Rey (2003). Without implicating them, we thank Manuel Arellano, Lutz Kilian, Hashem Pesaran and Ron
Smith for very helpful discussions. Some of the work on aggregation bias was realized when Imbs and Rey
visited the IMF Research Department whose wonderful hospitality is gratefully acknowledged. This paper
does not represent the views of the Bank of England or of Monetary Policy Committee members, and was
partly written while Mumtaz was at London Business School. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Jean Imbs, Haroon Mumtaz, Morten O. Ravn and Hélène Rey. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

“Aggregation Bias” DOES Explain the PPP Puzzle
Jean Imbs, Haroon Mumtaz, Morten O. Ravn and Hélène Rey
NBER Working Paper No. 11607
September 2005
JEL No. C23, F31, F15
ABSTRACT
This article summarizes our views on the role of an "aggregation bias" in explaining the PPP Puzzle,
in response to the several papers recently written in reaction to our initial contribution. We discuss
in particular the criticisms of Imbs, Mumtaz, Ravn and Rey (2002) presented in Chen and Engel
(2005). We show that their contentions are based on: (i) analytical counter-examples which are not
empirically relevant; (ii) simulation results minimizing the extent of "aggregation bias"; (iii)
unfounded claims on the impact of measurement errors on our results; and (iv) problematic
implementation of small-sample bias corrections. We conclude, as in our original paper, that
"aggregation bias" goes a long way towards explaining the PPP puzzle.
Jean Imbs
HEC Lausanne
Department of Economics
Lausanne 1015
SWITZERLAND
jimbs@unil.ch
Haroon Mumtaz
Bank of England
Threadneedle Street
London EC2R 8AH
UNITED KINGDOM
haroon.mumtaz@bankofengland.co.uk
Morten Ravn
Department of Economics
European University Institute
villa San Paolo
via della Piazzuola 43
Firenze 50133
ITALY
mravn@iue.it

Hélène Rey
Department of Economics
Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Fisher Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
hrey@princeton.edu

1

Introduction

In "PPP Strikes Back: Aggregation and the Real Exchange Rate", we show
that a dynamic aggregation bias is an important component of the PPP puzzle.
Aggregate real exchange rates are persistent because their components have heterogeneous dynamics, for which established time series and panel methods fail
to control1 . When we use estimators allowing properly for heterogeneity in the
data that we study, the persistence of the real exchange rate falls dramatically.
Its half-life, for instance, falls to around one year. We show that the corrected
estimates are consistent with existing dynamic general stochastic equilibrium
models for plausible degrees of nominal rigidity. These models do not incorporate any heterogeneous dynamics and should hence be compared with our
corrected estimates, which are purged from heterogeneity. Thus, arguably, we
solve the PPP puzzle.2
Chen and Engel (2005) [henceforth CE] criticize our paper on four grounds:
(i) they question the applicability of the "aggregation bias" to the PPP puzzle;
(ii) they claim the size of the bias is “shown to be much smaller than the
simulations in Imbs, Mumtaz, Ravn and Rey (2002) suggest”; (iii) they contend
that measurement error contaminates our results and (iv) that small sample bias
is the main reason behind them. In addition, they find that country-by-country
estimates contradict our results. Here we respond to each of these and cover
in detail what is often left as footnotes in our published paper, Imbs, Mumtaz,
Ravn and Rey (2005) [henceforth IMRR (2005)].3
The next four sections all point towards the same direction: our results survive each of the criticisms raised by CE. In section 2, we discuss the general
analytical proof presented in IMRR (2005) and explain why heterogeneous dynamics translate into an "aggregation bias" in our price data, thus answering
CE’s concern regarding the applicability of the bias to the PPP puzzle. The
proof allows for sectoral correlations and varying expenditure weights. We show
in particular that the counter-examples presented in CE are not empirically relevant. Even though it is theoretically possible that the bias be non-positive, it
is certainly not the case in our data, nor in theirs. Section 3 makes clear the
reason why the simulations in CE do not yield a large aggregation bias is their
choice of parameters. The extent of heterogeneity they use in their simulations
is smaller than in the data, and they choose a set of initial conditions that acts
to minimize the bias.
1 For

a detailed exposition of the concept of dynamic aggregation bias see Pesaran and
Smith (1995).
2 We point out in the conclusion of IMRR (2005) that the question of whether dynamic general equilibrium models featuring non-trivial sectoral heterogeneity are capable of mimicking
aggregate data is an exciting area for future research. Should such models prove unsuccessful
at generating persistent aggregate real exchange rates, there would be a "new" PPP puzzle.
3 Reidel and Szilagyi (2005) focus mainly on the interaction between small sample and
aggregation biases. We also address their claims in this article. Most of them are largely
similar to CE’s.

2

In section 4, we deal with claims in CE that we use a dataset plagued with
measurement errors, supposedly at the source of our results. It is doubtful
right from the outset that short-lived measurement error could explain our conclusions. CE’s argument is that measurement error acts to lower persistence
estimates based on sectoral data, while estimates based on aggregate data are
immune to the problem as it tends to be averaged away. But for this to be convincing, one would need to observe persistence estimates at the disaggregated
level systematically lower than in the aggregate. We do not: there are more than
a few sector-level persistence estimates in excess of the aggregate. Nevertheless,
we perform extensive robustness checks to show our results are not sensitive
to this argument. First, we use exactly the same dataset that Charles Engel
advocates on his website. When we apply the appropriate estimator to his data,
we find a half-life of 13 months (with a confidence interval ranging from 9 to 24
months), hardly diﬀerent from our results of 14 months in IMRR (2002). CE
find a diﬀerent result simply because they use an estimator which is rejected by
their data: they implemented on their sample the same estimator we used in
our original dataset. Their data, however, call for another estimator. Second,
we improved on the IMRR (2002) dataset by systematically checking Eurostat
time series against national sources. We believe that the final dataset used in
IMRR (2005) is of better quality than Engel’s. It yields a half-life around 11
months. Finally we perform formal tests for errors-in-variables and remove any
suspicious series. Again, our results stand.4
In section 5, we discuss the importance of the claim that our results are not
robust when our panel estimates are decomposed country-by-country. Criticizing our results on the ground that they do not hold within countries is akin to
criticizing results based on panel unit-root tests on the ground that unit roots
cannot be rejected on a country-by-country basis. The section next details the
small-sample bias corrections we implement, and shows that they still yield halflife estimates well below the “consensus view”. CE find otherwise because they
implement inappropriate estimators which, together with their bias correction
technique, induce a positive bias in their corrected half-life estimates. Section 6
concludes.

2
2.1

Applicability of “Aggregation Bias” to the PPP
puzzle
Some Theory

4 The first version of our paper, IMRR (2002) already had a full section dedicated to the
treatment of measurement errors. Our cleansed data has been available on the internet since
September 2003.

3

CE claim the “aggregation bias” is not really applicable to the PPP puzzle since
the bias is not necessarily positive. They argue cross-sectional correlation of the
errors may give rise to a negative bias. Further, the sign and magnitude of the
bias may depend on expenditure weights. To bolster their claim, they present
counter-examples for which the bias is either zero or negative.
We focus here on the case where the panel consists of the relative prices of
goods for a single country pair. IMRR (2005) generalizes to panels of exchange
rates. Consider an economy with N sectors, indexed by i. For simplicity,
suppose that (the log of) relative prices in each sector follows an autoregressive
process of order one, defined by
qit = ci + ρi qit−1 + εit , i = 1, .., N
with ci = c + ηci and ρi = ρ + ηρi . We assume that ηci and ηρi have zero
mean and constant covariance, and that the set of random coeﬃcients ρi has
support within the interval ]−1, 1[.5 We also suppose that εit is independently
distributed with mean 0 and variance σ2i with E(ε2it ) = σ 2i .6 We allow for nonzero cross-sectoral covariances of εit , with E (εit εjt ) = σ ij for i 6= j. These
correlations could arise, for example, from common shocks across goods or from
omitted (unobservable) global influences. Without loss of generality, we order
the N sectors so that 0 < ρ1 ≤ ρ2 ≤ ... ≤ ρN < 1.
The bilateral real exchange rate qt can be approximated by a linear aggregation of the diﬀerent sectors with weights ω j associated with the j th good.7
qt =

N
X

ω j qjt ,

j=1

N
X

ωj = 1

j=1

PPP studies estimate the persistence of the real exchange assuming that its
dynamics are best described by an AR(p) process. Many use an AR(1) as their
standard specification. So will we to simplify the derivations. An aggregate
estimation ignoring the heterogeneity in the dynamics of the subcomponents
would write
qt = c + ρqt−1 + εt
with
c=

N
X
j=1

ω j cj , εt =

N
X

ω j εjt +

j=1

N
X

ω j ηρj qjt−1

j=1

It is immediately apparent that since lagged dependent variables are present
in the error term, aggregation across sectors also leads to an inconsistent estimate of the mean persistence. In IMRR (2005), building on Pesaran and Smith
5 We

consider drawing from a discrete set of H values in the interval ]−1; 1[.
IMRR(2005) for other technical assumptions.
7 See IMRR (2005).
6 See

4

(1995), we show under what conditions this inconsistency gives rise to a positive "aggregation bias", that is increasing in the degree of heterogeneity. In
particular, we show that the bias ∆ writes
∆=

N
X
i=1

with δ i =

%

&

2
ω2
ωi ωj σ
S
i σi
ij
+ N
i6=j 1−ρi ρj
1−ρ2
i
 2
SN ωi ωj σij
SN
ω
i
2
i=1 1−ρ2 σ i +
i6=j 1−ρi ρj
i

.

(ρi − ρ) δ i

(1)

Hence the bias depends on cross sectoral

correlations, persistence of the various sectors and expenditure weights. We
prove that the aggregation bias is positive (∆ > 0) whenever the coeﬃcients δ i
are positively correlated with the persistence parameters ρi . This turns out to
be unambiguously the case in our data, as well as in Engel’s. Furthermore, in
IMRR (2005), we show that the bias is not only positive but also quantitatively
important.
Could the bias be negative or negligible in theory? It certainly could, as is
obvious from the inspection of the above expression. And it is easy to come
up with simple analytical examples in which the bias is either zero or negative.
On page 53, CE develop an example where two price series are perfectly negatively correlated (and thus exactly cancel out). In that case, if N = 3, the
aggregate persistence is that of the third, uncorrelated series. But none of these
rather extreme assumptions hold in price data. Next CE choose to linearize the
expression of the bias around a perfectly homogeneous case to argue the bias
is small or inexistent whenever ω i = ω and σ ij = c, or σ i = σ and σ ij = c.
We note the Taylor expansion is computed around the homogeneous case. This
is important, as we showed in IMRR (2002) that the magnitude of the bias
increases with heterogeneity, and indeed is zero under homogeneity. Since CE
focus on almost homogeneous processes, and use an approximation imposing
linear eﬀects of parameter heterogeneity, it is to be expected the heterogeneity
bias will be small. Irrespective of the expansion point chosen to perform the
approximation, however, what matters is whether the restrictions imposed in
all these experiments are plausible empirically or not.
CE made some other related points:
1) On page 52, CE claim “we can unambiguously state there is aggregation
bias only when αi (the weights in the price index) are equal for all i, σ 2i (the innovation variance for xit as defined in equation(3)) is the same for all i; and, the
cross-correlations of all series are equal”. Inspecting expression (1) shows immediately that this is not correct. There are many diﬀerent cases, with diﬀerent
weights, diﬀerent variances and covariances, which give a positive bias ∆. Even
the condition that we show in IMRR (2005) to be suﬃcient for the positivity of
the bias (i.e.. 0 ≤ δ i ≤ δ i+1 for all i) can be fulfilled under many possible data
configurations, again with diﬀerent weights, variance and covariances. And, in

5

our data as well as in Engel’s, the bias is unambiguously positive, even though
weights and innovation variances are not the same.
2) CE mention evidence in Rogers and Jenkins (1995) that unit roots can
be rejected only for a few perishable items, which tend to have a low weight in
the CPI. They infer that the aggregation bias should be small. Things actually
go the exact opposite way. In reality, inspection of the expression for ∆ shows
that for the bias to be negative, one would need highly persistent relative prices
to have (ceteris paribus) low CPI weights ω i .8 The fact that low persistence
items tend to have low CPI weights would if anything reinforce the positivity
of ∆, since it suggests ω i (and therefore δ i , ceteris paribus) tend to be low for
low ρi . Of course, the only sure answer to this question is to compute δ i and
compare it with estimates of ρi . In our data, the verdict is unambiguous, and
the bias is positive.9
3) CE criticize us on the ground that it is “well-known” that summing AR
processes yields an ARMA process. Well-known or not, this only happens under
heterogeneity. In the absence of any heterogeneity, the roots cancel out and the
aggregate real exchange rate is an AR process, akin to the one driving sectoral
prices. In other words, estimates of the persistence in real exchange rate that
only include autoregressive terms (no matter how many) ignore heterogeneity.
And since nearly all the papers of the PPP literature estimate AR(p) -and
often AR(1)- they de facto ignore heterogeneity. Furthermore, pursuing the
route of taking heterogeneity into account by allowing for ARMA terms in the
real exchange rate may not even be feasible in practice, since with suﬃcient
heterogeneity, one would quickly run out of degrees of freedom unless the sample
period is long enough. Heterogeneous estimators are better-suited to tackling
the issue than estimating processes with infinite (or even high order) ARMA
terms.
We have now demonstrated CE’s claim that "aggregation bias" is not applicable to the PPP puzzle because the bias could be negative or zero in theory,
is irrelevant empirically. But it should also be clear from the expression of δ i
that covariances in prices across sectors will aﬀect the magnitude of the bias.10
In IMRR (2005) we introduce heterogeneous estimators that do account for
correlated residuals. By contrast, CE only point to the possible importance of
non-zero σ ij , and give empirically implausible analytical counter-examples. The
estimators they use, however, do not investigate which way non-zero σ ij aﬀects
the aggregation bias, in the data. Our estimators do.
Accounting for cross-sectional dependence in as large a panel as ours, while
continuing to allow for heterogeneity in the slope coeﬃcients is by no means
8 As well as low innovation variance σ 2 , and/or low covariances with other components of
i
the real exchange rate. We note that in our price data covariances are systematically positive.
9 See IMRR (2005).
1 0 These correlations are uniformly non-negative in our data.

6

straightforward. We implement two estimators that can handle both issues,
the standard Seemingly Unrelated Regression (SURE-GLS) estimator and the
common correlated eﬀects (CCE) estimator introduced by Pesaran (2002).11 We
show correlated residuals to be an important characteristic of the data. We find
using both estimators that half-lives are even lower once correlated residuals are
accounted for. Thus, σ ij 6= 0 is an important element of ∆, but not because it
tends to decrease the magnitude of our bias, as CE claim. Indeed it is rather the
opposite. We also note that when we use a fixed eﬀect CCE estimator without
allowing for heterogeneous dynamics our estimated half life is still high (see
Table III of IMRR (2005)). Hence it is not the CCE estimator per se that
drives down our estimates. It is indeed the heterogeneity in the dynamics of the
sectors that is responsible for the high measured persistence at the aggregate
level. In other words, there is evidence of aggregation bias whether a standard
fixed eﬀect or a fixed eﬀect CCE estimator is used.
The main empirical result of Reidel and Szilagyi (2005) [henceforth RS] is
the discrepancy between the sectoral half-lives obtained using OLS and CCE estimators. These authors suggest the diﬀerence is problematic. But if the panel
is characterized by cross-sectional correlation and if this correlation is driven
by a common factor, then the discrepancy between OLS and CCE estimates
arises precisely because OLS regressions do not take the correlation structure
into account. And in panels of relative prices, the presence of a common component in the residuals is very plausible given the high likelihood of common
shocks and missing variables. We also performed simulations to evaluate the
properties of the CCE estimator. Simulations suggest estimated half-lives are
biased (upwards) if correlated residuals are not accounted for. The issue is important empirically and allowing for correlated residuals actually strengthens
our conclusions (see Figure III of IMRR(2005)).

2.2

Some Intuition

It is important to understand aggregation is a problem in panels because of ignored heterogeneity across the components of the real exchange rate. In other
words, estimates based on international panels of real exchange rates will generate high persistence because each real exchange rate is composed of many
sectoral relative prices whose dynamic properties are heterogeneous. Separating "aggregation bias" and dynamic heterogeneity bias, as CE seem to suggest
at the end of section 1, is impossible. They are one and the same issue. In
particular, our main argument is that wrongly imposing an identical speed of
adjustment for the components of the real exchange rate can lead to a bias in
1 1 Implementing SURE requires that the cross-sectional dimension be smaller than the time
dimension of the data. This is unfortunately not the case in our data, where N = 204 and T
= 180 in the full sample. We need to truncate our data, which we accomplish in IMRR (2005)
by using Engel’s version of the Eurostat dataset, which has fewer observations than ours.

7

persistence estimates, both in aggregate time series and in a panel setting. More
precisely, if the speed of relative price adjustment diﬀers across goods, the speed
of adjustment of the real exchange rate may not be an unbiased estimate of the
average speed of adjustment of relative prices. Thus, our main argument is
not that “impos[ing] an identical speed of adjustment across all real exchange
rates [...] can bias estimates of the half-life of real exchange rates” (page 51).
While such a bias is possible, our concern is about imposing identical speeds of
adjustment across diﬀerent types of goods and how this may aﬀect estimates of
relative price persistence.
Our paper explains how heterogeneity in the dynamics at the good level
translates into persistent aggregate real exchange rates. Our result does not
require nor imply that persistence be systematically smaller at the disaggregated
level. Hence results in Crucini and Shintani (2002) and Engel (2000) that CE
invoke in their conclusion do not contradict ours in any way.12 That Crucini
and Shintani (2002) should find homogeneously fast mean reversion in a wide
range of good prices immediately suggests they will not find much evidence
in support of "aggregation bias" in their data. There is little heterogeneity
in their estimates which all point to strikingly low half lives. If we are right,
there should not be much of an aggregation bias in a dataset of goods which
unanimously tend to revert to parity quickly. But surely, there is a PPP puzzle.
Most aggregate relative prices do tend to revert to parity slowly. That they do
not in Crucini and Shintani (2002) does not invalidate our contention.
As a matter of fact, the revised version of Crucini and Shintani (2004) now
finds explicit support for an aggregation bias. Their introduction reads: “But
how do we go from half-lives in the neighborhood of one year at the level of
individual goods to half-lives of CPI-based PPP deviations in the range of 3
to 5 years? The answer we present in this paper is a combination of small
sample bias and aggregation bias”. They therefore now confirm the existence
of an aggregation bias in a data set that includes emerging markets and is very
diﬀerent from ours.
It is also peculiar that CE assert that “there is already a large literature
devoted to [...] biases in panel estimates” due to heterogeneity, with application
to the real exchange rate (page 51). An EconLit search yielded one single paper
dealing with dynamic heterogeneity in the real exchange rate, and the point
there was heterogeneity across countries, not across sectors.13 In fact, in their
footnote 2, CE describe the Random Coeﬃcient Model (RCM) erroneously.
1 2 In their conclusion CE write: “Crucini and Shintani (2002), using a large worldwide
cross-section of goods prices from the Economics Intelligence Unit, do find rapid convergence
to deviations from the law of one price (half-lives of 9 to 12 months). But they explicitly find
no aggregation bias. The rate of convergence of the average of their prices is very similar to
the average of the rates of convergence of their individual prices. Aggregation bias does not
seem to explain the PPP puzzle.”
1 3 See Boyd and Smith (1999), who conclude there is very little heterogeneity in real exchange
rates dynamics between countries.

8

RCM does not compute an arithmetic mean of sectoral persistence estimates to
obtain aggregate half-lives. There are weights, and they are optimally inferred
from the observed heterogeneity in the data, using a Generalized Least Squares
procedure akin to that implemented in Random Eﬀects estimators.

3

Simulations

The second main criticism of CE - taken up as well by RS - concerns the MonteCarlo simulations in IMRR (2002). The reason why we performed Monte-Carlo
simulations in the original version of our paper was not to ensure there was a
bias. Comparing estimates where heterogeneity is allowed for, to ones where
it is not is indeed suﬃcient to prove the presence of a bias. Our Monte-Carlo
simulations were meant to quantify how the bias responds to variations in the
extent of heterogeneity and/or of persistence (and how various estimators perform at capturing it). CE propose to use Monte-Carlo simulations to prove
there is no bias, but both our data and theirs (even cleansed of measurement
error and small-sample bias) show it is there. The proof is in the pudding.
CE question the validity of the bias derived in our original simulations
(IMRR, 2002) on grounds that we allow the possibility for explosive roots in
our simulated sectoral prices. However, IMRR (2003) showed the simulated bias
remained substantial - identical, almost - even after changing the distribution of
sectoral persistence coeﬃcients so that they do not include any value (weakly)
above unity14 . Indeed, the Monte-Carlo simulations in IMRR (2005) exclude de
facto any explosive roots. Thus, the discrepancy has to come from somewhere
else.
There are first some obvious reasons. In IMRR (2002), we show the bias increases with the extent of heterogeneity, so part of the reason for the diﬀerences
in simulation results stems from the fact that CE use a range for the heterogeneity in sectoral persistence parameters that is smaller than ours (and indeed
smaller than what our -cleansed- data imply). Equally problematic are the assumptions RS use in their simulations. They consider only AR(1) processes
and assume that the mean persistence parameter is equal to 0.97. In contrast
IMRR (2005) use higher order autoregressive processes and estimate the largest
autoregressive root to be 0.95. Both aspects are important. First, there is
good reason to expect the presence of higher order terms, especially in monthly
data. Low order autoregressive processes may poorly fit the dynamics of the
data. Second, assuming a larger value for the autoregressive parameter implies
a higher relative importance of the small sample bias. Furthermore, allowing for
cross-sectoral correlations present in the data actually increases the magnitude
of the bias - CE never allow for cross-sectoral correlations in their simulations.
1 4 CE

(2005) does not mention the simulations of IMRR (2003).

9

There is another, more subtle yet important reason why the Monte Carlo
results of CE and RS diﬀer from ours. In their simulations, CE allow for fixed
eﬀects. The initial conditions are such that each cross-sectional unit starts
at its asymptotic mean. This is at best a special case, which has important
consequences for the results. Similarly RS draw initial conditions from their
unconditional distribution. Instead, Arellano and Bond (1991) impose zeros
for all initial conditions. In IMRR (2005), we use the actually observed initial
conditions. It turns out that the heterogeneity bias is important under any of
these two standard alternatives.
The intuition is as follows. As soon as initial conditions diﬀer from the
asymptotic mean of the cross-sectional units, there is an initial period of convergence towards the asymptotic mean even in the absence of any shocks. The
MG and the RCM estimators allow for heterogeneous dynamics over this adjustment period, but FE and indeed any other aggregate estimators do not.
Monte-Carlo simulations that ignore this initial adjustment period will tend to
minimize the discrepancy between heterogeneous estimators and standard ones.
Indeed, simulations that assume initial conditions that are specifically equal
to their long run values or drawn from their unconditional distributions are the
only ones that will tend to minimize the superiority of heterogeneous estimators
in the presence of heterogeneity. It seems inappropriate to reject the possibility
that there could be an aggregation bias, on grounds of simulation setups that
minimize its impact.
In IMRR (2005) we confirm that the bias is large, using actually observed
initial conditions.15 We note in particular that RS’s simulation result that the
CCE estimator is severely biased downwards depends entirely on the authors
assumptions about the starting values for the AR processes used in their experiment. Specifically, if the simulations in the paper are started using the
actual Eurostat data, the CCE estimators perform very well (see Figure III of
IMRR(2005)). We stress that simulations are not meant to establish the existence of the bias in the data, since the formal tests and the results already show
this. Rather they are meant to investigate robustness across heterogeneity and
persistence parameters. We provide analytical and direct empirical support for
the presence of a bias in our data. Given the importance of initial conditions,
Monte-Carlo simulations should be used neither to establish nor to disprove the
existence of a bias. We do not propose to do the former, and one should not
attempt the latter.

4

Data

1 5 In

our simulations, we actually truncate the first 50 observations of our Monte-Carlo
simulations, in order that the importance of initial conditions be minimized. Even so, we
continue to find a large bias.

10

The third claim in CE concerns the impact of measurement error on our estimates. First, if short-lived measurement error were to explain our low estimates
for persistence, it should do so on the basis of systematically lower persistence
at the sectoral level, which would naturally aggregate into low half-life for the
real exchange rate. As we show in IMRR (2005), there are no few instances
of sectoral persistence exceeding the aggregate measure, which would be impossible if measurement error were generating our results. Even so, CE argue
otherwise. In this Section, we detail the reasons for this discrepancy.
On his website, Charles Engel lists revisions to the Eurostat dataset that he
deems appropriate. We present below estimates based on these exact corrected
data, which were performed as early as January 2003. They confirm the halflife drops dramatically when heterogeneous dynamics are taken into account.
We also explain in detail why CE find otherwise: they implement an estimator
which is rejected by their data. In IMRR (2002), we used the oﬃcial Eurostat data, which we had already corrected for some obvious typos (and other
mistakes) to obtain our initial estimates. Our section 6.1 was entirely devoted
to tests of errors-in-variables, and re-ran all our estimations with suspicious
observations replaced by (suﬃciently) lagged values, as is customary. Our results were confirmed. Finally, in IMRR (2005) we go one step further, and use
sources from national statistical agencies to verify the consistency of the Eurostat data, as well as the corrections suggested on Charles Engel’s website. Our
revised dataset is therefore arguably of better quality than Engel’s.16 Again,
our results stand.17

4.1

Data Corrections, Part 1: On the Importance of Implementing the Appropriate Estimator.

Engel’s data have 127 cross sections for the period 1981:01-1996:12. There are 9
countries and a maximum of 16 goods. The coverage is considerably lower than
the data used in IMRR (2002). In particular, Greece, Finland and Ireland are
excluded as are goods such as Rents and Tobacco. In fact, the number of cross
sections in their data set is about half of those used in the original version of
our paper.18 There are two standard estimators which control for heterogeneous
dynamics: the Random Coeﬃcient Model (RCM) and the Mean Group (MG).
One should perform an appropriate test to ascertain which one should be used
in a given data sample. With a smaller cross-sectional dimension and a shorter
sample, it is to be expected the RCM estimator will perform less well, but the
1 6 And

is available on our websites.
to CE, Di Giovanni (2003) also contended that data limitations were the source
of our result, and found dissenting evidence on data with longer time series. What follows
also addresses his concerns. In particular, as the dataset alters, so may -potentially- the
heterogeneous estimator that should be implemented.
1 7 Prior

1 8 Our

dataset had 221 cross sections.

11

MG estimator still has good small sample properties. We now discuss this in
detail.
Table 1 confirms that we closely reproduce CE’s RCM and FE estimates
when using their data. However, the MG estimator produces a much shorter
half-life (25 months), with a precise confidence interval (9 to 31 months).19
In their Table 5, CE find an upper bound of 142 months when using the MG
estimator on their data. Since we find low upper bounds when we use their exact
data, the discrepancy must stem from their bootstrapping technique, which they
do not explain. We follow Ron Smith’s suggestion to bootstrap, and use the
mean coeﬃcients to draw the residuals, before performing sampling from the
residuals themselves.
Figure 1 shows that our findings remain true for all possible lag lengths. The
implication is clear. Allowing for heterogeneity makes a significant diﬀerence in
the CE sample as well. The Hausman test strongly rejects parameter homogeneity. CE do not find a strong eﬀect of heterogeneity on the basis of the RCM
estimator, but in this much smaller sample the RCM estimator is rejected in
favor of the MG estimator. Why do RCM and MG not perform equally well?
Both estimators allow for slope heterogeneity, but only the former imposes distributional assumptions on heterogeneity. Using CE’s data a Hausman test for
heterogeneity strongly rejects homogeneous slopes. However, the alternative
hypothesis could be either heterogeneous and deterministic, or heterogeneous
and random. In other words, the alternative hypothesis is consistent with both
MG and RCM. In order to distinguish between the two we use a test devised
by Pudney (1978). This is a test for the assumptions underpinning random
coeﬃcients. A rejection of the null hypothesis implies rejection of the random
coeﬃcient assumption. In an AR(5) model we obtain a test statistic of 126.72
(0.00). This implies that the Mean Group model is more appropriate in these
data.20 When implemented on exactly Engel’s data, the MG estimator yields a
half life of 25 months, as shown in Table 4. But none of these estimates allow
for cross-sectoral correlations. And indeed, the half-life drops further to 21 and
13 months when we allow for correlations across sectoral prices via a MG SURE
or a MG Common Correlated Eﬀect estimator (henceforth MG CCE), respectively.21 We show in IMRR (2005) that the common eﬀects are an important
characteristic of price data.
The fact that CE’s panel is narrower than ours could also explain their
problems with the RCM model, especially at high lags. This is particularly
important as the heterogeneous estimators we propose are essentially averages,
1 9 All

half-lives in our paper are defined as the number of periods it takes for the impulse
response to cross 0.5 permanently, as is customary.
2 0 In our original data the statistic was 10.29 (0.90).
2 1 See Pesaran (2002) for details on the MG-CCE estimator. Table 4 also reports all the
alternative measures of persistence we use to bolster our argument in IMRR (2005). They all
lead to the same conclusion.

12

and their consistency and eﬃciency depends on the cross-section of the panel.
We conducted a simple experiment. We assumed a heterogeneous data generating process, with 220 cross sections. Then we estimated RCM models only
on the first 100 cross sections. Figure 2 plots the distribution of the resulting
estimates and contrasts it with estimates from the whole panel. It is clear that
the estimator using fewer cross sections has a much more dispersed distribution,
i.e. the estimates are less precise. This problem is likely to be more severe as
the number of parameters increases.
Direct evidence on the importance of this point can be seen in Table 2, where
we list estimates obtained when CE’s dataset is expanded. We add the following:
1) Data for Greece, Finland and Ireland. 2) Data for Tobacco and Rents. In
each case, the data for all countries were checked and any outliers were removed,
in a way similar to the selection method described on Charles Engel’s website.
This gives us a panel with 191 cross sections, a number closer to our original
data. The fixed eﬀects half-life is close to CE’s estimate. The heterogeneous
estimators, however, now produce shorter half-lives. In particular the MG model
gives a half-life of 20 months. Figure 3 plots the half-lives obtained from these
estimators against the lag-length. The MG half-lives are consistently less than
two years. The RCM model produces half-lives close to two years, whereas the
Fixed Eﬀects estimator is biased upwards. Note that RCM and MG converge
at higher lag lengths, as they should. Note also that we do not observe the kind
of impulse responses found by CE.22 In IMRR (2005) we provide confidence
intervals for these results based on corrected data. Thus, CE find diﬀerent
results -even though we use almost identical data- because they implement the
very same estimator we used on our original sample. But this estimator is
rejected in their data. Had they used the appropriate estimator, they would
have obtained our results.

4.2

Data Corrections, Part 2: Formal Tests for Errors-inVariables, and Even Better Data.

CE correct the data by removing outliers and parts of the series that appear
inconsistent. We do a similar exercise when we expand their data. However,
removing “suspicious” data may also be problematic since it introduces a degree
of subjectivity. In other words, there is a chance that it remove shocks that are
actually informative. In fact, it is possible that such a procedure may produce
persistence. We can infer the impact of this from the following experiment:
10,000 AR(1) processes with an autoregressive coeﬃcient of 0.95 were generated.
Estimation was carried out on (i) the generated series without any changes (ii)
2 2 We tried various other combinations of the data. For example, adding data for Greece
and Ireland only, produces very similar results. In addition we considered removing every
series that has repeated observations (as noted by Charles Engel on his web page). Again the
MG estimator gives a half-life of 23 for an AR(5) model.

13

on series where “outliers” where replaced by an average over t + 1 and t − 1.
The mean estimated half-life in case (i) is 13.52 months, which is very close to
the true half-life of 13.51. In case (ii) this goes up to 22.5 months. Figure 4
plots the distribution of the estimates. It is easy to see that in case (ii) the
distribution is much more dispersed around a higher mean.
This is perhaps not very surprising because in this case outliers are erroneously removed. In reality, many of the “corrected” data may of course be
true measurement errors. Correcting for measurement errors on the basis of
removing replacing outliers is problematic, however, since it would for instance
not remove “small” measurement errors. For that reason, a more objective
approach to the measurement error problem might be desirable.
In the original version of our paper, we reported RCM estimates based on
GMM estimators with instruments chosen to account for errors in variables.
We showed this did not aﬀect the results. We now examine how this estimator
performs. We generate data for AR(1) models using a coeﬃcient of 0.95. Then
we add a random error ν to these data where ν˜N (0, 0.3). A typical sample
is shown in Figure 5. It can be seen that the series inclusive of the error has
many possible outliers. Next we estimate models using OLS, which is expected
to be biased, and GMM, which is consistent. The distribution of the resulting
estimates is shown in Figure 6. There is a downward bias in OLS, but GMM
performs much better and its mean is close to the true estimate. This does
indicate that if errors in variables were a substantial problem we should have
observed a large diﬀerence between RCM estimates based on OLS and GMM.
In IMRR (2002), we found very similar results from using either estimator,
indicating that measurement error did not account for our results.
The data we use in IMRR (2005), are the result of thorough checks of Eurostat sources against series published by national statistical agencies.23 Our
results, all presented in our main paper, are almost unchanged. Our best estimate for the half life is 11 months with a confidence interval ranging from 7 to
12 months. Hence, once more, our results are confirmed.

5

Country-by-Country Evidence and Small-Sample
Bias

The last section of CE develops two points. First, it is argued our results do not
hold on a country-by-country basis, and there is little evidence of cross-sectoral
heterogeneity within countries. Second, it is claimed that our persistence estimates suﬀer from a small sample bias, aﬀecting least squares estimators when
the data are persistent.
2 3 Our

data are available from our websites.

14

That our evidence should weaken on a country-by-country basis is unsurprising. We have made up for the lack of detailed disaggregated data on relative
prices by using the country dimension in our panel. Criticizing our results
on grounds that they do not hold within countries is akin to criticizing results
based on panel unit-root tests, on ground that unit roots cannot be rejected on a
country-by-country basis. For instance in the related literature on real exchange
rates persistence, should one dismiss the results in Frankel and Rose (1996) or
Murray and Papell (2003), which rest on the improved performance of unit-root
tests when a panel dimension is brought to the task? Should one counter their
argument with claims that it does not hold on a country-by-country basis?
We think one should not. That is not to say we have not tried to increase
the sectoral (or temporal) dimension of our panel as well, but for all its faults
Eurostat provides to our knowledge the best coverage of disaggregated relative
prices there is. As we underline in our paper, the number of (monthly) observations in our data is large relative to the literature, and enough to alleviate
somewhat the weakness of (panel) unit root tests. If the purpose were to address
the question of real exchange rate persistence within countries, one would need
much more disaggregated sectoral data than those we have.
Second, CE claim that a small sample bias pervades our estimates.24 At
first, CE’s results may appear consistent with the evidence presented in an interesting related paper by Choi, Mark and Sul (2003) [CMS henceforth]. CMS
examine the relative importance of three influences on real exchange rate persistence estimates: temporal aggregation, small samples, and heterogeneity. Their
empirical analysis centers on the relative magnitude of the first two biases, because they fail to reject slope homogeneity in their data (they use a panel of
aggregate real exchange rates, not sectoral data). Indeed we report similar results when we test for slope heterogeneity in a panel of aggregate real exchange
rates. We found heterogeneity to be key at the sectoral level not at the country
level.
The bias correction procedure used by CMS - suggested by So and Shin
(1999) and extended by Sul, Phillips and Choi (2002) to account for common
eﬀects in residuals - is only meant to assess the relative importance of the small
sample and the temporal aggregation biases. In their panel of aggregate real
exchange rates, CMS find the small sample bias dominates. Their quantification
of the heterogeneity bias, on the other hand, is based on simple Monte Carlo
experiments, in which the data generating process has slope heterogeneity. In
their simulations, they examine whether the total bias of a simple OLS estimator
is positive (in which case the heterogeneity bias dominates) or negative (in which
case the small sample bias dominates). For artificial data with fewer than 200
observations, they find that the total bias under OLS is negative, but somewhat
sensitive to the calibration of heterogeneity. For 200 observations, the bias of the
2 4 What

follows also largely applies to RS’s criticism.

15

OLS estimator can turn positive. Importantly however, their data generating
process does not allow for the common components that we find are important.
Their simulations, therefore cannot be used to dismiss the heterogeneity bias in
our data, where common components are crucial. Above all, CMS never propose
to implement their bias correction procedures to data with slope heterogeneity.
They never claim, with reason, that the methods they apply have desirable
properties when applied to data with characteristics akin to ours.
By contrast, CE correct for the small sample least squares bias by implementing the standard So and Shin (1999) procedure, which relies on recursive
demeaning of the data, and a bootstrap-after-bootstrap procedure suggested by
Kilian (1998). They find that either method gives rise to a substantial increase
in the corrected half-life of the data. The Kilian (1998) procedure implies an
increase in the mean bias corrected MG estimate to 44 months as against least
squares estimates of 26 months. The 95 percent confidence interval goes from
13 months to infinity. Application of the So and Shin correction instead raises
the point estimate to 161 months with a 95 percent confidence interval spanning
112 months to infinity. Thus, their results imply a worsening of the PPP puzzle,
and bring our results into doubt.
There are several problems with CE’s procedure. First, and this is a major
point, relatively little is known about the properties of the bias correction methods that CE use, when applied to heterogeneous panels with common correlated
eﬀects. We note again that CMS carefully tests for homogeneity (and fail to
reject) before applying these corrections on their data. Second, CE consider estimators that do not allow for common eﬀects while we show common eﬀects to be
an important characteristic of our price data. Third, there are reasons to question CE’s application of the Kilian (1998) procedure. In particular, whenever
the statistic of interest is a non-linear function of the estimated autoregressive
parameters, Pesaran and Zhao (1999) have shown that in heterogeneous panels,
bias corrections should be performed directly on the statistic of interest, and
not indirectly on estimated parameters. Using corrected autoregressive coeﬃcients to calculate a half-life, as CE do, may result in asymptotically biased
corrections.25
We therefore first provide some Monte Carlo evidence on the properties of
the bias reduction methods.26 Unlike CE, our correction procedures do account
2 5 Pesaran and Zhao (1999) discuss this issue in an application to a panel setting where
the object of interest is a long-run multiplier of a change in an exogenous variable. But the
same problem arises when estimating the half-life. Indeed, the issue will arise whenever one
attempts to correct short-term point estimates in order to obtain an unbiased assessment of
long-run phenomena. In general, the expression for long-run properties is highly non-linear in
short-run estimates.
2 6 Phillips and Sul (2003) suggest a Panel Feasible Generalized Median Unbiased estimator
that can be applied in heterogeneous dynamic panels with common eﬀects. Their method
generalizes the median unbiased correction to a SUR estimator. As noted in IMRR (2005)
the cross-sectional dimension of our data is large and the MG CCE estimator may outperform
the SUR estimator. For this reason we consider alternative bias correction methods.

16

for correlated residuals. Following Pesaran and Zhao (1999), we perform our
correction directly on the half-life, which is the variable of interest.27 In Appendix B, we describe the steps in our direct bootstrapping approach. It stands
in stark contrast with the indirect bias correction implemented in CE. We report the outcome of a simple Monte Carlo experiment meant to compare the
direct and indirect approaches in the presence of correlated residuals. We assume a data generating process in which the panel units are generated by AR(1)
processes with slope heterogeneity and common correlated eﬀects. We assume
that the time series dimension, T , is 200 and that the cross sectional dimension,
N , is 180 so that the panel is close to ours. By assuming AR(1) processes for
the panel units we minimize the defects inherent in the indirect approach because the non-linearity here is less severe than for higher order autoregressive
processes. We then apply the direct and indirect versions of the Kilian (1998)
procedure to the MG and MG CCE estimators and the So and Shin (1999)
procedure to the MG estimator.28
Table 3 presents the results. We report least-squares results as well as biascorrected estimates, using both the direct and indirect approaches to the bootstrap procedure and, for the simple MG estimation the So and Shin procedure.
Several results are worth mentioning. First, the least squares MG estimates
display a negative bias when the common correlated eﬀect is relatively unimportant. However, as common components rise in importance, simple MG becomes increasingly inaccurate, as the bias due to the neglected common eﬀects
starts dominating the least squares bias. Finally, a positive bias arises. This
suggests the simulations in CMS, which do not allow for common eﬀects, are
not well-tailored to our data, where common eﬀects are important. The least
squares MG CCE estimator has a negative - but very small - bias regardless of
the importance of the common eﬀect.
Second, using the indirect approach, or the So and Shin procedure to correct
the MG-based estimates is only accurate when the common eﬀect is relatively
small. As common eﬀects rise in importance, both induce a positive bias, which
can be large. Our suggested direct approach works better but still implies
a systematic positive bias. In contrast both bootstrap procedures (direct or
indirect) are accurate for the MG-CCE estimator, and give relatively precise
estimates that appear immune to the properties of the common eﬀect.
In summary, the results in Table 3 suggest that, in the presence of correlated
residuals, the preferred estimate should unsurprisingly be MG-CCE. Then, the
2 7 We also use a balanced version of our dataset in order to diminish the (considerable)
computational burden of the experiments. If anything, truncation works against us, since it
makes it harder to obtain precise half-life estimates.
2 8 In the Monte Carlo experiments we perform only the first bootstrap step of the Kilian
procedure. It would be computationally infeasible to implement bootstrap-after-bootstrap in
the panel setting because of time constraints and cycling. Cycling would imply that the simulated distribution would not emulate the asymptotic distribution. The empirical estimates,
however, do apply bootstrap-after-bootstrap.

17

Kilian (1998) bias correction procedure is accurate, especially if computed using
the direct approach. In contrast, applying bias reduction techniques to the MG
estimator not allowing for common eﬀects results in corrected estimates that are
themselves biased upwards, indeed overestimating the true degree of persistence.
This is especially true when the indirect approach is used.29 This may well
explain the results in CE, who apply the So and Shin (1999) method, and the
indirect version of the Kilian (1998) procedure.
In IMRR (2005) we apply the bootstrap-after-bootstrap procedure to our
panel of relative prices. We find a very modest increase in the estimated halflife. In particular, the corrected half-life estimate increases to eighteen months
only, as opposed to our uncorrected estimate of eleven months. Our confidence
interval is narrow and excludes the “consensus view”. The indirect approach
yields slightly higher but very comparable results, with a corrected half-life of
twenty months. As suggested in our simulations, choosing the direct or indirect
approach makes little diﬀerence when common eﬀects are accounted for. It does
however change the results dramatically (and push corrected estimates upwards)
when the estimation does not allow for common eﬀects, as in CE. This confirms
the robustness of our results, and accounts for the discrepancy with CE’s. They
simply use estimators and bias correction procedures that are inappropriate in
price data.

6

Conclusion

Existing dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models featuring plausible degrees of nominal rigidity cannot replicate the persistence of the aggregate real
exchange rate. This should not be surprising. One sector models should only
match the moments of data purged from any heterogeneous dynamics. In IMRR
(2005), we estimate the half-life of the real exchange rate in Eurostat data and
find it is roughly 11 months once one controls for heterogeneous sectoral dynamics. These estimates are entirely compatible with existing calibrated models.
Thus, IMRR (2005) propose that the PPP puzzle, as defined by Rogoﬀ (1996),
is due to an aggregation bias. Our results were obtained for US and European
real exchange rates, using two-digit sectoral data. Interestingly, Crucini and
Shintani (2004) have subsequently confirmed the importance of an aggregation
bias, using data disaggregated at a finer level and for a sample of countries that
includes emerging markets.
Our paper opens several lines of research. First, it is undoubtedly of great interest to explore whether introducing heterogeneous sectoral dynamics in general
equilibrium models with nominal rigidities will enable these models to replicate
2 9 The RMSE of the indirect approach to the bias correction for the MG estimator is large,
while both corrections have quite small RMSE when MG CCE estimator is implemented.

18

the persistence of the aggregate real exchange rate. Promising first steps in this
direction have already been taken, for instance by Carvalho (2005). Second, we
stress the importance of initial conditions in simulations aimed at quantifying
small sample and aggregation biases. We also emphasize the relevance of the
technique used to correct for small-sample bias: correcting the half-life is not
the same as directly correcting an autoregressive parameter estimate. Taken
together, these subtleties go a long way towards explaining some of the discrepancies between Imbs, Mumtaz, Ravn and Rey (2005), Chen and Engel (2005)
and Reidel and Szilagyi (2005). A rigorous, analytical and systematic study of
these technical refinements would be welcome and useful. Finally, the concept
of aggregation bias may be relevant for other macroeconomic variables. This is
an avenue we are currently exploring.

19

Appendix A: Asymptotic equivalence of RCM
and MG estimators
Pesaran (2003) demonstrates the asymptotic equivalence between the RCM
estimator and the MG estimator and here we summarize the key parts of Pesaran’s analysis.
Consider a panel with two cross sections and ti observations. Let the OLS
coeﬃcients be b̂1 and b̂2 and covariance matrices V1 and V2 where:
h
i
Vi = E (b̂i − bi )(b̂i − bi )0

where bi is the true value of the coeﬃcient. Consider the MG estimator in this
panel:
1
β mg = (b1 + b2 )
2
The RCM estimator is:

µ
¶
¶
1 b21 + b22 − 2b1 b2 + 2V2
1 b21 + b22 − 2b1 b2 + 2V1
+
b
b2 =
1
2 b21 + b22 − 2b1 b2 + V2 + V1
2 b21 + b22 − 2b1 b2 + V2 + V1
Ψ1 b1 + Ψ2 b2
³
´
As ti → ∞, b̂i − bi −→p 0 and Ψi −→ 12 as Vi gets smaller. In other
words for large T , the variance of the estimators gets very small and the RCM
weights approach the MG weights.
β rcm

=

µ

20

Appendix B. Direct Bootstrapping Method
The bias correction procedure can be summarized as follows:
Step 1 Use the appropriate estimator to get group specific slopes, intercepts and
error variances. Denote the estimated mean slope coeﬃcients by b
ρS where
S denotes the relevant estimator. Compute the implied half-life and denote
this by Tb1S .
2

h iT
for i = 1, ..N where
Step 2 Generate bootstrap samples of the innovations b
εjit
t=1
j denotes replications. We generate these using a non-parametric bootstrap. When we allow for cross-sectional dependence, we first pre-whiten
the residuals and then re-color them after the non-parametric bootstrap.
Generate artificial samples of relative prices.
Step 3 Use thePartificial data to estimate the mean coeﬃcients of the model: i.e.
e
ρ = N1
e
ρi . We use the method detailed in Kilian (1998) to generate the
ρ to calculate the half-life Te1S .
cross section specific coeﬃcients e
ρi . Use ẽ
2

P eS
Step 4 Repeat steps 2 and 3 R times and obtain the bootstrap average R1
T1 .
2

P eS
1
Step 5 The bias corrected half life is given by 2Tb1S − R
T1
2

21

2

References
Arellano, Manuel, and Stephen Bond, 1991, “Some Tests of Specification for
Panel Data: Monte Carlo Evidence and an Application to Employment Equations”, Review of Economic Studies, 58, 277-297.
Boyd, Derick, and Ron P. Smith, 1999, "Testing for Purchasing Power Parity:
Econometric Issues and an Application to Developing Countries," Manchester
School, Vol. 67 (3), 287-303.
Carvalho, Carlos, 2005, “"Heterogeneity in Price Setting and the Real Eﬀects
of Monetary Shocks"”, mimeo Princeton University.
Chen, Shiu-Sheng, and Charles Engel, 2005, “Does “Aggregation Bias” Explain
the PPP Puzzle?”, Pacific Economic Review 10, February 2005, 49-72.
Choi, Chi-Young, Nelson C. Mark, and Donggyu Sul, 2003, “The Dominance of
Downward Bias in Half-Life Estimates of PPP Deviations”, manuscript, Notre
Dame.
Crucini, Mario J., and Mototsugu Shintani, 2002, “Persistence in Law-of-OnePrice Deviations: Evidence from Micro-Data”, Working Paper No. 02-W22,
Vanderbilt University.
Crucini, Mario J., and Mototsugu Shintani, 2004, “Persistence in Law-of-OnePrice Deviations: Evidence from Micro-Data”, Working Paper No. 02-W22R,
Vanderbilt University.
Di Giovanni, Julian, 2003, “The Return of the Half-Life”, mimeo Berkeley
Engel, Charles. “Local Currency Pricing and the Choice of Exchange-Rate
Regime.” European Economic Review, 2000, 44, no 8, pp.1449-72.
Frankel, Jeﬀrey, and Andrew K. Rose, 1996, “A Panel Project on Purchasing
Power Parity: Mean Reversion Within and Between Countries”, Journal of
International Economics 40, 209-25.
Imbs, Jean M., Haroon Mumtaz, Morten O. Ravn, and Hélène Rey, 2002, “PPP
Strikes Back: Aggregation and the Real Exchange Rate”, NBER WP no. 9372.
Imbs, Jean M., Haroon Mumtaz, Morten O. Ravn, and Hélène Rey, 2003, “The
PPP Controversy - A Summary of the Debate surrounding ‘PPP Strikes Back’
”, posted at http://www.hec.unil.ch/jimbs/, http://www.iue.it/Personal/Ravn,
and http://www.princeton.edu/~hrey/.

22

Imbs, Jean M., Haroon Mumtaz, Morten O. Ravn, and Hélène Rey, 2005, “PPP
Strikes Back: Aggregation and the Real Exchange Rate”, Quarterly Journal of
Economics, February, Vol CXX, Issue 1, pp. 1-43.
Kilian, Lutz, 1998, “Small-Sample Confidence Intervals for Impulse Response
Functions”, Review of Economics and Statistics 80(2), 218-30.
Murray, Christian and David Papell, 2003, “Do Panels Help Solving the Purchasing Power Parity Puzzle?”, mimeo, Houston University.
Pesaran, M. Hashem, 2002, “Estimation and Inference in Large Heterogeneous
Panels with Cross-Section Dependence.” University of Cambridge, DAE Discussion Paper no. 0305.
Pesaran, M. Hashem, 2003, “Cambridge University Lecture Notes”, Cambridge
University.
Pesaran, M. Hashem, and Ron P. Smith, 1995, “Estimating Long-Run Relationships from Dynamic Heterogeneous Panels”, Journal of Econometrics, Vol.68,
79-113.
Pesaran, M. Hashem, and Zhongyun Zhao, 1999, “Bias Reduction in Estimating
Long-run Relationships from Dynamic Heterogeneous Panels”, in C. Hsiao, K.
Lahiri, L-F Lee and M.H. Pesaran (eds), Analysis of Panels and Limited
Dependent Variables: A Volume in Honour of G S Maddala, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, chapter 12.
Phillips, Peter C.B., and Donggyu Sul, 2003, “Dynamic Panel Estimation and
Homogeneity Testing Under Cross Section Dependence”, Econometrics Journal
6, 217-59.
Pudney, Stephen E., 1978, “The Estimation and Testing of Some Error Components Models”, mimeo, London School of Economics.
Reidel, Demian and Jan Szilagyi, 2005, “A Biased View of PPP”, mimeo Harvard University.
Rogers, John H. and Michael Jenkins, 1995, “Haircuts or Hysteresis? Sources
of Movements in Real Exchange Rates”, Journal of International Economics 38
(3-4), 339-60.
So, B.S., and D.W. Shin, 1999, “Recursive Mean Adjustment in Time Series
Inferences”, Statistics and Probability Letters 43, 65-73.
Sul, Dongguy, Peter C.B. Phillips, and Chi-Young Choi, 2002, “Prewhitening
Bias in HAC Estimation”, mimeo.

23

Table 1
Method
FE
RCM
MG
Hausman Test

P
ρ
p
12 0.97767
5
0.97951
5
0.97063
80.804 (0.000)

Table 2
Method
FE
RCM
MG
Hausman Test

P
ρ
p
12 0.97757
5
0.97247
5
0.96334
37.068 (0.000)

Half-Life
35
35
25

Half-Life
33
26
21

24

Table 3. Monte Carlo Evidence on Bias Corrections
Simple MG Estimator
True Least Sq. Indirect Direct So-Shin
λ=0
14.54 10.78
14.96
13.06
14.81
λ = 0.08 14.54 11.14
15.74
13.57
15.45
λ = 0.16 14.53 11.47
16.43
14.04
16.25
λ = 0.24 14.53 12.02
17.73
14.85
17.17
λ = 0.32 14.54 12.69
19.45
15.81
18.70
λ = 0.40 14.52 13.34
21.24
16.80
20.24
λ = 0.48 14.54 14.35
24.23
18.32
22.89
λ = 0.56 14.53 16.08
31.24
21.01
26.60

MG CCE Estimator
Least Sq. Indirect Direct
10.11
16.45
12.82
10.16
16.58
12.88
10.23
16.76
12.97
10.32
16.83
13.08
10.41
16.93
13.17
10.54
17.06
13.33
10.77
17.14
13.56
11.16
17.26
13.93

Notes: The table reports the mean MG estimates of the half-life of relative prices in a
Monte Carlo experiment where the data is generated by the process: qit = αi + β i qit−1 +
xt + εit , xt = λxt−1 + ξ t , α ∼ N (0, 1), β ∼ U [0.93, 0.99], εi ∼ i.i.d(0, 1),
ξ ∼ N (0, 1). We assume that T = 200, and that N = 180. We initially draw 250
observations but then drop the first 50 to lower the impact of the initial condition. The
column “True” reports the true half-life based on the impulse response function. The columns
“least squares” report the least squares estimates of the half-life based on either the MG or the
MG CCE estimators. The column denoted “So-Shin” reports the results of implementing the
So and Shin (1999) bias correction to the MG estimator. The columns “indirect” and “direct”
report the results of implementing the indirect and the direct versions of the bias reduction
methods based on the Kilian (1998) bootstrap procedure. The number of replications is 1000.

25

Estimates using Charles Engel’s Data
Table 4: Persistence Estimates using Disaggregated Data
P
qict = γ c + K
k=1 ρik qict−k + eict
PK
Model
P
Half-Life
k=1 ρik
35
Fixed Eﬀects
5
0.98
(26, 43)
35
Fixed Eﬀects (SURE)
5
0.98
(28, 45)
50
Generalised Fixed Eﬀects 5
0.99
(24, 152)
25
Mean Group
5
0.97
(9, 31)
13
Mean Group CCE
5
0.94
(9, 24)
21
Mean Group (Sure)
5
0.97
(17, 25)
80.804
a
H0 : ρi = ρ
(0.000)

26

LAR
0.97
(0.962, 0.977)
0.98
(0.972, 0.983)
0.99
(0.970, 0.995)
0.97
(0.861, 0.974)
0.93
(0.827, 0.959)
0.96
(0.954, 0.973)

CIR
48.72
49.53
71.35
35.09
17.18
29.50

Figure 1
41
40
39
38
37
36
35
34

Half-Lives

33
32
31
30
29

FE
MG

28
27
26
25
24
23
22
21
20
19
18
17
16
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36
Lags

Figure 2

Half-Lives

Figure 3
40
39
38
37
36
35
34
33
32
31
30
29
28
27
26
25
24
23
22
21
20
19
18
17
16
15
14
13
12

FE
MG
RCM

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36
Lags

Figure 4

Half-Lives: True=13.51, Not "Corrected"=13.52,
"Corrected"=22.5
1400
1200

Count

1000
800
600
400
200
0
49
47
45
43
41
39
37
35
33
31
29
27
25
23
21
19
17
15
13
11
9
7
5
Half-life
Not "Corrected"

"Corrected"

Figure 5
Example of measurement error

2.4

1.9

1.4

0.9

0.4

-0.1

-0.6

-1.1

-1.6

-2.1

With Error
Without error

Figure 6

