NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOUSING SUBSIDES: EFFECTS ON HOUSING DECISIONS,
EFFICIENCY, AND EQUITY

Harvey S. Rosen

Working Paper No. 1161

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138
June 1983

This essay is to appear in A. Auerbach and M. Feldstein (eds.),
Handbook of Public Economics. Part of the research was completed
while I was a Visiting Scholar at the Hoover Institution. I would
like to thank Patric Hendershott, Michael Murray, Richard Muth, and
John Quigley for useful suggestions. The research reported here is
part of the NBER's research program in Taxation. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1161
June 1983

Housing Subsides: Effects on Housing Decisions, Efficiency, and Equity

ABSTRACT

This paper surveys the effects of two of the most important

federal policies toward housing: the "implicit subsidy" for owner—
occupied housing in the income tax code, and the provision of housing

for low income families at rents below cost. Emphasis is placed on
the methodological problems that arise in attempts to assess the
efficiency and distributive implications of these programs.

Section 1 critically discusses the rationalization for a government

housing policy. Section 2 investigates the econometric problems associated
with estimating the effects of government policy upon housing decisions.
The federal tax treatment of owner—occupation and how it affects the
cost and demand for homeownership are discussed in Section 3. In
Section 4, the positive and normative implications of U.S. policies for
low income housing are evaluated.
The conclusion notes that the policies under concern have led to a
greater than efficient amount

probably

of

housing consumption, and have on net

led to a more unequal distribution of income.
Harvey S. Rosen
Dept. of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544

1. Introduction
1.1 The U. S. Housing Stock
From virtually every point of view, housing is an important commodity.
In 1979, the value of the net stock of residential capital in the United
States was over a trillion dollars, measured in 1972 dollars.

(See Table

1.1.) Although it is difficult to summarize in a single measure the quality

of this stock, most experts agree that in general it is very high.1 In
1978, for example, only 3% of the housing units lacked some or all of their

plumbing facilities. Similarly, overcrowded housing which is characteristic
of many countries does not appear to be a widespread problem in the U.S.
In 1978, the median number of persons per owner—occupied unit was 2.7; for

renter occupied units the figure was 2.02. In 1970, only 7% of housing units
had more than 1.01 persons per room.3
The flow of resources into housing continues to be large. In 1980,
out of $399.00 billion spent on fixed total investment, $104.0 billion went

into the residential capital stock. (See Table 1.2.) For the past two
decades, personal consumption expenditures on housing have been between
4
nine and ten percent of gross national product. For purpose of compari.son,
Table 1.3 shows the ratio of residential investment to total fixed investment

in a number of countries. The U.S. does not appear to be an outlier.

1
2

See, for example, Aaron (1972, p. 30).
Statistical Abstract 1980, p. 791.

Statistical Abstract 1980, p. 792. This figure is for units with all
plumbing facilities, which comprised 94% of all units.
'a

Statistical

Abstract 1980, p. 789.

TABLE 1.1
U. S. Net Private Residential Capital Stock*
(Selected years, measured in 1972 billions of dollars)
1960

1965

1970

1975

1979

601

721

826

959

1,058

U. S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Statistical
Mstract of the United States 1980, Washington, D.C., 1980, p. 789.

TABLE 1.2

U. S. Fixed Total Investment and Residential Investment*
(Selected years, measured in current billions of dollars)

Fixed
Total
Investment
Residential
Investment

1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

72.9

103.7

141.0

213.0

399.0

24.5

30.9

37.1

55.3

104.0

*Soce: Economic Report of the President, January 1981, p. 249.

TABLE 1..3

Ratio

of Residential Investment to Fixed Total Investlnent*
(Selected Countries, 1980)

Australia

.33

Canada

.17

-

France

.25

Sweden

.24

United Kingdom

.15

United States

.26

*Soce: Computed from figures in Organization for Economic
Co—Operation and Development, Quarterly Accounts Bulletin, 1967-81,

1981.

1.2

Government and Housing
The Pmerican housing market is subject to a mind boggling array of

government interventjorB by various levels of government.

These include;

housing codes, which set quality standards that must be met by builders;
licensure of real estate brokers and salespeople;
stipulates that land in a given area can

be

exclusionary zoning, which

used only for certain purposes;

open housing laws, which prohibit discrimination in the selling of housing;
rent control; interest rate and other regulations on mortgage lending institu-

tions; urban

renewal

programs, under which communities use their powers of

eminent domain to acquire urban land, destroy "slums," and sell the land to
private developers; real estate taxation; and interventions in the credit

market to incraase the flow of credit to housing (e.g., the Federal
Home Loan Bank Board).6
This essay focuses on what are probably the two most important federal
policies toward housing, at least in terms of costs to the government.7'

The

first is not even explicitly a housing program. It consists of certain provi—
sions of the federal income tax code which have the effect of lowering the costs
8
The second is the provision of housing
of owner—occupied housing.
for low income families at rents below cost. ,Both programs subsidize
the consumption of housing, the first mostly for middle and upper income groups,
the

second mostly for the poor. We will examine how each

affects economic

best source for an overall view of government housing p3licy remains
Aaron's (1972) classic work.
5

The

6

See Congressional Budget Office (1981) for a concise description of these

mortgage programs.
7

See

Aaron (1972, p. 162).

8
As noted below, there are also favorable provisions for owners of rental
housing, but these are not very large in comparison to those of owner occupiers.

— 3_

behavior, efficiency, and the distribution of real income.

As will be seen below, a number of countries have similar policies.
Although most of our attention will be devoted to the American experience,
some international comparisons will also be made.

Rationalizations for Government Intervention

1.3

Despite the fact that housing markets tend to be fairly
competitive (see Mills (undated) ),

it has been suggeted that government

action is required for reasons of efficiency as e11 as equity. Each of
these is discussed in 'turn.
1.3.1

Efficiency A±guments

The most frequently encountered efficiency argument concerns externalities in housing consumption. When an individual improves his property,
it increases the value of this investment. Simultaneously, the improvement
may increase neighbors' property va1ues.
tion

However, an individual's calcula-

of whether or not to undertake an improvement takes

the effect on his investments,
marginal

costs,

not those of his

account on].y

neighbors.. Thus, the

social benefits ofthe improvement exceed the private marginal

and the 'rational' property. owner is

socially

into

efficient amount.

..

-

likely to invest less than a
.

.

.

As a theoretical matter, it is hard to doubt that within a neighborhood,

some kind of property value interdependence exists. But it is equally

—4—

doubtful that all housing investments generate such externalities. Presunt—

ably, some such as painting outside walls create spillover effects. Others,
such as painting interior walls, do not. The usual Pigouvian analysis requires that subsidies be targeted specifically at those activities that

produce the externalities. It is pretty certain that the federal subsidies
for owner-occupied housing, which in effect lower the cost of housing in
general, are inefficient.
The empirical evidence for the existence of quantitatively significant

spillovers is weak. One would expect, for example, that

if externalities

were important anywhere, it would be in the slums, where housing density is

very high. Mills (undated, p. 15) notes that the presence of substantial

externalities

should provide a strong incentive for single ownership of neigh-

boring dwellings in such neihborhoods. No such tendency appears to exist.
Similarly, the literature reviewed by Muth (1973, p.. 35) indicates that the

removal of slums and

their

replacement by public housing does not have much

of an impact upon the values of surrounding properties. To the extent &uch
effects are present, they are probably due to the community facilities associated with the public housing (e.g., playgrounds), rather than the removal

of

slum

dwellings r Se.

Another externality sometimes mentioned is the "social cost of slums."

The notion is that poor housing does more than merely lower neighborhood
property values. It breeds crime delinquency, fires, disease, mental

5

illness,

etc. (Weicher 1979, P. 491). It seems reasonable to believe, how-

ever, that it is the povery associated with poor housing, rather than the

housing per se, that causes these costly social problems. (See Mills (undated)) or Aaron (1972, p. 22.)

A quite different efficiency argument is that federal subsidies for
housing merely offset biases tqainst housing consumption which are induced

by local property taxes. The soundness of this view depends upon one's
view of the role of the property tax. To the extent that it is an excise
the view has some merit. However, if the property

tax on housing,

tax is just a fee for services provided by the community, then it is
really not a distortion.

Such a notion is consistent with the "Tiebout

model," in which househids shop around for the community whose bundle of
public services best suits their needs, and property taxes finance these
services.

The Tiebout benefit-tax result holds exactly only under very restrictive

assumptions. Mills

(undated)

has argued that suburbs are more likely to

satisfy the conditions required for a Tiebout equilibrium than inner cities,
in part because suburbanites have more mobility than their urban counterparts.
Thus, the notion of a federal housing subsidy as an offset to a pre-existing

distortion

is probably more relevant to inner cities than suburbs. Again,

it is hard to justify subsidies for owner-occupied housing on this basis.

1.3.2

Equity Arguments

Housing

subsidies can also be rationalized in terms of redistributiOn

al goals. B providing subsidized housing for the poor, a more egalitarian

—6—

income distribution can perhaps be achieved. It is hard to see the relevance
of this point for subsidization of owner—occupied housing-, because the

incidence

of owner—occupation incr3ases with income. (See Section 3 below.)

Egalitarian

arguments cannot so easily be dismissed in the case of subsidized

housing for low income individuals. But here a puzzle arises. It is well—
known that if the government's sole objective is redistribution, and the
recipients' preferences are paramount, then using cash to redistribute
income is more efficient than a subsidy, in the sense that the same utility
level for the recipient can be reached with a smaller cash outlay.9

If this is the case, how can one account for the prevalence of subsidies
and in—kind transfers? If the donor cares not only about the beneficiary's

utility
well,
may

level, but the composition of the latter's consumption bundles

as

then inducements for the beneficiary to consume certain commodities

be

efficient. Alternatively, attitudes toward housing may be influenced

by "commodity egalitarianism," the notion that "society"

cares not only

about the distribution of income per se, but also about the distribution
of certain "necessary" commodities (see Tobin (1970).) In 1949 the

U.S. Congress set as a national goal ". . . a decent home and a suitable
living environment for every ?nierican family." (Weicher (1979, p. 470.))
Nichols and Zecl4thauser (1981) have suggested another possible rationaliza-

tion for in-kind transfers. Suppose that it is difficult for the welfare
authorities to determine who is qualified for a program and who is not. In
mis argument is discussed more formally in SectiOn 4.2. As usual

it applies strictly only in the absence of other distortions of competitive
market price.

—7—

other words, "welfare fraud" is a possibility. In the Nichols—Zeckhauser
model, in—kind transfers of inferior goods may discourage some impostors

applying for welfare. By forcing the "truly needy" to consume a

from

certain bundle, consumption efficiency is reduced. But program efficiency
increases, because the money is better targeted. The optimal design of

transfer

packages requires taking both kinds of efficiency into account.

It is hard to know how important any of these considerations are in

determing policy. Perhaps it is the high visibility of housing that

leads

people to view it as a "problem" that must be dealt with publicly.

In any event, many economists find public policies based upon such paternalistic principles to be quite unattractive from a philosophical view-

point, Indeed, Mills (undated) has suggested that in the U.S., official
paternalism toward low income groups may be tinged with racism ——

the

poor

are disproportionately black, and th.ere is an underlying expectation that
they cannot be expected to manage their lives without help.

Another explanation for the existence of low income housing subsidies

is political. An in-kind subsidy tends to help not only the beneficiary,

but also the producers of the favored commodity. Thus, a transfer program
that increases the demand for housing will tend to benefit the building
industry,

which will then

lend its support to a coalition in favor of the

program. As indicated in Section 4.1 below, housing programs for the poor
have focused on the construction of new units, thus benefitting the housing
industry rather directly.
It is also important

tion

to

note that

unlike

cash transfers, the administra-

of a public housing program requires substantial amounts of resources.

-8—

(Contracts must be arranged, standards set arid enforced, etc.)

According

to most theories of bureaucratic behavior (see, e.g., Niskanen (1971)),
one would therefore expect public employees to put their political support

behind low income housing progrms. In 1977, when welfare reformers proposed
that subsidized housing be phased out and replaced with cash grants, the
Department of Housing and Urban Development (H.U.D.) was in vigorous opposition (Weicher (1980, p. 51)).

1.3.3 Summary and Evaluation10
The main efficiency argument for subsidizing housing is the exist-

ence of externalities. However, the mechanisms through which these externalities work are not well understood and there is little evidence that

they are quantitatively important. The redistributive rationalization is
equally weak. To the extent that society seeks to distribute income to the
poor, the subsidies to owner—occupation are perverse, because as will be seen

below, they benefit mainly the middle and upper income classes. The in—kind
subsidies involved in low income public housing are inefficient in the sense
that the poor could be made better off if the transfers were made directly in
cash.

Paternalism and political

considerations seem to be the sources of this

We have discussed housing

policies in terms of the traditional

policy.

10

goals

of equity and efficiency. It has been argued that public housing can be an
effective means of alleviating racial discrimination in housing. (See. e.g.,
Suxnka and Stegman (1978, pp.
409-410)). Even if it does have someefficacy,
however,
the question is whether or not there are more efficient
achieving this end.

ways of

—9—

2.

Methodological Issues
The theoretical considerations of the last section left unanswered

many important empirical questions that surround housing policy. It may
be, for example, that even if the policy is inefficient on a priori grounds,

the actual magnitude of the distortions is small. Similarly, without examination of the data, one cannot assess the distributional effects of the

policy.
In order to investigate such issues, one must first understand how

the consumers and producers of housing make their decisions. Some special
aspects of housing as a commodity make it difficult to use the standard

theoretical and econometric tools. Because these difficulties crop up in
virtually every empirical study of housing, we discuss them now all
together, rather than later on a piecemeal basis.

2.1 Specifying a Model
In general, the effect of a housing policy is to change the price of

housing services facing a household, and perhaps its disposable

income

as

well. (For example, a subsidy at rate s would change the effective price

of

0

housing services from its initial value, say h' to (l—s)p).

given

Therefore,

price and income elasticities, one can predict individuals' responses

given policies. These considerations suggest the following strategy:

to

Employ
for

appropriate econometric techniques to estimate the demand

and

supply

housing services, using either cross—sectional or time series data.

yields

This

a set of the relevant elasticities. Then, assuming that people would

react to the price and income differences generated by the policy in the same
way as those generated "naturally," use the elasticities to estimate the

—10—

program's impact on behavior. We discuss problems in estimating demand
and supply functions, and

then

turn to the influence of the market environ-

ment upon the results.

2.1.1 Demand11
Empirical investigators typically begin by specifying a model that

the quantity of housing services demanded for the th observation
, to some function f() of price
income (Y.) and a vector

relates
.(QD)

of demographic variables

that theoretical considerations suggest might

be relevant:
(2.1)

=

In some cases f ( •)
as

f(PhilYj;zj)

is specified in an ad hoc but convenient form. such

log linear (Polinsky and Eliwood (1979)), while other times itis derived

from maximization of an explicit utility function (bbot and Ashenfelter
(l976), which is also chosen on the basis of convenience.

Equation (21) is deterministic, so the next step is to posit some
stochastic specification. Usually, an error term is appended additively.

Given a

set of observations on hJ. '

hj

'

stochastic specification, the model's parameters

Y

1

and Z.

can be

1

and the

estimated using a

variety of econometric techniques. The behavioral elasticities implied
by the parameter

policy

estimates

can then be used to predict the effects of

changes. Alternatively, one can obtain such predictions by sub-

1).

stituting the new values for price and income directly into equation .

11

For a useful survey of the

Mayo (1981).

results

.of housing demand

studies,

see

—11—

There

Economic theory puts very few constraints on the form of f (-),

(1)

so

are several problems with this standard approach:

the investigator must make

an

essentially ad hoc choice with respect to

the specification of either the demand or utility function.

(2) It must be assumed that f(-) is identical across individuals.
(When time

not

series data are used, the analogous assumption is that f(-) does

change over time.)
(3)

Demand functions

like (2.1) ignore the dynamic nature of housing

decisions. Because these decisions are
future prices and

incomes

(See Henderson arid

the

cycle context, expected

as well as those of the current period are relevant.

lonnides

(1981) or Weiss (1978).)

(4) Observations on hi are never directly observed. Only p. x
value of the dwelling —- is observable.
(5) For many

but

made in a life

owner—occupiers,

housing is not only a consumption item,

an investment as well. To the extent this is the case, the theory

portfolio

——

of

behavior suggests that the demand for housing depends upon the

joint distribution of the returns from housing and other assets. Even those
econometric studies discussed below which explicitly recognize the investment nature of housing decisions have failed to take into account

this

consideration.

this

Note that
need not imply that the elasticities be identical across
individuals; such will be the case only for the very simple Cobb—Douglas specification. One can also specify a random coefficients model, which allows for
a distribution of elasticities across people. See King (1980).

12

—12-

(6) It must be assumed that the fitted relationship will continue
to apply when a right hand side variable for a given observation changes.

For example, if an investigator using cross—sectional data finds that

hi

3QD

is

less than one, it does not imply that increasing a particular

family's income ten percent will increase its housing consumption by a smaller
percentage. Al]. that one really learns is that in the data, poorer

families

devote a larger fraction of their income to housing than richer families,

ceteris paribus. Only by assuming that poorer families would act like the
richer ones if their incomes were increased, and vice versa, can one give
any behavioral significance to elasticity estimates from regressions.

Moreover, most of the studies using cross—sectional data to examine housing

demand implicitly or explicitly assume that all agents are in equilibrium)3
Were not this the case, then a regression of housing services on price, income, and demographic variables could not be interpreted as a demand equa-

tion. On the other hand, analyses of longitudinal and time series data
often allow for the possibility that at a given point in time, households

may not be at

their long-run equilbrium positions,

make it prohibitively

expensive to respond

because adjustment costs

immediately

to

changes

in economic

environment.

It is usually assumed that such a disequilibrium is eliminated over
time as households move gradually to their equilibrium positions (e.g., Rosen

13

An

important exception is King (1980),

which.

is discussed below.

—13—

and

Rosen (1980)). Such models lack a strong choice theoretic foundation,

but

tractable alternatives are lacking. Venti and Wise (1982) measuxe

transactions

costs by including them as a random parameter in

-

a model of

moving decisions. Their results confirm earlier conjectures that these costs
are large relative to income ($60 per month in a sample of low income households whose median monthly income was $320.)

2.1.2 Supply
A popular approach for studying the supply of housing is to assume
some housing production function, estimate its parameters, and use them to
infer the shape of the supply function.14 For example, Ingrain and Oron

(1977) assume that housing services are a constant elasticity of substi-

tution

(C.E.S.) function of "quality capital" and "operation inputs" (p.284) -

Polinsky

and Ellwood (1979)

also posit a C.E.S.

production function, but

assume that its arguments are land and capital. Follain (1979) and
(1980) eschew selection of a specific form for the

and

instead

start

function,

by postulating supply functions that include the

of housing and input costs as arguments.

suggest

production

Poterba

price

(Of course, duality considerations

that one can work backward from the supply curve to the underlying

production function.)
The specification of
determine

the underlying technology can

sometimes pre-

substantive results. For example, since Polinsky and Eliwood (.1979)

Given the production function and input prices, one can derive
marginal cost schedule which, under competition, is the supply cuXve.

14

the

—14—

assume constant returns to scale (p. 210) the implied long run upp1y
curve of housing services is perfectly elastic, regardless of parameter
estimates.

15

Postulating such a technology, then, guarantees the result

that policies that affect housing demand will have no effect on the long
run producer's price of housing services, at least as long as input prices

remain unchanged. The interesting questions then become how high do prices
rise in the short run, and how much time is required to reach long run
equilibrium?

Various approaches have been used to model the process of adjust-

ment to the new equilibrium. Ingram and Oron (1977, p. 292) assume that
the most a landlord can invest each period is limited to the amount of
cash generated by the existing investment, even if this is insufficient

to close the gap between the desired and actual housing stock. Poterba
(1980) argues that the -supply of housing may be affected by conditions in

the credit market, and summarizes these by the flog of savings deposits

received by savings and loan associations. Poterba also assumes a delayed
supply

response to changes in all right-hand side variables, which

entered

are

in polynomial distributed lags. (p. 10).

2.1.3 Market Environment
In microeconomettic studies of demand or

is

supply,

the key question

how individual units react to exogenous changes in their budget con-

straints. No explicit consideration of the market environment is usually

taken. To understand
structure

overall effects, however, the

is crucial --

the

impact

question of market

of a given housing policy will depend

The assumption of a horizontal supply curve is quite common, e.g.,
DeLeeuw and Stryuk (1975, p.15). Of course, to the extent that input
prices change with the size of the housing industry, the long run supply
curve will have a non—zero Slope.
15

see

-15-

upon its effect upon the market price of housing, which will in turn depend mutatis mutandis upon the degree of competiveness in the market, the
amount of slack existing when the program is initiated, the extent of
housing market segmentation, etc.

The standard assumption is that competition prevails. As de Leeuw
and Struyk (1975) and Poterba (1980) note., however, even given competi—
tion, complications arise because two markets have to be equilibrated by

the price of housing services: the market for existing houses and the
market for new construction. The situation increases in complexity when
one takes into account the multiplicity of tenure modes. Each type of
housing is traded in its own submarket, and each of these (inter—related)
markets has its own clearing price. If the housing market is non—competitive,
the question of supply effects is even more difficult because of the

16
absence of a generally accepted theory of price determination.
In practice, most econometric investigations of the issues discussed

in this essay ignore such considerations. As will be seen below, attention
tends to be focused upon the estimation of demand curves. It is usually
assumed that the housing market is perfectly competitive, and that the

long supply curve of housing services is infinitely elastic.17

16
An example of the use of a non—competitive framework is Rydell
(1979), who attempts to explain the insensitivity of housing prices to

apparent variations in
polistic competition.

market tightness by recourse to a theory of mono-

17
An exception is Englund and Persson (forthcoming). In their simulation
model of the Swedish housing market, they assume that the supply of housing
services is perfectly inelastic.

—16—

2.2

Measuring Quantity and Price
Our discussion of model specification suggests that accurate

measurement of the quantity and price of housing services is crucial. This
is a very difficult task, because housing is intrinsically a multi—dimensional commodity ——

a dwelling is characterized by its number of rooms, their

size, the quality of construction and plumbing, etc, It is therefore not
obvious how to summarize in a single number the quantity of housing

services generated by a given dwelling. Usually it is assumed that the
amount of housing services is proportional to the rent paid, or, in the

case of an owner-occupied dwelling, to the value of the house. (See, e.g.,
Polinsky and Eliwood (1979).) A problem here is that the rental value of
a dwelling at a given time may reflect characteristics of the market that

have nothing to do with the quantity of housing services actually generated.
As King (1980) points out, for example, the special income tax treatment of
rental income will generally influence market values.18

An

alternative

tack would be to abandon the possibility of summar-

izing housing services in a single variable, and instead to estimate a

series of demand functions for various housing attributes. An immediate
problem is the bsence of observable market prices for attributes. Recent—
ly Witte, et.al (1979) have implemented the suggestion of Rosen (1974) that

attribute demand

equations

be estimated in a two step process: (1) esti-

mate the implicit attribute prices from an hedonic price equation19 for

18
Other problems with the concept of housing services are discussed
by Diamond and Smith [1981).
A regression of the price of a commodity R on its characteristics
19
(a vector X ) is the basis ohan hedonic price index for the commodity.
.
See Rosen
characteristic is
The implicit price of the i
L1974).

—17—

housing; and (2) use these prices as explanatory variables in regressions
with attribute quantities as the dependent variables.

However, Brown and

Rosen (1.982) have shown that major statistical pitfalls are present in this

procedure, and that the validity of Witte, et al's results is therefore in,

question. Although some progress is being made in dealing with these
problems

(see Quigley (1982 ), the

approach that continues to predominate

is to measure the quantity of a dwelling's housing services by its market
value (if it is owner—occupied) or otherwise by its rental value.

Because the price of housing services is housing expenditures
divided by the quantity of housing services, the above noted difficulties
in measuring the latter are bound to create problems in

measuring price.

Several possible solutions are found in the literature. A popular approach is to estimate hedonic price equations for different cities, and

use them as the bases for a housing price index. However, Alexander (1975)
has pointed out several problems with this approach. One of the most
important is that the selection of a set of attributes to be included in
the hedonic price index must be decided on ad hoc grounds, but the sub—
stantive implications of the estimates often depend upon the choice made.

Further

difficulties in measuring price are caused by the

fact that

even within a given housing market, the price per unit of housing servi:es
may not be a constant.. Struyk et.al., (1978) have argued that one of the

key characteristics of urban housing
each

of which has

differences

markets is

different prices per unit

of

the existence of sübmarkets,

housing services. (Such

might exist because of residential segregation.) Most empirical

studies, however, continue to assume that any given city is characterized by
a single (pre—tax) price of housing.

—18--

Measuring "Shift" Variables

2.3

In order to obtain unbiased estimates of demand and supply parameters,
one must also take into account variables other than price that might he

affecting decisions. On the demand side, probably the most obvious candidate is income. Standard theoretical considerations suggest that for in-

come

a permanent rather than annual measure should be used. It is not ob-

vious how to compute permanent income, and

the

investigators have dealt with

problem in various ways. Carliner (1972) and Rosen (1979), analyzing

longitudinal data, take an average of several year's worth of annual income.
Struyk (1976) uses the fitted value of a regression of income on a set of
20

personal characteristics as his permanent income measure.
analyses, a distributed lag on income is often used.

In time series

(See, e.g., Hendershott

and Shilling (1980).)

With respect to the selection of other shift variables, investigators
have to make arbitrary decisions with respect to which ones to choose, their
measurement,

candidates

of

and how they interact with the other variables. Typical

for inclusion are race, sex of head of household, age, number

children, etc.

supply side, theory suggests that input prices are important
variables. There are serious problems involved in obtaining operational
On the

measures of housing input
Boeckh index of the

costs. For

price of

example, Poterba (1980) uses the

inputs for a new one family structure to

Neither the necessity of using a permanent income measure
nor the types of solutions just mentioned are unique to the study of housing;
estimation of demand functions.
they appear throughout the literature on the

.20

measure construction costs. Although this is a commonly used index, it
is well—known that it is deficient because fixed weights are used in its
computation. Ingrain and Oron (1977) use the fuel component of the consumer' s price index to account for the price of all

as Rothenberg

operating inputs, but

(1977) points out, it is not clear that this index captures

all the needed information.

2.4
The quandries facing students of housing are similar to those who
seek to explain other kinds of complicated economic behavior (e.g., the

determinants of business investment). Although it is easy to carp about
the siznplifications made by econometric investigators, compromises are re-

quired in

order

to obtain tractable models. On

the

other hand, in light

of the serious methodological problems, one must regard substantive con—
clusions regarding policy with a very critical eye.

Housing Behavior and the Federal Income Tax

3.

In this section we discuss:

(1) the key provisions of the income

tax code that pertain to housing; (2) how the provisions change the

effec-

tive cost of housing; (3) the impact of these cost changes upon iñdividuals
housing decisions; (4) the implications of these changes for economic
efficiency and equity; and (5) some proposals that have been made for
reform.

3.1

Housing Related Tax

Exclusion

require

that

of

Provisions

Net Imputed

Rental. The U.S.

federal

tax code does not

the net value of the services received by owner—occupants from

their homes be included as taxable income. If these same units were rented out,

—20—

the income obtained would be taxed, after deductions for taxes, interest,

maintenance, etc. In other words, because an investment in owner—occupied
housing produces in—kind income rather than cash, that income is untaxed.
Deduction of Mortgage Interest. Tax payers can deduct from taxable
income the full value of all interest payments, including the interest on
22
home mortgage loans.

The deduction of interest has been a part of the

tax law since its inception. At that time (1913), however, consumer interest payments were minimal.

Deduction of Local Property Taxes.

Hc1necwnersaXeall0Wd.t0 deduct

all state, local and foreign taxes paid on real property. This provision,

which also dates from the beginning
that such taxes represent a

of the code, was based on the idea

reduttiofl In disposable income. To the extent

rationthat local taxes are user fees for locally provided services, this
alization lacks validity.
Deferral of Capital Gains on Home Sales.

income are any capital gains from

Excluded from taxable

the sale of a principal residence when

another residence costing at least as much is purchased within two years

of the sale of the former one. This
consequence of the view that

provision, introduced in 1951, was a

individuals' decisions to change houses were

to a
to personal reasons or uncontrollable circumstances, as opposed
would cause undue
profit motive. Therefore, taxation of the capital gain
due

hardship.
For more detail, see congressional Budget Office (l981) upon which
most of this section is based.

21

There are certain limitations for interest payments on property held
not important in the current context.
for investment income, but these are
advantageous to take the standard deFor certain homeowners, it may be more
duction than to itemize. Sde HendershOtt and Sleinrod (1981).
22

—21—

One—Time Exclusion of $125,000 Capital Gains in Home Sales for
payers 55 Years of Age and Older. Provisions to shield elderly taxpayers
from potentially heavy tax burdens when they decide to become renters or

move to less costly residences were first introduced.in 1964. The cut-off
age at that time was 65 years and the exemption was available only under

special

circumstances. In light of this provision and the one concerning

deferral just discussed, most investigators have found it safe to assume
that for all practical purposes, the tax rate on capital gains from owner—
occupied housing is zero.

Exclusion of Income from Tax Exempt Mortgage Bonds. In 1978 states
and localities began to sell tax exempt bonds to provide mortgage funds

for owner-occupied and rental units at below market interest rates. However,
in

1980, significant limits were imposed on the issuance of new tax exempt

bonds, and issues to finance new single family housing are now banned beginning

in 1983.

Table 3.1 shows some estimates of the foregone tax revenues

associated with the various exclusions discussed above. Note that these
estimates are based on the assumption that even if the provisions were

eliminated, people would continue to make the same housing decisions. As
both common sense and the empirical evidence reported below indicate,

this is an unrealistic assumption. Nevertheless, the figures in the table
at least indicate the orders of magnitude involved. The Congressional Budget
Office estimated that if all the tax preferences associated with housing
(except exclusion of imputed rent) were eliminated, it would be possible to

lower all personal marginal tax rates by 10% without sustaining any revenue

loss. (Congressional Budget Office 0.981, p. 40)).

-21a--

''ABLE

3.1

Approximate Revenue Losses
From the Special Tax Treatment of Owner—Occupied Housing,
Fiscal Year 198]. (niillionsof dollars)*

exemption of net imputed rent

16,413

deductibility of mortgage interest 19,805

*

Source:

deductibility of property taxes

8,915

deferral of capital gains

1,110

exclusion of capital gain for
"elderly"

590

tax exemptbond finance

840

Except for the exemption of net imputed rent, the
figures are from Congressional Budget Office (1981, p.
7). A study for the Department of Housing and Urban
Development estimated that in fiscal year
revenue loss due to the non-taxation of net imputed
rent was between $14 and $17 billion. (See Congreisional
table
Budget Office (1981, p. 20).) The figure.
found by taking $15 bj1iio, and mu1ip1ying by 177/163,
of the implicit GNP price deflators for 1980
the

.s

in the

ratio

and1979.

—22--

The main federal tax item concerning rental housing is accelerated
depreciation. Owners of rental property may claim accelerated depreciation
on their buildings, and amortize construction period interest and real estate
taxes over a ten year period, rather than the full economic life.23 The Congressional Budget Office (1981, p. 33) estimated that the foregone tax revenues
due to the tax treatxent of rental housing were about $1.9 billion. in'. 1981,

considerably less than those associated with owner—occupation.

With respect to tax concessions for housing interest payments, the

United States is roughly comparable to Western Europe. Fainstein (1980) estimates that the revenue loss as a percentage of gross domestic product in the
early 1970's was about 0.3% for Germany, 0.9% for the Netherlands, 1.1% for

Sweden, 0.7% for the United Kingdom, and 0.6% for the United States. England,
like the United States, levies no tax on imputed rental income (since 1963).

On the

other hand, some form of imputed net rental is taxed in Belqiun, Denmark,

Luxembourg, Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Sweden and West'.Germany.

3.2

Effects on the, Cost of Housing
Following Aaron (1972)24 denote RG = gross imputed rent, aN =

imputed rent, MA = maintenance, D =
taxes, and

MI

depreciation, T = state

net

and local

mortgage interest. Assume that io changes are ex—

23
For, a discussion of other features of the tax treatment of rental
housing —— recapture provisions, capital gains rules and minimum tax rules
—— see Hendershott and Shilling (1980).
24

See

also Laidler (1969).

—23—

pected

in either house prices or the general price level. Then by defini-

tion

RN=RG_MA_D_T_Mr.

(3.1)

If net imputed rental were subject to income taxation and a homeowner's:..
marginal

tax rate

were T, then the tax liability associated with home—

ownership would be t X N Under the current regime, the main ta
consequences of homeownership are to reduce taxable income by the sum of

MI and T ,

or

alternatively, to reduce tax liability by t X (MI+T). To

find the difference between tax liabilities under the status quo and
those which would occur if net imputed rent were taxed, we simply compute
X RN —

(3.2)

To

X (MI+T)) = : T (RN+MI+T)

get a sense for the numerical values involved, asssuine for simplicity

that the mortgage rate and the individual's opportunity cost of capital

are the same rate, i

property taxes are

proportion

of house value; and depreciation plus maintenance are a proportion

of house value d. Then (3.2) can be written as .T(i+t)V,

where V is

the

value of the house. When the homeowner spends (i+t+d)V

on housing services, he therefore derives tax savings

the after tax
(33)

imputed

of r(i+T)V , so

rent is

(i+T+d)V T(i+t)V =

((l—t)i

+ (l—r)r 4 diV

—24--

Alternatively,

the difference between the pre-and

post—income tax

costs

of housing, expressed as a proportion of the pre-tax cost, is

r (i+t

p

__y

(34)

i+T+d
p

Suppose that

= .025, i = .06, d = .03, arid the individual's marginal tax

rate is 0.2. The substitution into (3.4) indicates that the federal income

tax

lowers

the cost of owning by about 15%. For an individual with the same

circumstances but a marginal

rate

income tax

of 0.4, the difference would be

about 30%. The amounts involved are substantial, and increase with the

marginal

tax rate, ceteris pribus.

Hendershott

and Shilling (1980, pp. 3-6). provide a more, detailed

analysis of the costs of owner—occupation which is based on the analogy

between

the cost of housing services arid

the

"user cost of capital" from

the literature on the neoclassical theory of investment.25 Their derivation makes clear exactly what assumptions are required to obtain a simple

expression like (3.3). It begins with the notion that in
equilibrium,.one expects that the present value of the net cash

flows from

a

house will equal the initial equity investment. The positive

cash flows consist of the net imputed rent from the house, and a lump sum

received at the selling date. The negative cash flows include the after—tax

costs of mortgage and property taxes, the selling costs at the date of sale,
and the

outstanding

and Shilling

25

See,

assume

mortgage debt due at the

that:

e.g., Jorgenson (1971).

time

of the sale. Hendershott

—25—

(1)

Inflation is expected to generate increases in net revenues

at rate p , and in housing prices at rate q
(ii) Physical depreciation of the house occurs at rate d -

(iii)

The proportion, a ,

of

the purchase price is financed with a

mortgage at rate i

(iv) The house is expected to be sold after

time a percentage realtor's fee, p ,

is

N periods, at which

paid.

Then the equilibrium condition is

(3.5)

(l-a)V

=

N (l+p-y d)tlR
E

t=l

-

E

N (l—T )t (l+q—y d).
-Et=l

(l+e)t

(l+e)

N TiLti

t=l

+E

(l-p) (l+q-

(l+e) t=l (l+e)

(l+e)N

where

V=

purchase

e = after
=

R =
ty

=

tp=

price of the house, including land

tax rate of return available on other investments..

ratio of the value of the structure to the value of structure
plus land.
implicit rent during the first period
marginal income tax rate.

property tax rate.

Ct = mortgage payment in period t
=

mortgage loan outstanding at the end of period t

Because a is the loan to value ratio, (l-a)V is the equity investment
in the house. The sums on the right hand side are the present values of

—26—

the stream of imputed rents, the after tax cost of property taxes,

the

mortgage payments, the tax savings from interest reductions, arid the

net "profit" from selling the house. Note that the income tax rate is

not included in the last term. This reflects the realistic approximation
that the rate on housing capital gains is zero.

Hendershott and Shilling go on to show that if: (i) The mortgage i5

standard fixed rate, fixed payment mortgage or f the variable rate is
expected to remain at the constant value i through period N; (ii) The
a

holding period is "large" (N approaches infinity); (iii) There are no
selling costs, (p = O)j (iv) The net mortgage rate equals the net rate
of return available on other iivesthents (e= (l-t) i); (v) The expected
rate

of

increase in implicit rents equals the expected rate of increase in

housing prices (p=q); and

0.6)

(vi) The

E(l—T,)i —

structure to value ratio is 10; then

q +d+

(l—r)tJ!

where P is the general price level.
The crucial difference between (36) and
q ,

the

(3.3)

is the presence of

expected rate of increase in housing prices. When homeowners ex-

pect capital gains, it lowers their effective cost of housing.

This tact

is often ignored in popular discussions of housing markets. The expectation of rising prices is an incentive to buy a house provided that

households

are not constrained in their ability to borrow in the capital

markets.
The fact that housing capital gains are untaxed is reflected by the
fact that q is not multiplied by U—t7) .

As a result, the decrease In

—27--

the cost of housing as the inflation rises is greater for individuals with
high values of

To see this, assume for simplicity that increases in

the inflation rate are matched by increases in the nominal interest rate,

=1

i. e.,

.

Then taking the derivative of (3.6) with respect to q

yields
•

T

y

Clearly, even if nominal interest rates increase on less than a one—for—one
basis with inflation, the tax advantages associated with the deduction of

nominal interest payments will still be greater the higher the tax rate,
though the magnitude will be less.

Hendershott and Shilling evaluate (3.5) on a quarterly basis

from

1955 through 1979. As usual, some arbitrary decisions have to be made

to

estimate expected inflation rates. They compute the general expected inflation rate as a 16 quarter distributed lag on current and past rates
of change in

prices.

In Table 3.2 we present annual averages of

Hendershott and Shillings' quarterly figures.

The first column is based

upon a marginal income tax rate of 0.30; the second of 0.45. The figures
make clear that the cost of owner

occupation

fell dramatically in the 1970's,

a phenomenon due largely to increases in the inflation rate.

26

also

that the higher marginal tax rate is associated with a low user cost, as
expected.
As Hendershott and Shilling note, even this relatively elaborate.

estimate of the user cost of capital suffers from inadequacies. For example,

26
Presumably, if Hendershott and Shilling had used each year's average
value of r , rather than keeping it constant over time, an even greater
decline wouYd have been evident, given that inflation was pushing people
into higher personal income tax brackets. See Hendershott and Slemrod (1981)
for a discussion of the problems involved in computing the marginal tax
rate relevant for hoineownership decisions.

-27a--

TABLE

3.2

User Cost of Housing: 1955_1979*

=.30

t

*

Owner-Occupied
t

=.45

Rental

Year

y

1955

.0563

.0478

.0873

56

.0500

.0410

.0803

57

.0539

.0446

.0827

58

.0591

.0502

.0878

59

.0627

.0536

.0921

1960

.0666

.0572

.0989

61

.0680

.0589

.1010

62

.0666

.0576

.0992

63

.0671

.0584

.0988

64

.0650

.0563

.0975

65

.0596

.0508

.0936

66

.0552

.0460

.0907

67

.0514

.0418

.0859

68

.0455

.0355

.0801

69

.0402

.0291

.0786

1970

.0492

.0378

.0927

71

.0419

.0313

.0809

72

.o4ri

.0299

.0818

73

.0369

.0250

.0866

74

.0350

.0223

.0866

75

.0241

,0117

.0681

76

.0292

.0165

.0801

77

.0227

.0093

.0807

78

.0177

.0040

.0847

79

.0231

.0059

.0867

Source:

shilling

y

Averages of quarterly figures presented by Hendershott and
(1980, pp. 33—34).

—28—

it

does not take into account people's expectations on the future course

of tax policy. Neither does it allow for the holding period or depreciation rate to vary with the tax structure. Similar problems, of course,
have

been encountered in attempts to estimate the after tax costs

of

business capital.

Hendershott and

the

user cost of

Schilling use a - similar

-.-

-

rental occupation. (The equilibrium condition takes into

account the federal tax

are

framework to derive

provisions

for rental housing.) Their

reported in the third column of Table 3.2.

calculations

Over time, renting has become

expensive relative to owning. The implications of this phenomenon are

dis-

cussed below.
It is common to refer to the tax induced lowering of the relative
cost of owner—occupation as an "implicit subsidy" of owner—occupied housing..

Alternatively, housing related deductions are viewed as "tax expenditures",
items that are exempt from tax but which would be included under a compre-

hensive tax base. Although we follow this practice, it should be noted
that some object to it strenuously. First of all, in order to characterize
an item as being "exempt", one must first have some kind of criterion for

deciding what "ought" to be included. As is well known, there exists no
rigorous set of principles for determining what belongs in income.
(Musgrave (1959)).

In addition, the tax

expenditure concept has been attacked on more

philosophical grounds:
"...The tax expenditure concept implies that all income
what
belongs of right to the government, and
government decides, by exemption on qualification, not
to collect in taxes constitutes a subsidy. This
violates a widely held conviction, basic to the American
polity...that the income earned by the people belongs to
them, not the government." (Jones, (1978, p. 53) ) -

that

S

—29—

Characterizing

the tax provision discussed herein as a "subsidy" is not

meant to carry these ideological implications, but merely to describe their
impact on the cost of owner-occupation.

Effects on Behavior

3.3

3.3.1 Housing Decisions
Laid].er's (1969) early attempt to assess the impact of the federal tax

treatment of housing upon housing decisions begins with an estimate of its

effect upon the cost of housing for each of several income groups. This is
done by evaluating expression (3.4) with reasonable values of the appropriate

parameters. (All
income

parameters

except the marginal tax rate are constant across

groups.) To find the amount

of

housing demand generated by these tax

price changes, Laidler assjmes a price elasticity of demand of -1.5,
a figure consistent with much of the econometric literature completed at the
induced

time of his study. He finds that in 1960, the housing stock of $355,369
million dollars would have been $60,699 million smaller had imputed rent been

taxed.27 This calculation assumes that the long run supply of housing services
is

perfectly elastic, an

assumption

that is in line with some econometric

evidence.
One problem with the

used

is based

upon

Laidler estimates is that the price elasticity

econometric studies which ignore the impact of taxes

upon the relative price of housing. In addition, attention is focused
only upon the quantity of

housing consumed by owner-occupiers, with no

attempt made to incorporate the effect of taxes upon the tenure choice.
Subsequent work has attempted to remedy these problems.

27

Laidler £1969, p. 60).

—30—

Rosen L979) uses cross-sectional U.S. data from 1970 to estimate
jointly equations for the quantity of housing services demanded and the tenure

choice. He assumes that the demand for housing services by owners (conditional
upon owning) is a translog function in the relative prices of owner—occupied
housing and permanent income, with an intercept which depends upon

the

individual's personal characteristics.28 The price of owner—occupied housing
is based upon equation (3.3). A probit equation is used to model the choice
between renting and owning. The choice depends upon the relative prices of

both

owner and renter-occupied housing, permanent income, and the same set

demographic

variables as in

of

the demand function. The two equations axe. estimated

a statistical procedure which corrects for possible biases associated
with the fact that the assortment of people into tenure modes in not random.
using

(Heckman (1979).)

The results indicate
occupied

about

housing services evaluated at the mean

is —1.0; the income elasticity,

0.76.29 The sign of the price-income interaction term is positive,

implying that the

price

that the price elasticity of demand for owner—

price

elasticity of demand falls with income. The effective

of owner—occupied housing also enters the tenure choice equation with a

negative

sign, while income affects the probability of owning positively.
-

These include age of head of household, number of dependents under
28
17
in the family unit and age and sex of head of household. Permanent
age
income is a four year average of annual income.

29 McRae and Turner (1981) argue that allowing for the impact of taxes upon
f actor input ratios in the production of owner-occupied housing would lead to a
lower estimates of the income elasticity of demand. Unfortunately, .

they study only purchasers of homes with mortgages from the Federal Housing
Aaniinistration (FHA), a rather unrepresentative sample.

—31--

The parameter estimates are used to predict how housing decisions

would change if net imputed rent were taxable. Such a change would generate a new value of the price of owning for each family. 30(Assuming that

the long run supply curve of housing services is perfectly elastic, the
possibility of changes in the pre-tax price of housing services can be

ignored.) By substituting these new values into the probit equation, the
expected proportion of homeowners under the new regime can be calculated.
Similarly, by substituting into the demand equation, the expected amount

of

housing demanded condithnal on owning can be predicted.

The results are shown in Table 3 .3. Taxation of net imputed rent
produces substantial reductions in the expected amount of owner—occupied
housing demanded.
greater

Although

families in the

increases in the price

highest income brackets face

of housing, their demand is sufficiently

less price elastic that their demands actually fall by smaller amounts.
The third column shows how the expected percentage of homeowners decreases

due to the removal of the tax advantages. The average change in the incidence of owner—occupied housing for the entire sample is 4.4%.

simulation, Rosen assum
accompanied

In another

that the removal of the housing tax subsidy is

by a proportional reduction in marginal tax rates so as to keep

constant. Despite the income effects so generated, ther are
still sizeable decreases in the quantity of housing demanded and in the

tax

revenues

percentage of homeowners

in

each income bracket.

30 Specifically, the price of a unit of housing services would rise from
$1 —

T(l+.r)
l+t+d

(see equation 3.4)

to $1.

—32—

TABLE 3,3
The Effects of Taxing Net imputed Income Upon Housing Decisions (1970)*

Gross Income Group

Status Quo
House Value

Change in
House Value

Change in
% Owning

0— 4000

10991

—1254

—2.6

4— 8000

14022

—2549

—3.9

8—12000

17856

—3107

—4.7

12—16000

21134

—3756

—4.9

16—20000

26665

—4343

—5.0

20—24000

29893

—4879

—5.4

24—28000

36477

—4379

—5.1.

>28000

48031

—4250

—4.8

*Source: Rosen (1979).

—33..

King

United

(1980)

studies

the impact of taxes on housing decision in the

Kingdom, where, as noted in Section 3.1, the tax treatment of housing

is similar to that of the United States. Like Rosen (1979), he examines
both the tenure choice and the quantity of services demanded conditional on

that choice. In Rosen's analysis the two decisions are modelled in an ad
hoc fashion, so that there is no guarantee that the estimates are consistent
with a single underlying utility function. In contrast, King derives both.
equations from the same structure of preferences.
Another important feature of King's model is that it allows for the

possibility that there is rationing in the choice of tenure modes. In the
United Kingdom, essentially three types of dwellings are available; owner—
occupied, government subsidized rental, and unsubsidized furnished rental.
Mortgages are not freely available in the U.K., and are rationed among

applicants. In addition, admission to the subsidized rental sector is
also rationed. King assumes that the household chooses the unsubsidized —

rental

sector only if it is rationed out of the other two.

In King's model, preferences are represented by a homothetic transiog
indirect utility function,

(3.7)

in v. =

in

(L.._)

—

g].

—

gi

2
2

(2)
gi

where V. is the th individual's utility, y. is income hi is the
price of housing services (which is defined using an expression like (3.4)),

Pgj

is a price index for all other goods, and the B

function parameters.

given

are the utility

On the basis of a suitable stochastic specification,

the probability that
tenure' mode as a finction

King eomputes

's

each individual will be observed in a
of the utility

function parameters, and hence is able to deduce the likelihood function.

The

's are then estimated by maximum likelihood.

—34—

An unusual aspect of King's model is that he does not
include any

controls

for the demographic situation of the family, as is common in

most housing demand studies. Income and the relative price of housing
are

the only explanatory variables. King does assume a "random coeffjcj"

model, i.e., that

and2 are to be regarded as means of the relevant

distributions.
King estimates the model with cross sectional
data

from..1973-74 for England and

Wales. -

He

finds

(s.e.=.0008) and 2O.0238 (s.e.=.0009). Perhaps more useful are

the

implied price elasticities of demand for housing. Evaluated at the means,
the

price elasticity of demand for owner—occupied housing is —.523; for

subsidized rental, -0.498; and for furnished rental, —0.645. (p.156.)
This elasticity for owner-occupation is somewhat less than Rosen's (i979).

figure of about —1.0 for U.S. data. King's analysis does not provide an

estimate of the income elasticity, because a value of 1 is imposed by the

utility function (3.7).
A disturbing aspect of King's results is that a statistical test
of the hypothesis that the utility functions for the discrete and continuous choices are identical is rejected at conventional significance levels.
He suggest two explanations for this finding. One is that different
spouses are responsible for different parts of the decision, and the two

spouses may have different utility functions. The second is that the assumption that rationing probabilities are exogenous results in a serious
model misspecification. Presumably, this latter deficiency could be
corrected by making the rationing probability a function of some observ-

able demographic chracteristics. But it is hard to imagine how to specify

—35—

a

set of characteristics that would affect the probability of

rationing

but not affect the decisions themselves.
In another paper, King (198].) uses his

estimates

to predict the

consequences of taxing the imputed income from owner-occupation.31 Under

the assumption that
rate

the

increased tax

revenues

are distributed as a flat

lump sum amount to each family, he finds that the taxation of net

imputed rent leads to an overall decline in the lOng—run consumption of

housing services of 13.7%. This is not too different frn Rosen's
suits for the U.S.

re—

In the exercise just described, King makes the "standard" asstmtp—

tion of an infinitely elastic supply of housing services. He also does
the simulation assuming..a priäe elasticity of-supply of 2.0,

a value found by Poterba (1980) in U.S. data. In this case, the overall
average
less

percentage decrease in housing consumption is 12.2%. Thiá is
than the result obtained in the perfectly elastic case, because

part of the removal of the subsidy is offset by a lower pre—tax price. It

interesting to note that departing from the assumption of perfectly
elastic supply does not have a dramatic impact on the substantive results.
is

The studies discussed so far
expected

have

ignored the impact of (non-taxable)

capital gains upon housing decisions. This

omission

is probably

a consequence of the fact that cross—sectional data are not well suited for
dealing with, such a phenomenon. Rosen and Rosen (1980) use U.S. time series

data to study the determinants of the

31

choice between renting and

I these calculations, the tenure choice is assumed
model.

to be

homeowner—

ex0genoUS

to the

—36-

ship. In their model, it is assumed that the overall proportion of families
who desire to be owners in a given year depends upon relative price of homeowning to renting, per capita permanent income, and a vector of shift variables. They posit a simple partial adjustment model to account for the fact

that

in a given year, the actual number of homeowners will not necssariiy

equal the number who desire to own.
The expression

for the price of owner—occupied housing used by Rosen

is essentially expression (3.6). The expected capital gains
component of the expression is calculated as the difference between the
one—year forward preduction of house value, ti-i , and the current value:
and Rosen

- V.

Vt =

An ARIMA model with one autoregressive and one moving

average parameter is used to generate

The price of renting is

simply the rental component of the consumer price index.
The relative price of owning to renting is entered as a polynomial

distributed lag, and permanent income is "proxied" by consumption. To take
account of the possibility that credit rationing may affect people's abil-

ities to become homeowners, a variable measuriig

deposits

the

availability

of

at th±ift institutions is also included.

The model is estimated using annual U •S. data fqr the period 194974.
The price term.is negative and significant..at. conventioziái levels.

The coefficient on income

is positive and also significant. There is

no

strong theoretical presumption for a positive effect of real par capita
permanent

income

on the incidence of homeownership, but it crops

up

virtually every study. The avaLiability of funds at credit institutions
coeffiexerts a positive effect on the proportion of homeowners, but this

cient

is not estimated precisely.

—37—

To assess the quantitate implications of their results, Rosen and
Rosen use them to predict the long—run consequences of changing the tax

treatment of housing. More specifically, the price of owner—occupied
housing that would prevail in the absence of tax

preferences

is substituted into the regression and the long-run proption ..of home
owners calculated. The model predicts a change in the incidence of owning
from 64% to 60% of all households in 1974. Because the income tax provisions relating to homeownership only became important with the rise in
marginal tax rates associated with World War II, this implies that about
one—fourth of the 16% increase in homeownership between 1945 arid 1974 carl

be attributed to these tax factors.
In another time series analysis of the tenure choice in the U.S.,
Hendershott and Shilling (1980) study quarterly changes in an "adjusted
homeownership rate," i.e., an ownership rate adjusted for changes in the
demographic structure of the population. The relative cost of owning to
renting and real disposable income per capita are the

key explantoxy

variables. The costs of the two housing modes are computed as discussed in

Section

3.2 (see the text surrounding Table 3.2).

Both variables are entere

in third degree polynomial lags.
Estimating the model

to 1978.4,

with quarterly data for the period 1960.2

Hendershott and Shilling

find a tatistica1ly significant

response to changes in the relative costs of owning and renting. Long
lags appear to be present; the peak response takes place after 12 to 15

quarters (p.26). Income has a positive and statistically significant
effect on homeownership only when the user cost is based upon a tax rate
of 0.30.

—38—

The regression coefficients are used to predict what the long—run
homeownership rate would have been in 1974 if property taxes and interest

payments had not been deductible. Hendershott and Shilling estimate that
the incidence of homeownership would have been 59% conditional on the
average marginal incothe tax rate being 15%, and 57.5% conditional on a -

Value

of 30%. It is striking to note the similarity to the result of

Rosen and Rosen, despite the differences n model specification and defin—.
ition of the price of housing services.

3.3.2 Investment Decisions
The models discussed above view housing primarily as a consumption
good, albeit one whose analysis is particularly complicated because of its

durable nature. In addition, housing is a form of investment, and as
such., it competes with other assets for a place in people's portfolios.

(See, e.g., Henderson and loannides (1981).) Thi aspect of housing has recently received considerable attention in discussions of whether invesment
jn housing4 has crowded out investment in business capital, and hence contrib-

uted to the "productivity crisis."

tpirical resolution
estimation

of this issue would require joint specification and

of housing and physical plant

ately, e.ven after

several decades

and equipment equations. tjnfortun—

of careful research on

the determinants of

business investment, not much consensus with respect to how the process should be modelled has developed. (See, e.g., Sunley (1981). We discuss,

then, a few theoretical and: empirical
what

might

studies whose results are indicative of

be happening, but are certainly not demonstrative.

—39—

in the

To begin, it is important to note the asymmetry

of

tax treatment

owner—occupied housing and business investments during inflationary

periods. It is sometimes argued that the

that

key

to the difference is the fe.ct

owner-occupiers are allowed to deduct nominal rather than real mortgage

interest. However, as Summers (1380) points out, this is somewhat misleading
reasoning, because nominal
taken

does

out

interest payments are also deductible on loans

to finance other types of investment. Thus,

deductibility se

not increase the attractiveness of owner-occupied housing vis a vis

investment.32

other forms of

The important sources of asymmetry

are that:

(1) In the presence of inflation, depreciation of business investment based
on historical costs lowers the real value of depreciation allow'ances33 and.
(2) Owners

gains.

of

physical capital pay tax on nominal rather than real capital

Other things being

the same, then, increases in inflation increase

the effective tax rate on business capital. Thus, inflation raises the
relative cost of an investment in business capita]. to one in owner-occupied

housing. When this fact is built into theoretical models which determine

the amounts of
——with

residential and

business

investment, the

result is predictable

reasonable parameter values, when inflation increases, the amount

owner—occupied housing relative to business investment goes up.
Hendershott and

Ku

of

(See

(1981), Feldstein (1981 ., or Muth (1982).)

Summers (1980) notes that an implication of such theories is that in
the

short run, an increase in the permanent expected rate of inflation should

32

A possible exception occtfrs if. ownership of housing relaxes capital market
constraints that would otherwise be binding (Summers (1980, p. 2 ).

Note that the distorting effect of a given level of inflation can
be offset by a suitable rate of accelerated depreciation.
33

—40--.

increase the market price of housing and reduce the value of the stock market..
He regresses the "excess returns" of both the stock market and

owner—occupi

housing on changes in the permanent expected rate of inflation. The excess
return on the stock market during a given period is defined as the ratio of
capital gains plus dividends to the beginning of period market valuation, all

the beginning of period treasury bill rate. The analogous measure for
housing is the appreciation in the price deflator for one—family structures
less the beginning of period treasury bill rate. (Imputed rent is ignored.)
minus

Finally, the expected inflation rate is estimated by assuming that expectations are formed on the basis of an autoregressive moving average process
applied to the preceding 10 years of data on inflation.
Summers estimates the regressions with quarterly U.S.. data from 1958—

78. The results suggest a strong negative relationship of excess stock

returns to increases in the expected inflation rate. A 1% increase in the
expected inflation rate reduces the value of the stock market by 7.6%. Ift
contrast, a similar increase in inflation increases the value of a house by
1.68%. As Sunmiers emphasizes (p.11), these results do not prove that the

interaction has increased residential, capital at the
expense of business capital. First of all, inflation rates and housing prices
inflation—taxation

generally have moved, together over time, while the stock market has moved in

the opposite direction. It is therefore dangerous to ascribe a structural
interpretation to such regressions. More importantly, the regressions do not
even attempt to establish a link between the price changes induced by the
inflation—taxation interaction and individuals' investment decisions.

—4].—

Summary and Evaluation

3.3.3

The federal income tax treatment of owner—occupied housing lowers the

Cost of owner-occupation relative to renting. Studies of housing demand

and

tenure choice in the United States, as well as the United Kingdom (where the
relevant tax provisions are similar) suggest that these provisions have had

a substantial impact on housing decisions. They Induce people to become
homeowners, and to consume more housing conditional on owning. The interaction of inflation with the tax system has exagerated these effects. Although

there

is speculation that the expansion of the housing stock has come at the

expense of business capital, not much in the way of econometric evidence is
available.

Although considerable progress has been made in explaining housing

behavior, much remains to be done. Consider the figures in Table 3•434 Even
without any elaborate calculation of the user cost of

from

columns 2 and

middle
As

3

housing,

that owner—occupied housing was a good

it is clear

deal

in the

1970's. The nominal capital gains rates tended to exceed mortgage rates.

a very rough approximation, one could say that owner—occupiers were con-

suming "free housing" over this period. Yet column 4 indicates that there
,was hardly a rush into owner—occupation. The proportion of owner occupiers

moved from just under 0.65 to just above it.

It is not hard to come up with explanations for this phenomenon. Transactions costs may inhibit the switch from renting to owning. Rationing in
the credit market may prevent individuals from obtaining loans.35 Jaffee
and Rosen (.1979) have emphasized the fact that households with different

35

mis discussion is based on Rosen (1981).
This possibility is discussed by Kearl (1979).

—41a-

34

TABLE

Some Data on Housing for 1973_78*

Median Value of
Owner-Occupied
Housing Units

Year

(dollars)
(1)

*

Nominal Capital
New Home
Owner Occupan
Gain Rate
Rate
Mortgage Yields

(percent)
(2)

(percent)
(3)

(4)

7.95

0.645

12.8

8.92

0.646

29,500

8.4

9.01

0.646

1976

32,300

9.4

8.99

0.647

1977

36,900

14.2

9•oj

0.648

1978

41,500

12.5

954

0.652

1973

24,100

1974

27,200

1975

Source:

For years prior to 1977, figures are from Rosen (1981, p. 325)
For 1978, colunus 1 and .4 are from Statistical Abstract of the
United States, 1981 (pp.794 and 793, respectively) and column.
from Economic Report of the president 1981, p. 308.
Column 2 is calculated from column 1.

3 is

demographic characteristics have quite different homeownership rates, and
the proportion of the population of those groups with low rates has been
increasing.

Finally, the

price

figures in the table are ex post. Ex ante,

individuals do not know for sure how much and in what direction prices will

move. Presumably,
concerning

housing decisions depend upon

the subjective uncertainty

the future course of prices. The point is that such potentially

important phenomena as these have either been ignored or treated periphera].jy
in empirical studies of the impact of taxes on housing. As progress on

the theoretical and econometric issues in dealing with these problems is
made, one can expect more reliable estimates to be produced.

3.4 Efficiency and Equity Implications
For purposes of estimating efficiency effects, the basic problem is to

the tax

model

law

in such a way that the usual techniques for measuring ex—

cess burden can be used. Laidler (1969) recognizes that the tax provisions

related

to housing introduce a wedge between the effective price of housing

services and their marginal cost. Therefore, it can be analyzed like any

other

distortion.

In particular, assuming there are no

other imperfections

in the system, and given estimates of: (a) individual i's mtr'inal tax
tax rate,
(b) the proportion of his housing costs which are not su1ject
to tax, , and Cc) the compensated price elasticity of demand T1., then the
size of the welfare loss 'triangle' is:36
36

See

Harberger (1964).

-.43—

(3.8)

ii

.5(t .&.)2V.fl.

yl].

Laidler

assumes a value of —1.5 for r, and 0.68 for .

value of t. for

He couputesa

each. of 10 income groups on the basis of Internal Revenue

Service statistics. Substituting into equation (3.8), he calculates the
excess burden

for

each group, and then

aggregates

to find a figure of $500

million dollars for the year l960. This is equivalent to about $50 per
household in 1980 dollars
Rosen (1979) uses the same basic framework for calculating the excess
burden on the basis of his estimates, with. a few differences: The excess
burden is computed on a household basis, a different price elasticity of

demand38

is used for each household (the translog functional form does not

constrain the elasticity to be constant), and the

behavioral

response

includes tax induced changes in the tenure choice. The average annual
excess

burden for the entire sample for the year 1970 is $107. In terms of

1980 dollars, this is about l92
It is difficult to decide whether or not excess burden of this magnitude

should be characterized as 'large.' Ultimately, the decision to el{m(nte
the

excess

burden

depends upon the

social and political costs of doing so.

To assess the distributional effects of taxing

imputed rent,

Rosen

estimates bow the disposable income of each household in his sample
would change, assuming that each would modify its housing behavior as pre-

dicted by his model. In
37

38

Table

Laidler (1969, p 64)

3.5,

This

the first column shows average dispos—

is

about $1.3 billion in terms

of 3.980 dollars.

The uncompsnsated price elasticity is converted to the theoretically required compensated version by using the Slutsky equation.

-43a—

TABLE

3.5

Disposable Income Under Alternative Tax Treatment of Net Imputed Rent*
(1970)

(1)

Status Quo
Income Group
$ 0

*

(2)

Tax Net Imputed
Rent

(3)

Tax Net Imputed
Rent and Maintain
Constant Tax Revenues

4,000

$ 2686

$ 2666

$ 2675

4 — 8,000

6024

5953

6018

8 —12,000

9452

9317

9678

12 —16,000

12715

12465

12736

16 — 20,000

15829

15396

3.5795

20 — 24,000

19088

1852].

19086

24 — 28,000

22248

21482

22208

> 28,000

30306

28800

30186

—

Source:

Rosen (1979, p.20).

—44—

able income for each income group under the status

g.

Column 2 shows

disposable income if net imputed rent is taxed, and the government makes no

other adjustments in the tax schedule. Column 3 is based on the assumption
that marginal tax rates are adjusted proportionately so as to keep tax revenues
the same as they were under the status quo. As is well-known, it is impossible

to summarize the degree of inequality in any "objective" distributional
measure. (Atkinson (1970)).

In any case, it appeazs that the taxation of

net imputed rent would tend to distribute income away from high income
groups, although at the very bottom end of the scale disposable incomes
would fall by small amounts.

King t1981) uses his estimates of housing demand parameters in the
United Kingdom to assess the efficiency and distributional consequences of

the tax treatment of housing in that country. Instead of relying upon the

usual second order approximation, he estimates the welfare effects directly
using the utility function (3.7). Specifically, King computes each household's "equivalent gain" (EG), the sum of money which it would have accepted

under the status quo as equivalent to the impact of taxing the imputed

rental

.th
from owner-occupation (pp.8-9). The equivalent gain for the i.

individual can be defined algebraically in temns of the indirect utility

function:

Vj(Y+EGjPji.Pg)

11
Vi(YiPh+iPg)
a

where the super'ipts-

0 and ldenote values under the status g and

new regime, respectively, and

the

the

other variables are as defined above. King

—45--

observes

that for a tax reform that holds tax revenues constant, the

sum. of

the cjuiv2.lait giin 2rovides a measure of the efficienc-r gain to the
econoiiy. Given c:ntant revenues, a positive average EG "...is equivalent
to a Pareto—improvement combined with. a set of lump-sum redistribut_jan

among households." (p.9.)
For

the sake of contrast, King also computes for each household a "cash

gain" (CG), which is just the effect of the reform on the
flow on the assumption that its behavior is

household's cash
exogenous (p.7). A comparison

of EG and CG

decisions

indicates whether or not allowing for endogenous housing

has important Substantive consequences.

Table 3.6 shows the distribution of gains and losses

by income decile

for both measuxes. The reduction in excess burden, which is given by the
-

overall-,

mean value of the equivalent gain, is O.l7 per week, about

0.4 of one percent of mean income. The overall' value of the cash gain has
to be zero given that it is computed under the assumptions of exogenous

behavior and constant tax revenues. The figures indicate that just as mT

the U.S., non-taxation of net imputed rent has substantial distributional
intplications.9Those with higher

incomes would tend

to be made worse off

by the taxation of net imputed rent, and vice versa.

-

Of course, the estimates of efficiency and equity effects described

in this section can

be

only as good as the underlying behavioral estimates,

so all the caveats of Section 2 should be recalled. In addition, several.
other qualifications deserve attention:
39 Patric Hendershott

results

has pointed out to me that comparison of Icing's-

with those of Rosen for the U.S. (Table 3.5) must take into
account the fact that Rosen assumes tax revenues are held constant via
proportional changes in marginal tax rates, while King assumes a lump
sum rebate.

-45a-

TABLE 3.6

Gains and Losses from Taxing Imputed Rent in the United Kingdoxn*
C-per week, 1973 prices)

Decile

Mean Income

Mean CG

Mean EG

1

10.77

.52

0.76

2

17.13

.34

0.67

3

24.34

.28

0.58

4

31.39

.24

0.48

5

37..64

.13

6

43.65

.05

0.24

7

49.43

—.05

0.14

8

57.07

—.24

—0.09

9

67.64

—.40

—0.32

10

103.20

—.87

—1.15

Overall

44.23'

*$ojt.ce: King (1981, p. 41).

0

:

0.36

0.17

—46—

1. The results all involve comparison of long—run equilibria. The
short—run capital gains and losses in housing which might occur between
equilibrium positions could have important distributional consequences.

2. The studies focus on housing as a use of income. Presumably,
if there were major decreases in the demand for housing, it would have a
large effect on the seurces side of the account as well.

The owners of those

factors used intensively in the production of housing services would suffer

reductions in income. As of yet, such effects have not been integrated into
studies of the distributive aspects of the tax treatment of housing.

3.5

Proposals for Reform
In the absence of clearly articulated goals for U.S. housing policy,

it is

bound to be difficult to determine how the tax treatment of housing

should be

changed. If we discount the externality arguments of Section 2,

then it would appear that subsidizing owner-occupation is inefficient. Moreover, if we take the evidence on the distributional implications from Section 3.4
seriously, this inefficiency cannot be viewed as "buying" society more equality.

Such considerations have lead a number of investigators to suggest that net
imputed income should be taxed at the same rate as other sources of income.
Thus, for example, Hughes (1980) argues that "...the inclusion of imputed
housing income in taxable income would be justified under almost any consistent

income tax system." (p.74) From this point of view, the only valid reason for
not taxing imputed rent would be administrative difficulties involved in
computing it.

—47--

This argument is in line with the famous Haig-Simons principle of tax

design,

which states that an individual should pay tax on his total income

regardless of the source. It is often suggested that departures from the
Haig—Simons criterion necessarily induce inefficiencies. Clearly, the excess

burdens reported in the last section are non-trivial. But

the

excess burden

computation is implicitly based upon a comparison with a lump sum tax. In

practice, such taxes are infeasible. The theory of optimal taxation shows
that if lump sum taxes are excluded, the efficiency maximizing set of tax

rates is in general a complicated function of the elasticities of demand and
supply for all commodities. (See Sandmo

cases

(1976)).

It is only in very special

that one would expect efficiency to require equal rates for all sources

of income. On the other hand, it is also highly improbably that the efficient

tax rate on imputed rental income is zero. Determination of the appropate
rate has received some attention (e.g., Atkinson (1977)), but remains an
important topic for future research.
A number of reform suggestions have been made which maintain the

basic structure of the status ,

but

seek to ameliorate its inegalitarian

income distributional consequences. Such a view might be consistent with
the

notion that there is some merit to the externality argument, but that

the subsidy goes too far in helping high income groups. Alternatively,
one might believe that there i5 no valid externality argument, but that it
is politically and administratively impossible to include imputed rent in

the tax

base.

In any case, these reforms focus upon reducing the valne of

mortgage interest and property tax deductions to upper income individuals.
One possibility would be to put ceilings on the amounts of mortgage inter-

est and property tax deductions, and/or capital gains exclusions. Other

—48—

proposals would convert the deductions into credi——every homeowner would
be allowed to subtract some proportion of interest and property tax pay-

ments from his tax liability. In this way, those with higher marginal tax
rates would not enjoy an advantage, ceteris paribus.
Questions of administrative feasibility lessen the attractiveness of

deduction limitations. Unless limitations in the deductibility of mortgage
interest were accompanied by a ceiling on all interest deductions, taxpayers

could simply secure mortgage loans to other assets. More generally, it is
difficult to evaluate such. proposals because it is not clear what their

objectives are, and what other policy instruments are assumed to be available.
If increased efficiency is the goal, why not tax imputed rent at the appropri-

ate rate? If more income distribution is sought, why not increase marginal
tax rates at upper income levels?
So far, our discussion of the equity implications of the tax treatment
of housing has focused on distribution of income between upper and lower income

groups. A number of observers have urged reform because the status
violates horizontal equity, the injunction that equals be treated equally for
purposes of tax policy. If there are two identical people, but one owns and.

one rents, the renter does not obtain the tax advantages of owning.40 A
possible solution to this disparity would be to allow renters either a tax

credit

or a deduction for part or all of their rent payments.
Evaluation

of this suggestion is complicated by the considerable con-

troversy over the question of what horizontal equity really means. (See
Fe].dstein CL976) or I(ing (forthcoming .)) Feldstein, for example, has
Indeed, if increases in tne demand for tkousirlg generated by the subsidy to owner—occupiers increases the price of rental housing, renters will
be worse off. See White and White (1977).
40

—49—

argued that given a fairly reasonable definition of horizontal equity,

under certain

conditions the tax

Specifically,

define a horizontally equitable tax system as one that

treatment of owner—occupation is equitable.

preserves the utility ordering: If two individuals would have the same

utility

level in the absence of taxation, they should also have the same

utility level if there is a tax.

(Feldstein, (1976, p. 94)). Suppo3e that

individualst tastes are the same, and they are free to choose between rent-

ing and owning. Despite the fact that homeowners are not taxed on the net
imputed income from their housing capital, there is no horizontal inequity

in Feldstein's sense. As long as tastes are identical, everyone would
choose ownership unless the price of houses adjusted to capitalize the tax

advantage. Some individual might choose to rent because (for example) the
nature of their employment required a variety of temporary locations. In
this case, however, one would expect their earnings to adjust enough to com-

pensate them. Indeed, the surprising conclusion is that any attempts to

change

the status quo would probably induce horizontal inequities.

The fact that the opportunity to be a homeowner may be more avail-v

able

to those with high inconsis not

equity. "If the

se

a violation of horizontal

opportunity is open to everyone with the nign

.s.t..

is in effect a reduction in rate progressivity but not a source of hori-

zontal inequity." (Feldstein (1976, p. 95)1k
This analysis relies heavily upon the assumption that tastes are

identical. If this is not the case, then any tax treatment of housing
will create horizontal inequities. It is therefore not clear a priori
that moving to a system of credits for renters would result in less horizontal inequity.4'

The difficult problems involved in quantifying the amounts of horizontal
equity associated with various tax reforms are discussed by King (forthcoming)..
41

t

—50—

4.

Housing Assistance

As we have seen, housing subsidies for the middle and upper income

groups are implicit in the federal income tax. In contrast, housing sub—
sidies for the poor have tended to be more explicit, often taking the

form of public housing provided at below market rents. In this section,
we begin by describing briefly the structure of U.S. housing assistance

programs, with most of the emphasis on public housing. This is followed
by discussions of the prograin'sequity and efficiency implications, and
some possibilities for reform:

4.1 Provisions
In the United States, subsidies for the provision of housing to the

poor began in 1937. Until very recently, the largest was public housing.
Public housing units are developed, owned, and run by local authorities
which operate within a municipality, county, or several counties as a

group. Up to 1969, the federal government covered the capital cost of
the housing, but did not subsidize operating costs, which were paid by the

tenants. Since that time, a portion of the operating costs has been sub-

sidized. To obtain finance, the authority sells its own tax exempt and
federally guaranteed bonds; the interest and principal are paid by the

federal government. By the end of fiscal year 1978, there were 1,173,000
42
public housing units (Straszheim (1980, p. 170)).
The low income housing program has been extended and modified many
43
times. We discuss just a few of the key developments in its history.

42 As Murray undated) has noted, it should not be assumed that this
figure represents net additions to the housing stock. It may be the case
that to some extent, subsidized housing displaces unsubsidized.
43 More details can be found in Aaron (1982) or Congressional Budget Office
(1982).

—51—
Section 235,

mortgage

authorized

payments made

in 1968, provides subsidies for the annual

by low— and moderate—income persons who live in

built or substantially rehabilitated homes. No new funds have been
provided since fiscal year 1981 to finance additional Section 235 coxmnitxnents..
newly

In

1969, Congress mandated an important change in the administration

of public housing. The rent that could be paid by an eligible family in
public housing was limited to 25% of its income, if this was less than the
operating cost of the dwelling. This represented a fundamental change in
the nature of the federal subsidy, making it income conditioned as well as
cost conditioned. By 1976, 40% of operating costs were met by subsidies
(Weicher (1979,

p. 474)).

The turnkey program, also introduced in the 1960's, permitted the

local authorities to purchase new, privately built projects. The idea
was that by permitting the participation of more developers, construction

costs could be

reduced.

Another attempt to reduce the authorities'

participation in building itself was Section 23,

the leased

housing program

(1968), under which local authorities could sign leases with private land-

lords for existing apartments r with the federal government
making available
the same subsidy it would for new units.
Section 8 of the Housing Act of 1974 included an important "existing.

housing and moderate rehabilitation prograztt.'4 Under this progam, which

will involve federal expenditures of $1.9 billion in l982, eligible
households search on the_private market for housing units. If the dwelling
Section 8 also includes a "new construction and substantial
rehabilitation" section, which gives financial incentives for developers
to house low income families. From the point of view of the inhabitants,
this is the same as traditional low income housing programs.

44

Congressional Budget Office (1982, p. 17).

—52--

meets certain quality standards and
the government, then it

the

landlord.

subsidizes

the

rent is deemed to be "fair" by

the rent with payments directly to

(The tenant's rent payment is a fixed proportion of his

income, currently set at 25%, but due to rise to 30 percent by fiscal
year 1986.) By the end of fiscal year 1978, there were 666,603 housing

units

covered under Section 8.

European

(See

Straszheim (1980, p. 170)).

programs for low income housing are qualitatively similar

to those of the U.S.

Great Britain, Sweden, Germany and the Netherlands

also have rent subsidies, management of public housing by special authorities, etc.

(Fainstein (1980, p. 216)?. The major difference between the

United States and Western Europe concerns the extent of the subsidies.

Table

4.1 shows estimates of direct public expenditure on housing and

community development as a percentage of gross national product for a
group of selected countries in the mid-1970's. Table 4.2 shows the percentage of dwellings completed by private persons. Both tables indicate
that the U.S. has relied more heavily on the private market than its
European counterparts.
On the other hand, while the amounts spent in the U.S. are relatively

small, they are certainly not trivial. The Congressional Budget Office
(1982, p.17)

estimated

that

in 1982 the federal government would spend nearly

$10 billion on a variety of housing assistance programs for low and moderate
income households. The various programs, and particularly public housing,
have generated considerable political and academic controversy. The

TABLE 4.1
Direct Public Expenditures on Housing and Community Development
as Percent of GNP
(selected countries, mid l9701s)*

United Kingdom
(central government, local authorities,
public corporations —- 1976)

4.1%

Netherlands
(central government —— 1975)

2.5%

Sweden
(central government —- 1976)

2.3%

Germany, Fed. Republic
(all government ——. 1975)

1.9%

United States
(all governments —— 1976)

0.5%

Source: Fainstein (1980, p. 218).

TABLE

4.2

Percent of Dwellings Completed by Private Persons
Selected Countries, 1979*

*

Source:

Building
**

Figure

Austria

45.9

Denmark

81.5

France

50.4

Sweden

66.2

Switzerland

88.8

United Kingdom

54.0

United States**

99.9

Economic Commission for Europe, Annual Bu1ltin of Housiz and
Statistics for Europe, United Nations, New York, l98O,.pp. 38—41.

for U.S. is for the year 1978.

—53—

economic literature has focused on three allegations: Public housing is
produced inefficiently; it is an inefficient method for distributing income

to the poor; and it has anomalous distributional implications. Each of these
is discussed in turn.

4.1 Production Inefficiency
As noted above, for a considerable portion of its history, the federal
government paid for the capital costs of public housing, but did not subsidize

operating costs. To assess the efficiency implications of this practice,
Muth (1973) assumes that housing services are produced with two inputs, "real
estate inputs," which are used to build a structure, and "current inputs,"

which are used to maintain it. Presumably, there is some scope for sub-

stitution between them. For example, one can use relatively expensive
aluniinwn siding which requires little maintenance, or wood siding, which

is cheaper but needs more maintenance.

The necessary condition

for cost minimization is that the marginal rate of substitution between

the inputs be equal to theratio of their marginal social costs.
Because capital Costs are paid ky the federal government, local authorities
in effect face a price of capital below its social marginal cost. This
gives them an incentive to produce housing which uses too much capital and
too little maintenance.

—54—

Nuth's

formal analysis focuses on the costs of this distortion in

input ratios.46 He postulates a constant elasticity of substitution unit
cost function for housing services:

h =

(4.1)

=

where

price

(1—) +

per unit

estate inputs, c =

price

of

housing services, r =

price

per unit of current inputs,

=

per unit of real

elasticity of

substitution between real estate inputs and current inputs, and ,

is a

parameter of the production function.
On the basis of earlier studies on production in housing, Muth assumes

that

=

0.2

and 4.i =

sector r = 1 and c =

.243.

1.

He normalizes prices such that in the private

To the extent the public housing authority pays for

its operating expenses, it also faces a price of c equal to one. On the
other hand, due to the federal subsidy, the authority's effective value of
r is only about .05.

Substituting these figures into equations for input ratios derived from
(4.1), l4uth shows how the subsidy lowers the per unit price of housing

produced by the housing authority, and induces it to use relatively less

in the way of current inputs than the private sector. But the key question
is what the resource cost of public housing is. This is found by pricing
the inputs used by the local housing authorities at their market prices.
Muth finds that the ratio of the market value of public housing to its
resource cost is 0.82. Other studies using, methodologies somewhat

46 Muth (1973, p. 7) notes two other reasons why public housing tends to be
more expensive than comparable private housing: (1) The Davis—Bacon Act forces
contractors to use wage scales set by the Department of Labor. These tend to be
higher than those prevailing in the labor market. (2) Cleared slum land is
often used, and such land tends to be expensive due to proximity to downtown
areas. Demolishing existing structures is also expensive.

-.55—

different than Muth's have found estimates of production inefficiencies
similar in magnitude.47 (See Weicher (1979, p. 497)).
In 1970, it was decided to reimburse

local housing authorities for the

excess of operating costs over revenues. As Olsen (forthcoming,

p.9) notes,

in effect this reduces the

price of marginal maintenance and rehabilitation
facing the authorities to zero.
Operating costs increased dramatically,
and by 1976 federal operating subsidies mounted to 40 percent of
the operating

costs of public housing units. However, in many programs today, there are
still mortgage subsidies which gerteratea bias toward capital intensive

production techniques. There is also a persistent belief that publicly
constructed housing is excessively expensive because public sector
managers,

unlike

their counterparts in the private sector, have no incentive to give

much weight to efficiency.

Unfortunately, no systematic estimates of the

importance of this effect are available.

Similarly, despite the widespread

publicity given to occurrences of outright corruption in the administration
48
of public housing ,
is not clear what the impact of this has been on its

it

cost.

4.2 Consumption Inefficiency
An important motivation behind public housing appears to be income

redistribution. Given the theoretical presumption that redistributing
income via a price subsidy is inefficient relative to cash, the key
empirical question is whether the inefficiency is large in dollar terms.

47 Of course, the validity of such estimates must be viewed in light
of the methodological difficulties in studying housing supply discussed
in Section 2.
48. In 1982, one member of the Chicago Housing Authority (CHA) opined
that "The CHA is a political slop bucket, and
everybody's drinking from
it." (Newsweek Magazine, April 19, 1982.)

—56-

An early examination of this issue is due to Aaron and Von Furstenberq

(1971).

They assume that a representative individual's utility (U)

depends only upon his consumption of housing services, h (which are
defined so that the price of a unit equals one dollar) and all other goods
G:

U =

U(Q,G)

Facing private market prices, the individual chooses some bundle
,

(Q,G°)

with

associated utility level U0 .

Now suppose the government

makes available to the individual the opportunity to purchase housing

services at a price of (l-s) , where

s is the subsidy rate.

ally this is equivalent to pivoting out the budget line.

In general, the

individual will change his consumption bundle to (Q,G1) ,

gives

utility

U1 > U0 •49 The

Geometric-

which

-

cost to the government of the program is

:1.

The

problem is to find the amount of income that would be reqtaired

for the recipient to
reached
price

under

of

the subsidy

at market prices, the level of utility Ut

program. This is found simply

by holding the

housing at its original value, and giving the individual lump

sum income until his

a

attain,

utility reaches U

.

(The

geometrical analogue

is

parallel shift outward of the budget line until it is just tangent to

the indifference curve

associated with UCall the amount of

lump sum

If the individual is not allowed to choose freely the quantity
49
of subsidized housing he consumes, his utility may be less than U1.
In the extreme case where the housing authority offers a specific
quantity-price bundle, the budget line does not pivot. The program
simply adds one point to the family's budget set.

—57—

income so required N . Then Aaron

and Furstenberg define

the relative

consumption inefficiency of the subsidy as

sQ-N
sQh
To implement this theoretical framework, one needs to choose a

utility function and specific values for its parameters. Aaron

and von

Furstenberg assume a constant elasticity of substitution utility function.
Parameters are selected so that they are consistent with a price elasti-

city of demand for housing of -l.0 and an income elasticity of 1.0.
Assuming that the public housing subsidy rate is 50% (i.e., s—OS),
they find that the relative consumption inefficiency is about 10%.

The price and income elasticities used by Aaron and von Furstenberg
to compute the utility function parameters are from studies of the housing

behavior of the general population. It might very well be the case, how—
ever, that the behavioral responses of the poor differ from those of the

population at large. Moreover focusing on a representative individual
does not allow one to address the important question of how benefits vary

across

of

individuals. Subsequent to the Aaron-von Furstenberg study, a number

others have been done which estimate utility function parameters with• -

cross sectional data on public housing recipients. This allows a more accurate depiction of the behavioral and distributional effects of the subsidy.
We discuss here the analysis by Murray (1980), which is one of the most
recent and careful.

50
See also Kraft and Kraft (1979), Kraft and Olsen (1977) , Suzuka
Stegman (1978) , and Olsen and Barton (1982)

and,

—58-

Murray assumes that preferences can be represented by the genera1izei
constant elasticity of substitution form

U lh C2+ G )

(4.2)

where the C's are parameters to be estimated, and the other variables
are as defined above.51 The first order conditions for utility maximization
imply that

(4.3)

____ =

gh

C1C +

-) £n

+ (2-c3) 2,n G

.c3

Murray partitions his sample into groups based

on family size, and for

each group estimates (4.3) using aninstrumejital variables technique.
The' variable p is based upon the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS)
estimate of the price of a "standard" unit in each city. The quantity of
housing services provided by a given dwelling i Ito rent divided by the
rental on the BLS standard unit.

(Inter-city price indices are formed by'

taking the ratio of the prices of the BLS units in the different cities.)

Because market rents are unavailable for public housing units, it
is not clear how to measure the quantity of housing services they provide.
(Recall the discussion of Section 2.concerning the difficirlties of measuring

.housing services. in general.) To estimate the market value of each pubUc

houág unit, Murray uses an hedonic price equation produced by another study
By substituting into the hedonic equation the characteristics of a given

The version of this equation appearing in Murray's paper has a typographical error (equation 1, p. 27).

51.

—59—

public housing dwelling, he can obtain an estimate of what its rent would

be in the private market.52
Equation (4.3) is estimated with 19.71 data on nearly 1400 successful

public housing applicants across evèn cities. The parametersp1y. tha
dn aVerage, the.subsidy increased housl.ng consumption by about 95% oér what it

would have been otherwise. (p.33). If.aoh household would have received
instead axv equivalent cash grant, housing consumption would have increased

only 0% above the unsubsidized level.
To assess the efficiency of the program, Murray computes the subsidy
cost associated with each public housing unit, defined as the resource cost

of the unit53 plus administrative costs minus the rent paid. He finds that
in his sample, the average subsidy cost is $1530, while the average nominal

benefit is $94954 Thus, a shift to an equivalent cash grant would lower
costs by 34%. Other studies have reached similar conclusions. (See Weicher
(1979, p. 497)).

Although the results of such analyses have contributed considerably
to our understanding of public housing, they suffer from several potentially

important problems. The fact that the utility function parameters are estimated using only public housing inhabitants means that the estimates may be
inconsistent due to selectivity bias.55

The use of hedonic indices to value

public housing units is also problematic because, as Aaron (1977, p. 69) has
noted, public housing tenants may not value housing characteristics the sarna

way that the market would.

52 The hedonic

price equation is based

53 Building on research similar

assumes that
percent.
54

on data from New York City.

to that described in Section 4.1, Murray

the resource cost exceeds the market value of the unit by 17

There is considerable variation in these figures across families.

5 For a discussion of this statistical problem, see Heckman (1979)

—60—

Even if the parameter estimates were perfect, errors in measuring con—

suxnption inefficiency might arise due to the implicit assumption that the
only distortion in the system is the subsidy on housing. For example, it is
well-known that the welfare system tends to place high implicit marginal tax

rates on the labor income of the poor. Analyses of public housing subsidies
shou'd therefore also take work decisions into account. However, it is difficult to say a priori in what direction current estimates are biased by the
failure to do so.

4.3 Distributional Implications
The studies by Murray and others have shown that public housing

confers a relatively large benefit upon the recipients. However, this

benefit is available only to a small number of poor people. As noted
above, there are a few million public housing units, but in 1979, there
were about 25 million persons whose income fell below the U.S. govern—
ment poverty line.

56

Hence, many more people desire entry into publ.ic

housing than it is possible to acconodate. It turns out that although -

the incomes of the recipients are concentrated at the bottom of the income distribution, many people gain entry who are better off than

those

who do not. (See Aaron (1972, p. 115)1
A related issue is the distribution of benefits within the group

of families who actually gain admittance. Murray (1980, p. 31) regressed
his estimates of the actual benefit on annual income, holding constant

various demographic characteristics of the families. He found that there
is indeed a negative relation between income and benefits. But the R2 of

56 Statistical Abstract of the United States, (1980, p. 465.)

—61—

the equation is only O.7O, suggesting that there is quite a bit of ranciomness
in the way the benefits are distributed across tenants.

Aaron (1972, p. 12) has pointed out that public housing may have general equilibrium effects with important distributional implications. Pre—
sumably, the availability of public housing decreases the demand for low-cost

non—subsidized housing, lowering the rents in that sector. This would tend
to increase the real incomes of the tenants and lower the real incomes of

the landlords. These issues do not yet appear to have received econometric
attention.

4.4 Possibilities for Reform
The consensus from the literature is that public housing is inefficiently produced, distorts consumption patterns on the part of the beneficiaries, and redistributes income capriciously.57 Most economists have

been against the program for years. Muth's (1973) sentiment is probably
typical: "The only possible justification for housing programs I can see
is that they are politically feasible whereas increased income maintenance
is not.". (p. 43)

It has been suggested that if subsidies have to be maintained, then

their link to public provision of housing should be broken. If the subsidy
could be applied to private sector housing, then it would no longer be nec—

57

We have not touched upon the administrative coxnple:ity of the

program and the associated costs. Mills (undated) p. 26 notes, "...
a cadre of specialized talent has sprung up to advise building landlords
and tenants on procedures to find their way through r around the
bureaucratic maze...".

—62—

essary

for

the public sector to get involved in apartment construction and

management. In addition, recipients of aid would rio longer be geographically concentrated and marked publicly.

As noted above, under the Section 8 program, there are indeed subsidies

for low income individua who rent on the private market.

However, as of

19Th, only about 1.3% of publicly subsidized dwellings for the poor were

associated with demand side programs (Quigley (1980, p. 162)). And even

under

Section 8, recipients are limited in their choice of dwellings, cannot

spend more than 25% of their incomon rent, and can only choose front landlords who participate in the program.
-

demand oriented subsidy

attention

program

that has received a good deal

of

is "housing allowances.'58Each qualified individual would receive

from

the government a payment equal to the difference between the cost of
standard housing established by the program and some fraction

of his income.

The allowance could be spent on any housing on the private market, providing
that

it met certain quality standards.

(the

Experimental Housing Allowance

to
of

Recently, a large social experiment

several cities

Program) was conducted in

determine how housing allowances would affect people's behavior.5 Analyses
the data by Hanushek and Quigley (1981, p. 204) and Venti and Wise (1982)

suggest a moderate effect upon housing consumption; the income elasticity of

demand for housing services in

the

the

experiment was below 0.5.

increased demand generated by the housing allowances does not seem to

58 A number

of

alternative policy approaches are discussed in

Budqet OUice (1982).
59

Interestingly,

For details on the design of the experiment and

Bradb.iry

and Downs (1981).

its

Congressional

results, see

—63-

have had much effect upon housing prices in the communities where the expe—
irnent was conducted. This is probably because the supply of housing services

is fairly elastic and the response to the increased allowance takes place
gradually over time.
The main problem with the housing allowances system examined in the
experiment is the stipulation that the dwellings meet various quality

standards. The purpose of this provision is presumably to protect the poor
from unscrupulous landlords who would take their money and provide no
services in return.

The evidence from the experiment indicates that it

would be very hard to set sensible standards and that enforcement would entail

substantial administrative costs. In
reduced

the imposition of standards

participation in the program significantly (Allen et al. (1981,

Nuth

which

addition,

(1973) has proposed the introduction of "rent certificates,"

could be used by the poor to pay for their rents in any public or

private housing that they deemed reasonable. Such a program comes very
close to being an unrestricted cash transfer. Clearly, there are power—•
ful interest groups which, for one reason or another, wish to see income
support for the poor closely linked to their consumption of housing.
Whether or not a scheme like Muth's is perceived to be tied closely enough
to housing to be politically acceptable is an open question.

5. Conclusions
Empirical investigation of the effects of government policies upon
housing behavior presents researchers with difficult methodological

problems. Given that there is no "best" way for dealing with these
problems, investigators are bound to produce different answers. Never—

26)) -

—64—

theless, there appears to be widespread agreement that in the United
States, the income tax treatment of owner-occupied housing and the pui1jc

of low—income housing have substantially increased the consumption
of housing services. In the process, economic efficiency has decreased.
provision

Moreover, the housing related provisions in the federal income tax

have lead to a more unequal distribution of income. It is unlikely that the
disequalizing effects of these provisions have been mitigated by the equalizing
effects of the expenditure programs. Thus, judged by the standards of con—
ventiona]. welfare economics, reform seems appropriate, and we have discussed

a number of possibilities. Of course, it might be that current programs are
moving us toward important social and political goals that lie outside the

scope of welfare economics. But given that these goals have never been carefully articulated, it is impossible to tell whether or not such is the case..

—65-

Aaron, Henry, 1972, Shelters and Subsidies, (Washington, D.C.: The Brookings

Institution.
Aaron, Henry J. and

George N. von Furstenberg, June 1971, The Inefficiency

of Transfers in Kind: The Case of Housing Assistance, Western Economic
Journal, pp. 184-191.

Aaron, Henry, 1977, Comments, in Juster F. Thomas (ed.), The Distribution of
Economic Well-Being, (Ballinger Publishing Company), pp. 65-69.

Abbott, Michael, and

Demand, and

Orley

Ashenfelter, October 1976, Labor

the Allocation

Supply,

Commodity

of Time, Review of Economic Studies 43,

pp. 389—411.

Alexander, W. E., Comment, Annals of Economic and Social Measurement 4,
pp. 175—178.

Allen, Garland E., Jerry J. Fitts, and

Evelyn

S. Glatt, 1981, The Experiuenta1

Housing Allowance Program, in Bradbury, Katharine J. and Anthony Downs
(eds.),

Do Housing Allowances

Work?, (Washington, D.C.: The Brookings

Institution), pp. 1—32.

Atkinson, A. B., 1970, On the Measurement

of

Inequality, Journal of Economic

Theory 2, pp. 244—263.
Atkinson, A. B., 1977, Housing Allowances, Income Maintenance and Income

Taxation, in Feldstein, N. S. and R. P. Inman (eds.), The Economics of

Public

Services, (Macmillan, London).

—66—

Bradbury, Katharine L. and Anthony Downs, 1981, (eds.), Do Housing Allowances

Work?, (Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution).

Brown, James N. and

Harvey S. Rosen, Nay, 1982, A Note on the Estimation of

Structural Hedonic Price Nodels, Econometrica 50, pp. 765-768.

Carliner, Geoffrey, 1973, Income Elasticity of Housing Demand, Review of Economics
and Statistics 55, pp. 528—532.

Congressional Budget Office, September 1981, The Tax Treatment of Homeowner—

ship: Issues and Options, (Congress of the United States).

Congressional Budget Office, May 1982, Federal Housing Assistance: Alternative
Approaches, (Congress of the United States).

de Leeuw, Frank and Raymond J. Struyk, 1975, The Web of Urban Housing,

(Washington D.C.: the Urban Institute).

Diamond, Douglas B. and Barton A. Smith, 1981, Housing as an Explicit 'Good,'
(North Carolina State University, mimeo).

Englund, Peter and Mats Persson, forthcoming, Housing Prices and Tenure
Choice With Asymmetric Taxes and Progressivity, Stockholm School of
Economics, Journal of Public Economics.

Fainstain, Susan S., 1980, American Policy for Housing and Community Develop-

ment: A Comparative Examination, in Montgomery Roger and Dale Marshall
(eds.) Housing Policy in the 1980's, (Lexington Books, D.C. Heath and
Company), pp. 215-230.

-67-

Feldstein,

Martin S., July-August 1976, On the Theory of Tax Reform,

Journal of Public Economics 6, pp. 77-104.

Feldstein, Martin S., September 1981, Inflation, Tax Rules, and the Accumulation of Residential and Nonresidential Capital,

National Bureau of

Economic Research, Working Paper No. 753.

Pollain, James

R.,

Jr., May 1979, The Price of Elasticity of the Long-Rw

Supply of New Housing COnstruction, Land Economics 55, pp. 190—199.

Hanushek, Eric A. and John M. Quigley, 1981, Consumption Aspects, in

Katharine L. and Anthony Downs (eds.), Do Housing Allowances
(Washington D.C., Brookings Institution), pp. 185—240.

Bradbury,

Work?,

Beckman, James, January 1979, Sample Bias as a Specification rror,
Econometrica

47:1, pp. 153—162.

Hendershott, Patric H. and Sheng Cheng Hu, July 1981, The Allocation of
Capital Between Residential and Nonresidential Uses: Taxes, Inflation
and Capital Market Constraints, National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper No. 718.
Hendershott,

Patric H. and James D. Shilling, September 1980, The Economics

of Tenure Choice, 1955-79, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Working Paper

No.

543.

Hendershott, Patric B. and
Capital

Henderson,

Joel

Slemrod, 1981, Taxes and the User Cost of

for Owner-Occupied Housing, The Ohio

State University, inbneo.

J. V. and Y. loannides, September 1981, A Model of Housing Tenure

Choice, Brown University, Working Paper No. 81-27.

—68—

Hughes, G. A., Housing and the Tax System, 1980, in Hughes, G. A. and

C. N. Heal, (eds.), Public Policy and the Tax System, (Boston: George
Allen and Unwin), pp. 67—105.

Ingrain, Gregory K. and Yitzhak Oron, 1977, The Production of Housing Services

from Existing Dwelling Units, In Ingram, Gregory K. (ed.) Residential

Location and Urban Housing Markets, (Cambridge, NA.: Ballinger
Publishing Company), pp. 273-314.

Jaf fee, Dwight 14. and Kenneth T. Rosen, 1979, Mortgage Credit Availability

and Residential Construction, Brookings Papers in Economic Activity 2,
pp. 333—76.

Jones, Reginald H., December 1978, Sunset Legislation, Tax Review.

Jorgenson, Dale W., December 1971, Econometric Studies of Investment Behavior:
A Survey, The Journal of Economic Literature, pp. .1111-11.47.

Kearl, J. R., October 1979, Inflation, Mortgages, and Housing, Journal, of
Political Economy 5, pp.. 1115—1138.

King, Mervyn A., October 1980, An Econometric Model of Tenure Choice and
Demand for Housing as a Joint Decision, Journal of Public Economics,
pp. 137—160.

King, Mervyn A., March 1981, The Distribution of Gains and Losses from

Changes

in the Tax Treatment of Housing, London: Social Science

Research. Council Programme, No. 20.
King,

Mervyn

A., forthcoming,

Horizontal

An

Index of Inequality: with ApplicatiOnS to

Equity and Social Mobility, Econometrica.

—69—

Kraft, John and Arthur Kraft, 1979, Benefits and Costs of Low Rent Public
Housing, Journal of Regional Science 19, No. 3, pp. 309—317..

Kraft, John and Edgar 0. Olsen, 1977, The Distribution of Benefits from
Public Housing, in Juster, F. Thomas ted.), The Distribution of Economic

Well—Being, (Ballinger Publishing Company), pp. 51—65.
Laidler, David, 1969, Income Tax Incentives for Owner—Occupied Housing, in
Harberger, Arnold C. and Martin J. Baily, (eds.) The Taxation of Income

from Capital, (Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution).

MacRae, C. Duncan and Nargery Austin Turner, 1981, Estimating Demand for
Owner-Occupied Housing Subject to the Income Tax, Journal of Urban
Economics, 10, pp. 338—356.

Mayo, Stephen K., July 1981, Theory and Estimation in the Economics of
Housing Demand, Journal of Urban Economics 10, Pp. 95—116.

Mills, Edwin S., undated, National Housing Policy: A Critique and a Proposal,
Princeton University, mimeo.

Murray, Michael P., 1980, Tenant Benefits in Alternative Federal Housing
Programs, Urban Studies 17, pp. 25—34.

Murray, Michael P., undated, Subsidized and Unsubsidized Housing Stocks:
1961—1977, Claremont Graduate School, mimeo.

Nusgrave,
Hill.

Richard A., 1959, The Theory of Public Finance, New York: McGraw—

—70--

Muth, Richard F., 1973, Public Housing — An Economic Evaluation, (Washington,
D.C.: American Enterprise Institute).

Nuth., Richard F., March

1982, Effects of the U.S. Tax System on Housing

Prices and Consumption, Hoover Institution, Working Paper No. E—82-3.

Nichols, Albert L. and Richard J. Zeckhauser, May 1982, Targeting Transfers
Through Restrictions on Recipients, American Economic Review Papers and
Proceedings 72, pp. 372—377.

Niskanen, W. A., Jr., 1971, Bureaucracy and Representative Government,

Chicago: Aldine.

Olsen, Edgar 0., forthcoming, Implications of the Experimental Housing
Allowance Program for Housing Policy, in Joseph Friedman and Daniel
Weinberg (eds.), The Great Housing Experiment.

Olsen, Edgar 0. and David M. Barton, February 1982, The Benefits and Costs
of Public Housing in New York City, The Jefferson Center for Political
Economy, Discussion Paper No. 123.

Polinsky, A. Mitchell and David T. Eliwood, May 1979, An Empirical Reconcili-

ation of Micro and Grouped Estimates of the Demand

of Economics and

Statistics

for

Housing, Review

LXI, pp. 199—205.

Poterba, James N., 1980, Inflation, Income Taxes and Owner—Occupied Housing,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 553.

—71--

Quigley, John .M., 1980, Housing Allowances and Demand-Oriented

Subsidies, in Montgomery, Roger and

in the

1980t5,

Dale

Housing

Marshall (eds.) Housing Policy

Lexington Books, D. C. Heath and Company,

161-68.

Quigley, John M., September 1982, Non—Linear Project Constraints and Consumer

Demand: An Application to Public Programs to Residential Rousing,
Journal of Urban Economics.

Rosen, Harvey S.., February 1979, Rousing Decisions and the U. S. Income Tax:

An Econometric Analysis, Journal of Public Economics 1]., pp. 1—23.

Rosen, Harvey S., 1981, Comments, in Aaron, H. 7. and J. A. Pechinan (eds.),

How Taxes Affect Economic Behavior, (Washington, D. C.: The Brookings
Institution), pp. 323—326.

Rosen, Harvey S. and Kenneth T. Rosen, February 1980, Federal Taxes and

Homeownership Evidence from Time Series, Journal of Political
Economy 88, pp. 59-75.

Rosen, Sherwin, 1974, Hedonic Prices and

Implicit

Markets: Product Differ-

entiation in Pure Competition, Journal of Political Economy 82, pp. 34—55..

Rothenberg, Jerome, 1977, Comments on Chapter 8, in Ingram, Gregory K., (ed.)

Residential Location and

Urban Housing Markets, (Cambridge, MA: Eallinger

Publishing Company), pp. 315—321.

Rydell, C. Peter, September 1979, Shortrun Response of Housing Markets toDemand

Shifts, Rand Corporation, Working

Paper R-2453-HUD.

—72—

Sandmo, Agnar, July 1976, Optimal Taxation

—- An Introduction to the Literature,

Journal of Public Economics,6, No. 12, pp. 37-54.

Straszheim, Nahion R., 1980, The Section 8 Rental—AssiStance Program: Costs
and Policy Options, in Montgomery, Roger and Dale Marshall (eds.), Housing

Policy for the 1980's, (Lexington Books), pp. 169—184.
Struyk, Raymond J., 1976, Urban HomeownerShiP, (Lexington, MA: Lexington Books).
Struyk, Raymond J., 1978, Sue A. Marshall and Larry J. Ozanne, Housing Policies
for the Urban Poor, (Washington, D.C.:

The Urban Institute).

Suxnka, Howard 3. and Michael A. Steginan, 1978, An Economic Analysis of Public

Housing in Small Cities, Journal of Regional Science 18, No. 3, pp. 395—410.
Summers, Lawrence, December 1980, Inflation, the Stock Market and Owner-Occupied.
Housing, National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 606.

Sunley, Emil N., 1981, Comments,

in Aaron, Henry 3. and J. A. Pechinan, How

Taxes Affect Economic Behavior, (Washington, D.C.: The BrookingS Institution),
pp. 127—130.

Tobin, James, 1970, On Limiting

ths Domain of Inequality, Journal of Law and

ECOnOmiCS 13, pp. 263—277.
Venti, Steven F. and David A. Wise, 1982, Moving and Housing Expenditure:
Transactions Cost and Disequilibrium, Harvard University, mimeo.

—73—

Weicher, John C., 1979, Urban Housing Policy, in Mieszkowski Peter and

-

Nahion Straszheim, Current Issues in Urban Economics, The Johns
Hopkins
Press, pp. 391.

Weicher, John C., 1980, Housing —-

Federal Policies and Programs, (Washington,

D.C.: American Enterprise Institute).

Weiss, Yoraxn, 1978, Capital Gains, Discriminatory Taxes, and the Choice Between

Renting and Owning a House, Journal of Public Economics 10, pp. 45—55.
White, Michelle 7. and Lawrence White, The Subsidy to

Owner-Occupied Housing:

Who Benefits? Journal of Public Economics 7, pp. 111—126.

