                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  RECENT TRENDS IN RESOURCE
                                   SHARING AMONG THE POOR

                                             Steven J. Haider
                                            Kathleen McGarry

                                          Working Paper 11612
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11612


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2005




This paper was prepared for the National Poverty Center project, "Working and Poor: How Economic and
Policy Changes are Affecting Low-Wage Workers." We are grateful for useful advice from Rebecca Blank,
Sheldon Danziger, Robert Schoeni, and participants at the preliminary conference in Ann Arbor, MI. Both
authors gratefully acknowledge financial support. Haider from the National Institute for Child Health and
Development (R03 HD42084-01) and McGarry from the National Institute On Aging (R29 AG14110-05).
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Steven J. Haider and Kathleen McGarry. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Recent Trends in Resource Sharing Among the Poor
Steven J. Haider and Kathleen McGarry
NBER Working Paper No. 11612
September 2005
JEL No. I3, J0, H0

                                           ABSTRACT


Motivated in part by the dramatic changes in the United States economy and public assistance
policies, many researchers have examined the changes in the resources of the low-income population
over the last two decades, with particular attention paid to income from earnings and public
assistance programs. One source of income that has received comparatively little attention is income
from private transfers. However, private transfers may be a key source of support for low-income
individuals, especially for those who have had little attachment to the labor force or who have
experienced reductions in public assistance. In this paper, we provide a conceptual discussion of
private transfers drawing on several related literatures and provide new empirical evidence regarding
the significance of private of transfers as a source income. We find that private transfers are an
important source of income for many less-skilled households, the contribution of private transfers
to total income has increased over time, and shared living arrangements are a common mechanism
for providing assistance.


Steven J. Haider
Michigan State University
Department of Economics
110 Marshall-Adams Hall
East Lansing, MI 48824-1038
haider@msu.edu

Kathleen McGarry
Bunche Hall 9359
UCLA Department of Economics
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
mcgarry@ucla.edu
1. Introduction

    During the 1990s, the United States economy experienced sustained economic growth with

low levels of unemployment and high levels of wage growth accruing across the skill

distribution. Along with this robust economic performance, there were substantial changes in

economic and social policies: the minimum wage was raised for the first time in fifteen years, the

Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) was expanded, and cash welfare assistance was changed from

an entitlement to a temporary assistance program that imposes strict work requirements and

lifetime limits on benefits.

    Many of these changes would be expected to have had large effects on the incomes of the

poor, and consequently, there has been a spate of research assessing how the low-income

population has fared. Some of these studies have focused on specific changes—such as changes

in the wage distribution (David Autor, et al., 2004), the Earned Income Tax Credit (Bruce Meyer

and Daniel Rosenbaum, 1999), and cash welfare assistance (see Rebecca Blank 2002 for a useful

review)—while others have examined the overall changes in the income of the poor (Blank and

Robert Schoeni, 2003).

    One source of income that has received comparably little attention is income from private

transfers. Private transfers can come from relatives, friends, or non-spousal partners and can

consist of cash or non-cash transfers or shared living arrangements.1 We refer to this broad

definition of private transfers as “resource sharing.” Shared resources could be especially

important for low-income individuals who may not qualify for benefits from social insurance

programs such as unemployment insurance or Worker’s Compensation, both of which require

some degree of previous attachment to the labor force. Moreover, the recent changes in public

1
  Although assistance from charitable institutions may be an important source of support for some low income
families, we do not address it here.


                                                  p. 1
assistance programs, including time limits on benefit receipt and work requirements, will result

in a reduction in assistance for some. Absent these formal sources of support, low-income

individuals may turn to family or friends. Recent research has indeed provided some evidence

that resource sharing is an important component of income for individuals leaving the welfare

rolls (Sheldon Danziger et al., 2002; Robert Moffitt and Katie Winder, 2005).

   In this paper, we consider the importance of resource sharing to the financial well-being of

low-income households and changes in this importance over time. We begin in section 2 with a

broad discussion of resource sharing, drawing on several existing literatures. We consider both

the potential motivation for sharing and the different modes through which such sharing can

occur. Because this volume focuses on the low-income population, we pay specific attention to

the interaction between private transfers and government assistance programs.

   In Section 3 we undertake an empirical analysis of resource sharing from 1980 to 1979 to

2003 using data from the Current Population Survey (CPS). Our analysis yields several

important findings. First, private cash transfers from outside the household are an important

source of income for recipients and are more common when the economy is weak. Second,

although much attention has focused on cash transfers, shared living arrangements provide an

alternative means of resource sharing that is quite common among the low-income population;

coresidency thus has the potential to be a significant source of support for the poor. Third, the

importance of private cash transfers and income from unrelated household members rose beyond

that predicted by macroeconomic and demographic changes, suggesting that factors such as

changes in public programs (e.g., TANF and the EITC) could also be important.




                                            p. 2
    Overall, our analysis, like those on which it builds, is limited by the available data. In

section 4, we discuss these limitations and offer suggestions for future research, as well as

discuss the implications of our findings for public policy.


2. A synthesis of the related literature

    The recent literature on the well-being of the low-income population has focused on the

importance of labor market opportunities and public transfer programs. However, both the

robustness of the labor market faced by less-skilled workers and the regulations governing the

receipt of public assistance are beyond the control of these individuals. When faced with a

reduction in income, an individual may look for assistance from private sources, such as family

and friends. Despite the potential importance of private transfers, relatively little research has

focused on such assistance. In this section, we draw on a diverse set of literatures to consider the

potential importance of private transfers and to lay the ground work for our empirical analyses.

    We take a broad view of private transfers, including both cash and non-cash transfers and

shared living arrangements. Measurement of these transfers is not always straightforward. For

example, imbedded in the value of shared living arrangements is the direct transfer of such

tangible items as food, shelter, and household goods, as well as less readily measurable

assistance implicit in the returns to scale in household production.2 We will use the term

“transfers” to refer to direct assistance provided through cash or non-cash transfers or through

shared residence, and reserve the more general concept of “resource sharing” to indicate both

these direct transfers and the indirect gains obtained through coresidence. In many cases, we do

not observe how resources are actually shared among coresident individuals, but rather, we only

observe the income of each individual. When discussing the phenomenon of how coresident

2
 For example, the fixed cost of telephone service is the same regardless of how many individuals share the
apartment


                                                   p. 3
individuals might combine their incomes, we use the term “income pooling.” We note also that

the focus of this paper is on voluntary resource sharing. We refer the reader to the chapter by

Maria Cancian and Meyer (2005) for a discussion of legally mandated transfers such as alimony

and child support.


2.1. Motives for resource sharing

    A family can provide assistance to one of its members out of concern for the well-being of

the (potential) recipient (Robert Barro, 1974; Gary Becker, 1974) or as part of a quid pro quo

arrangement (B. Douglas Bernheim, Andrei Schleifer and Lawrence Summers, 1985).3 These

competing explanations, the former an altruistic motivation and the latter based on exchange,

have generated a sizable volume of research, with much of it attempting to discern which motive

is most consistent with the data.4 Despite these efforts, a consensus has yet to be reached, and

recent work suggests that each model may play an important role (Audrey Light and Kathleen

McGarry, 2004). The existing literature has, however, generally found that transfers are strongly

compensatory, with both the probability of a transfer and the amount higher for lower income

recipients (Cox, 1987; Joseph Altonji, Fumio Hayashi, Laurence Kotlikoff, 1997; McGarry and

Schoeni, 1995, 1997).5 Furthermore, the probability of making a transfer and the amount

transferred are positively related to the donor’s income. These findings suggest that we would

likely observe changes in the pattern of resource sharing in response to changes in the income of

either party and to changes in the economic environment more generally.


3
  Although we are equally interested in sharing among related and unrelated persons and will examine both in our
empirical analysis, we follow the existing literature and couch our conceptual discussion in terms of sharing among
extended family members.
4
  See Donald Cox (1987) for a clear description of these alternative models of altruism and exchange and a formal
test of the validity of the altruism model.
5
  This result is consistent with an altruistic model wherein the donor is seeking to increase the consumption of a less
well-off recipient but is also consistent with an exchange regime in which the transfer represents payment for a
service, behavior, or previous assistance provided by the recipient.


                                                     p. 4
    When family or friends provide assistance in response to declines in the income of the

recipient, they could be providing a form of insurance to each other, akin to that provided by

formal private insurance markets or by publicly provided social insurance. This notion has been

developed in several papers. For example, Kolikoff and Avia Spivak (1981) present a model in

which families provide insurance (annuities) for their elderly members to protect against the

possibility of “living too long” and exhausting their assets. Similarly Cox (1990) and Cox and

Tullio Jappelli (1990) model the potential for familial transfers to alleviate liquidity constraints.

Social insurance programs such as unemployment insurance, Social Security, and Workers’

Compensation can provide substantial protection against negative shocks to income (for

example, Jonathan Gruber, 1997; Susan Dynarski and Gruber, 1997). However, because these

programs typically require some previous attachment to the labor force, many of the lowest

income individuals may not qualify for benefits. For this population, then, families could play a

particularly important role. 6


2.2. Modes and magnitudes of resource sharing

    Although economists often focus on cash transfers, resource sharing can occur through other

modes like the transfer of goods, time help, or a reduction in expenses through shared living

arrangements. The optimal choice of mode is determined by the characteristics of the donor and

recipient, such as their financial resources, preferences, and the opportunity cost of their time.

For example, a retired parent facing a low opportunity cost of her time may choose to assist her

daughter by providing childcare to a grandchild, whereas a fully employed parent might choose

to make cash transfers to pay for childcare. These sorts of trade-offs between time and financial


6
  The notion of families or communities providing insurance against consumption shortfalls has been emphasized in
the context of developing countries where formal insurance markets are less prevalent. Robert Townsend (1995)
provides a good discussion of some of the relevant literature.


                                                  p. 5
assistance have been documented in several empirical studies (Kenneth Couch et al., 1999).

Despite the potential for transfers of various types to substitute for one another, research has

tended to focus on each mode in isolation.7

      Studies examining cash transfers have found that they are relatively common (Altonji,

Hayashi, Kotlikoff, 1997, 2000; McGarry and Schoeni, 1995, 1997). These studies estimate that

approximately 20-30 percent of parents make inter vivos transfers to their adult children, with

positive transfer amounts averaging from $2000- $3000 a year. In addition, substantial amounts

are transferred as bequests (for example, William Gale and John Karl Scholz, 1994).

      Ethnographic evidence also points to the importance of private transfers. In a compelling

descriptive study of the resources of low-income households, Katherine Edin and Laura Lein

(1997) report that approximately 80 percent of single mothers received transfers from private

sources and these transfers accounted for 20 percent of household resources (pp. 150-151). They

also find that 25 percent report “doubling-up” with friends or relatives in order to reduce living

expenses (pp. 54, 115). However, because their data are not based on a randomly selected

sample from a well-defined population, it is not possible to generalize their findings to a

population beyond their respondents, nor do they analyze how resource sharing responds to

changes in the economic and policy environment.

      Of the studies that have attempted to measure non-cash transfers, attention has been primarily

limited to the transfer of time. These studies have found that the provision of home health care is

the most common type of time transfer, with over one-third of such assistance flowing from adult

children to their elderly parents (Department of Health and Human Services, 1998). McGarry

and Schoeni (1995) find that, among individuals in their 50s who are providing care to elderly

parents, the average amount is over 700 hours a year. At a wage rate of $18 (MetLife, 2004),
7
    Important exceptions to this practice are Mark Rosenzweig and Ken Wolpin (1993, 1994).


                                                   p. 6
these services are comparable to cash transfers of at least $12,000 a year. When help with tasks

other than personal care items is included in the measure of time help, the fraction providing

assistance rises substantially (Altonji, Hayashi and Kotlikoff, 2000). The family also figures

prominently in the care of children. In cases in which the mother is employed and not the

primary caregiver, nearly 40 percent of the time the primary caregiver is a relative (David Blau

and Janet Currie, 2004).

    Another potential mode of transfer is the provision of coresidence. This form of assistance is

perhaps the most difficult to evaluate. Not only is it difficult to measure accurately the multitude

of direct subsidies that are provided through food, shelter, and time help, but monetary values

must also be assigned to the returns to scale implicit in such arrangements and the potential costs

associated with the loss of privacy.8 Empirical analyses of shared living arrangements have

again focused largely on the behavior of the elderly (Frances Korbin, 1976; Fred Pampel, 1983;

Michael, et al., 1980), with some work examining the behavior of young adults (Leslie

Whittington and Elizabeth Peters, 1996).

    In many data sets, including the one we use in our empirical analysis, income is collected for

each household member but no information is collected on how income is shared. Thomas

Deleire and Ariel Kalil (2005) show that expenditures on child-specific consumption items differ

markedly between cohabiting and married couples, with cohabitating couples spending less on

children. This finding suggests that income is not simply pooled at the household level, but

rather that household structure matters. Even more striking, a growing branch of the literature


8
  Although we do not attempt to quantify them here, the returns to scale can be considerable. For example, in
determining the appropriate poverty thresholds, the U.S. Census Bureau assumes that two individuals need only 28
percent more income than a single individual to obtain the same standard of living. See Constance Citro and Robert
Michael (1995) for a detailed discussion of the returns to scale in the poverty measure. These financial gains may be
offset, at least in part, by the utility loss associated with less privacy. Magnuson and Smeeding (2005) in a study of
low-income new mothers, conclude, “In this case and others we encountered, the decision to live with relatives was
determined more [by] necessity than by choice.” (p19).


                                                    p. 7
has focused on income pooling among spouses. Important early work by Duncan Thomas

(1990) and Shelly Lundberg, et al. (1997) find that expenditure patterns differ significantly

depending on which spouse controls the resources, with mothers devoting a larger share of

spending to children. Thus, not only is the assumption of equal sharing likely to be invalid in the

case of coresidency, it is unlikely even to hold between spouses. These findings have important

implications for our empirical analysis below.


2.3. Resource sharing and the policy and economic environment

   As we have noted, decisions to share resources within and between households are likely to

be influenced by the existing policy and economic environments. In fact, the structure of many

government assistance programs explicitly defines the economic unit in which resource sharing

is expected to occur. As with much in our society, these assumptions have changed repeatedly

over time, reflecting shifts in attitudes regarding public and private roles in meeting economic

needs. For example, the former state run Old Age Assistance (OAA) programs often included

“relative responsibility” clauses that obligated children to provide financial support to their

elderly parents (Elizabeth Epler, 1954). Failure to support needy parents could result in court

action and denial of public assistance to the parent. These requirements were abolished in 1974

when the Supplemental Security Income program (SSI) replaced OAA. Similarly, the Aid to

Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) initially targeted only unmarried mothers and their

children; the presence of any adult male in the household to be sufficient grounds for the denial

of benefits, presumably under the assumption that his resources were available to the children.

Supreme Court decisions eventually invalidated this assumption (Patterson 2000, p. 173-4), and

by the 1980s and 1990s, states generally ignored the resources of non-parents (Moffitt, et al.,




                                             p. 8
1998).9 Under the TANF regulations applicable today, some states have returned to stricter

requirements regarding the inclusion of resources from other household members, requiring, for

example that a minor mother live with a parent or guardian and including a portion of that

parent’s income when determining benefits.10

    Even at a specified time, there is variation across assistance programs in the definition of the

economic unit. For example, the Food Stamp Program (FSP) has consistently used a broad

definition, including all individuals in a household who purchase or prepare food together,

regardless of their relationship (Steven Haider, et al., 2003). In contrast, cash welfare assistance

(TANF) generally only includes the income of a child’s parent and direct cash assistance from

others when computing benefits.

    Several studies have examined the extent to which private cash transfers respond to public

assistance programs.11 In an early empirical study, Robert Lampman and Timothy Smeeding

(1983) discuss the potential for government transfers to “crowd-out” or replace private cash

assistance and provide suggestive evidence of such a trade-off. More recent studies have

confirmed the relationship, finding that private cash transfers decline in response to increased

public assistance, although the overall responses are very small (Cox and George Jakubson 1995;

Schoeni 1997; Schoeni 2002; Rosenzweig and Wolpin, 1993, 1994).

    Similar analyses of the relationships between the policy and economic environments and the

choice of living arrangements have been undertaken. With respect to the living arrangements of

9
  States differed in their treatment of non-parental income. In terms of benefit calculation, the Supreme Court
decision barred the assumption that all income of the non-parent adult benefited the child. However, some states
inquired specifically about direct cash transfers to the child and included this amount in the benefit calculation.
10
   See Gretchen Rowe and Victoria Russell (2004) for a more complete description of TANF regulations across
states.
11
   Theoretically, the specific relationship depends on the underlying motive for transfers. The predictions are the
most clearly defined when altruism is the primary motivation. In this case as the income of a recipient rises, the
marginal utility of a dollar transferred to her is reduced, and the marginal utilities of the donor and recipient
(appropriately weighted) are equalized with fewer transfers. With an exchange motivation, the exact relationship
depends on the relative elasticities for the supply and demand of the exchanged goods.


                                                    p. 9
the elderly, several studies have concluded that the dramatic improvement in the financial

situation of older persons evident over much of the last century has led to a sharp decline in the

probability of coresidency (Michael, et al., 1980; Saul Schwartz, et al., 1984). Using expansions

of Social Security, Old Age Assistance programs and SSI to identify the relationship between

income and the living arrangements several studies have subsequently confirmed this

relationship and in doing so have demonstrated the important interactions between public and

private transfers (Dora Costa, 1999; McGarry and Schoeni, 2000; Gary Englehardt, et al., 2002).

Studies of the living arrangement choices of younger populations have demonstrated that they

too respond to the structure of cash assistance programs (Rosenzweig and Wolpin 1993, 1994;

Mariane Bitler, et al., 2004).

   In comparison to even this somewhat limited body of research assessing the interaction

between public and private transfers, the relationship between macroeconomic conditions and

private transfers has received relatively little attention. Many of the general principles, though,

should be the same. To the extent that an improving economy leads to an improvement in the

economic status of recipients, we would expect fewer transfers. However, because broad-based

economic changes could affect the resources of the donor as well as the recipient, the supply and

demand for transfers will change and the net effect may be ambiguous.


3. Recent trends in incoming sharing

   The recent literature has tended to focus either on transfers from outside the household,

referred to as inter-household transfers, or on income pooling within the household, referred to

as intra-household transfers. In our empirical work, we examine the relevance of both modes of

resource sharing and focus on how these patterns have changed in response to changes in the

macroeconomic environment.



                                            p. 10
3.1. Data and definitions

     Our data are drawn from the Current Population Surveys (CPS) for the years 1980 to 2004.

We use the March supplements for each year, at which time information is obtained about

income in the preceding year. We will thus refer to our data as pertaining to the years 1979

through 2003. The CPS provides detailed information on income components and household

living arrangements for a large nationally representative sample. With these data we can identify

both cash transfers from outside the household and the potential for income pooling within the

household. A detailed household roster allows us to distinguish various types of living

arrangements, including whether the other individuals in the household are relatives, non-

relatives, or, in the later years of our data, cohabiting partners.12

     Our definitions of income sharing are straightforward. For inter-household income sharing,

we us the CPS question that specifically asks about “regular financial assistance from friends or

relatives not living in this household.” This question necessarily limits our focus to cash

transfers, although in-kind transfers such as help with child care are likely to be important. In

addition, the phrase “regular financial assistance” presumably further limits the type of income

transfers that will be reported. Respondents must use their judgment regarding what qualifies as

“regular”, and transfers that are made to offset a temporary income short-falls may be excluded.

Such concerns are corroborated by past research that suggests the CPS-type question

dramatically underestimates the amount of private transfers actually received.13


12
   Information about cohabitating partners is collected from 1994 through the end of our sample period. Although
nuclear family relationships are clearly delineated for everyone in the CPS, non-nuclear relatives and cohabiting
partners are only identified for the household “reference person”, where the reference person is defined to be the
person who “owns or rents” the unit (Current Population Survey, 2002).
13
   In 1988, the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) included a question about private transfers that is fairly
similar to the CPS question and an alternatively worded question that asks about transfers more fully. McGarry and
Schoeni (1995) show that the alternatively wording increased the prevalence of reported transfers from 4.9 to 20
percent for the same respondents. This result suggests that inter-household transfers in the CPS may be substantially
more common than our data indicate.


                                                   p. 11
   With regard to intra-household income sharing, the detailed information on the components

of income contained in the CPS allows us to measure the income of various household members

separately. The ability to define the relationship between household members is central to our

analysis, and the definitions we use are largely determined by the structure of the CPS. We

define the “nuclear family” as an individual or married couple along with any unmarried and

childless children. This nuclear family is part of a potentially larger household, defined to be all

individuals occupying an independent housing unit, such as a house or apartment. Other

household members are classified as relatives if they are related by blood or marriage to any

member of the nuclear family; if not, other household members are as referred to as non-

relatives. Based on these definitions, unmarried, cohabiting partners are not considered to be

part of the same nuclear family, but rather in separate, unrelated families.

   There are three important considerations that should be noted when examining within

household income sharing. First, we do not know the extent to which total household income is

indeed shared by household members; we can therefore speak only to the potential for income

sharing. Second, along with the potential for pooling cash resources, these shared living

arrangements will involve some degree of pooling of non-cash resources, such as time spent

engaged in household chores or child care; these we are also unable to measure. Third, there is

an implicit gain in resources from the returns to scale in household production, such as the

sharing of housing and utility costs and quantity discounts in food. Although these factors are

important to understanding the transfers imbedded in coresidency, they are largely ignored in our

empirical analysis due to data constraints.




                                              p. 12
     Our analysis is based on women ages 18 through 54.14 For these individuals we examine the

incomes of all members of their nuclear family and the incomes of others in the household;

income accruing to these “other” household members is further broken down by relationship to

our sample person (that from related persons, unrelated persons, and in the years for which it is

possible, cohabiting partners). Within these categories we classify income into four sources:

earnings, means-tested public transfers, private financial transfers, and other income. In order to

highlight the patterns of resource sharing for the low-income population, we divide our sample

of individuals into three groups based on schooling level: less than high school, a high school

degree, and schooling beyond high school. Our discussion focuses primarily on the less than high

school group with the more schooled used for comparisons. We apply sample weights

throughout our analysis.15


3.2 Income sharing in 2003

     In the top panel of Table 1, we examine the sources of income for our sample of women.

Unsurprisingly, we find extremely large differences in mean nuclear family income by schooling

level, as well as differences in the components of income. Nuclear family income for low-

schooled women averages $35,248, while those in our highest education group report an average

nuclear family income of $77,756. In terms of the source of this income, labor earnings are a

less important component for the less-skilled women than for the more-skilled women while

income from means-tested transfer programs is obviously more important. The mean fraction of

nuclear family income due to earnings is 78.6 percent for the less-educated women, compared to


14
   The patterns we report here for women are fairly similar to those observed for men. Due to space constraints we
do not report the results for men.
15
   We make two adjustments to these income data. First, we recode negative earnings and negative income to be
zero, viewing a loss in these dimensions as a reduction in wealth. Second, we drop from the analysis all households
that report zero total income. The results are not sensitive to these decisions.



                                                  p. 13
85.1 percent for women with a high school diploma and 87.4 percent for women with more than

a high school education. In contrast, means-tested transfers account for 8.2, 3.0 and 1.0 percent

of income, respectively.

   From the results in the table, private financial transfers are fairly unimportant, comprising on

average less than 1 percent of nuclear family income for all educational groups. However, as

discussed in Section 3.1, previous studies have concluded that CPS-type questions dramatically

underestimate the amount of private transfers actually received. Although we cannot demonstrate

it with these data, we expect that private transfers are substantially more important than they

appear to be based on this evidence.

   The top panel of Table 1 also presents information on the source of total household income

for women in our sample. Unsurprisingly, total household income increases with schooling level

ranging from $42,089 for the least-educated group to $83,900 for the most-educated group.

However, the fraction of total income attributable to household members outside of the nuclear

family is much more important for the less schooled group. For example, among women without

a high school diploma, 85 percent of household income accrues to the nuclear family, 6 percent

to related household members, and 5 percent to both cohabiting partners and unrelated

individuals. For women with more than a high school diploma, the figures are 92 percent to the

nuclear family, 2 percent to related household members, and 3 percent to both cohabitors and

unrelated individuals. These results suggest that the least-educated women could be relying

more on resources stemming from shared living arrangements than are women with more

education. Moreover, among the least-educated, transfers arising from shared residence are

potentially much more important than transfers from outside the household. Rosenzweig and

Wolpin (1994) draw a similar conclusion using NLSY data.




                                           p. 14
   Although our focus is on all women, we present a similar set of tabulations for single women

with a child under eighteen years old in her nuclear family in the lower panel of Table 1. The

same general patterns emerge: nuclear family income and household income increases with

education, the relative importance of different income sources are comparable, and the scope for

resource sharing from within the household appears to be much greater than the measured private

financial transfers reported by a nuclear family. Perhaps the most notable difference between the

two panels is that, for less-educated single mothers, the role of related family income in the

household is greater than for the general population of less-educated women. For example,

related family income comprises 6 percent of household income for all less-educated women, but

13 percent of household income for less-educated single mothers. However, given the similarity

in overall patterns, we focus the rest of our analysis on all women.

   In Table 2 we focus in more detail on the importance of resource sharing by examining the

distributions of these private financial transfers and non-nuclear family income more generally.

The table also highlights some of the more interesting differences in demographic characteristics

for the recipients and non-recipients of each form of transfer (or potential transfer). Despite the

probable under-reporting of the receipt of private cash transfers, columns 1 through 3

demonstrate that when the private transfers are reported, the amounts are large. The mean

amount of private transfers for the least schooled is $6,574 and one-quarter of the recipients

reported transfers over $7,900. Because the mean nuclear family income among women in the

lowest education group is just $24,683, the average cash transfer was nearly one-third of average

income. Average transfer amounts are similarly large for the other education groups, with the

women in the high school diploma group receiving an average of $5,182 and women with more

than a high school diploma receiving $7,621. However, because nuclear family income is




                                            p. 15
substantially higher for these more highly educated women, cash transfers are less important

relative to total income.

   In comparing those who receive cash transfers with those who do not among the least-

educated women, transfer recipients have lower nuclear family incomes on average than non-

recipients and are less likely to be married, have children, or to be in school. The patterns are

similar for the two other educational groups, with the notable exception of the relationship

between transfer receipt and school attendance. In each of the more highly educated groups,

transfer recipients are substantially more likely to be attending school than their non-transfer

counterparts. This difference in school enrollment suggests that the transfers reported in the CPS

for those with a high school diploma could represent familial financial assistance in financing a

college education.

   In columns 4 through 6 of Table 2, we similarly examine non-nuclear family income. The

probability of having non-nuclear family income is much higher than that for private financial

transfers, ranging from 24 percent for women in the lowest educational group to 15 percent for

women in the highest educational group. Moreover, conditional on having some non-nuclear

family income, the amount of such income is actually larger than mean nuclear family income, a

result holds for all educational groups. The existence of non-nuclear family income is

concentrated among those who are relatively young, less likely to be married, and less likely to

have children. Overall, the recipient/non-recipient comparisons for non-nuclear family income

are similar to those for private financial transfers, consistent with the notion that private financial

transfers and coresidency are different modes of the same economic process of income sharing.




                                             p. 16
3.3. Trends in income sharing

   In Figure 1, we show the trends from 1979 to 2003 in the importance of various components

of household income for each of our schooling categories. The height of each line depicts the

sample average of the fraction of total household income coming from each of three underlying

components: nuclear family income, related family income, and unrelated/cohabiting family

income. The first panel demonstrates a clear decline over time in the relative importance of

nuclear family income. This decline is particularly dramatic for the less educated women, falling

from approximately 94 percent of total household income in 1979 to 85 percent in 2003. As the

next two panels demonstrate, this decline was offset by an increase in the fraction of income

coming from unrelated/cohabiting individuals (a 7 percentage point increase) and a somewhat

smaller increase in the fraction of household income from related family members (a 4

percentage point increase).

   There are two potential sources for the substantial decline in the fraction of total income

attributable to individuals in the nuclear family: changes in the composition of household living

arrangements or changes in the importance of nuclear family income within living arrangement

type. As an example of the first source, suppose disadvantaged women begin to coreside with

other individuals (who are not their spouses). To the extent that these other individuals have

income, then these women will experience a decline in the amount of total income attributable to

the nuclear family. Alternatively, even for households for which the composition remains

unchanged, the income received by the members of the nuclear family could decline relative to

that received by other household members.

   In figure 2 we decompose the total change in the fraction of household income coming from

the nuclear family into the portion attributable to each of these sources and we do so separately




                                           p. 17
for each of our three schooling groups.16 We consider four mutually exclusive and exhaustive

living arrangement groups: (1) married women, (2) unmarried women who live with only

nuclear family members, (3) unmarried women who live with at least some related family

members but not any unrelated individuals, and (4) unmarried women who live with any

unrelated individuals, regardless of whether there are other relatives in the household. The top

panel presents the results for the years 1979-2003. The first bar in each set shows the total

decline and the next two bars illustrate the portion due to a change in living arrangements and the

portion due to a change in income shares within living arrangement. The height of each bar

depicts the percent decline. For those in the less than high school category, the total change in

the fraction of household income attributable to nuclear family income is a reduction of 9.5

percentage points. Of this decline, about three-quarters (-7.0 / -9.5) is attributable to changes in

living arrangements and the remaining one-quarter is attributable to changes in income fractions

within living arrangement types. For the more schooled groups, the decline in nuclear family

income is less (6.9 percentage points for women with a high school diploma and 2.8 percentage

points for women with more than a high school diploma), but the relative importance of the two

sources of change are similar.




16
     The decomposition is implemented as follows: Let θ t be the population ratio of nuclear family income to
                                       j                                                                             j
household income at time t. Let θ t be the equivalent ratio for each subgroup j at time t, and let π t be the

proportion of the population in each subgroup. For the simple case with just two subgroups, a and b, θ t can be
written as a weighted average of the income ratio for each subgroup, i.e. θ t = π taθ ta + π tbθ tb . Then the change in
the relative importance of nuclear family income between time t and s can be expressed as
                     θ t − θ s = (π ta − π sa )θ sa + (π tb − π sb )θ sb + (θ ta − θ sa )π ta + (θ tb − θ sb )π tb
where the first two terms reflect the effect of shifts in the proportion of the population in groups a and b, holding
relative income constant at the initial period (s) level, and the second two terms reflect the change due to changes in
the relative importance of nuclear family income, holding the proportion of the population in each group constant at
the final period (t) level.


                                                          p. 18
   Using this decomposition technique, we can also examine which types of living

arrangements rose in prominence and which declined. (This decomposition is illustrated in

appendix table A1). We find that the 75 percent of the decline in the importance of nuclear

family income that was due to changing living arrangements arose primarily to a reduction in the

proportion of women living in the married household and an increase in the proportion in each of

our three unmarried groups. Among these unmarried groups, the increase in women living with

unrelated individuals (possibly cohabiting partners) was twice as important as the increases in

the two other unmarried groups.

   These results demonstrate an important increase in the number of women living with

unrelated individuals. One potential explanation for this increase is a movement from marriage

to cohabitation because, as we noted earlier, spouses are defined to be part of the same nuclear

family while cohabiting partners are not. Such a movement would thus shift income from the

nuclear family to an unrelated family member. To examine this possibility, we repeat our

analysis for the period 1994-2003, the years in which the CPS distinguishes between cohabiting

partners from other unrelated individuals. These results are presented in the lower panel of

Figure 2. The overall change in the importance of nuclear family income for the least schooled

category over this shorter time period is a decline of 2.4 percent, somewhat smaller than would

be expected if the change over the longer time period were distributed evenly. Furthermore, the

source of the change is divided about equally between changes in living arrangements and

changes in the distribution of income within household types (-1.1 and -1.2 percent). When we

once again disaggregate these results further to examine the role of specific types of living

arrangements (not shown), we find that all of the decline due to changing living arrangements is

attributable to increased cohabitation.




                                           p. 19
       We now turn to a detailed examination of the components of nuclear family income. We

examine four nuclear family income sources: (1) earnings, (2) means tested transfers, (3) private

financial transfers (including child support, and alimony), and (4) other income (e.g., asset

income, retirement benefits, workers’ compensation, and unemployment insurance). Figure 3

graphs the respective fractions of household income due to these components over our sample

period.

       For women in the lowest educational category, there was a fairly consistent decline in the

importance of earnings throughout the 1980s and early 1990s. However, beginning in 1994, there

was a sharp reversal of this trend with the portion of family income coming from earnings

increasing substantially. This reversal is likely related to the strong economic growth during this

period and changes in welfare policy (Schoeni and Blank, 2000; Jacob Klerman and Haider,

2004). The pattern for means-tested public transfers mirrors that for earnings, increasing during

the 1980s and early 1990s and then falling dramatically.

       Although it is difficult to discern in the figure, there is a notable increase in income coming

from private financial transfers, child support or alimony, particularly towards the end of this

period.17 The change is small in an absolute sense, increasing from 2 to 3 percentage points of

family income, but large in percentage terms, increasing by 50 percent. This trend towards

private transfers could be a response to the decline in public support, as well as to the increased

efforts to establish paternity and collect child support (Cancian and Meyer, 2005). Also of

interest is the relatively high and consistent level of related family income, remaining fixed at

approximately 10 percent throughout the period for the least-educated women.




17
     We combine these sources because they are not separately identified until 1987.


                                                     p. 20
3.4. Assessing macroeconomic effects

     In order to assess the relationship between the economy and the relative importance of the

various sources of income net of other household characteristics, we turn to a regression analysis.

For this exercise we divide household income into six categories, four of which pertain to the

income of the nuclear family (earnings, means-tested public transfers, private transfers, and other

income) and two of which pertain to income accruing to non-nuclear members (related family

income and unrelated/cohabiting income). We then construct six different dependent variables

Yit to be the percent of total household income due to each of these sources and regress these

dependent variables on a measure of macroeconomic performance and other standard controls.18

Specifically, we estimate the regression equation

     (1)          Yit = β 0 + β1U it + β 2 X it + α s + γ t + ε it .

We use annual state unemployment rates Uit as our proxy for the macroeconomic conditions. As

other controls Xit, we include our three schooling levels, race/ethnicity, age, marital status,

whether the woman is enrolled in school, and the presence of children in the nuclear family.

State fixed effects α s are included to control for persistent differences across states in policies

and the economic environment. We use year fixed effects γ t to capture other nationwide

changes over time, such as changes in public assistance programs, the EITC, and social norms.

We use data from 1987 through 2003 yielding approximately three-quarters of a million

observations. We present only the results for our key coefficient Uit in Table 3; appendix table

A2 provides complete regression results.

     Unsurprisingly, we find that higher unemployment rates are associated with a reduced

percentage of household income due to nuclear family earnings and an increased fraction of
18
  Because the dependent variables sum to 100 across income sources for each individual, the coefficients on any
particular regressor must sum to zero across income sources. The individual coefficients should be interpreted as
the relative cyclicality of each of the underlying sources.


                                                     p. 21
means-tested public transfers. These effects, although statistically strong, are not economically

large. An increase in the unemployment rate of 1 percentage point is associated with a decline of

0.5 percentage points in the fraction of income coming from labor earnings of nuclear family

members. This is equivalent to a decline of just 0.6 percent (0.522 / 77.99). The increase in the

probability of means tested transfers associated with a 1 percentage point increase in the

unemployment rate is even smaller in percentage point terms (0.2), but because such transfers are

less common than labor earnings, the percentage effects are large, corresponding to a 5.8 percent

increase in the fraction of income due to means-tested public transfers (0.186 / 3.22). Private

transfers also increase significantly with the unemployment rate by a similar 5.7 percent (an

increase of 0.024 percentage points). Thus, even though private transfers are relatively rare, they

potentially play an important role in smoothing the consumption of low income families over the

business cycle. However, we find no significant relationship between the unemployment rate

and the income from either category of non-nuclear family members.

   Our regression methodology also allows us examine yearly trends in the importance of

income sources, net of the business cycle and other factors that are controlled for in the

regressions. These trends are simply the coefficients on the dummy variables denoting each year

of our sample. In Figure 4 we plot the values of these coefficients for each of the six regressions.

Many of the same patterns we have already identified are apparent. Perhaps most importantly,

there is a strong secular increase in earnings from unrelated and cohabiting individuals, reaching

almost 3 percentage points by the end of our sample period. There is also a steady increase in

the fraction of household income due to related family members. Finally, the decline and then

increase in the importance of nuclear family earnings, with an opposite pattern for means-tested

transfers, is also apparent in these estimated effects.




                                             p. 22
3.5 Poverty rates and income sharing

     The results presented thus far indicate that private cash transfers and transfers through shared

living arrangements can be important sources of support for the low-income population. In this

section we address the potential for these transfers to mitigate economic hardship. To do so, we

examine the effect of various transfers and income pooling arrangements on poverty rates. The

basis for our analysis is the official poverty measure defined by the U.S. Census Bureau, but we

explore alternative definitions of income and the relevant economic unit.19

     In Table 5 we tabulate the poverty rate for seven different definitions of the appropriate

economic unit and income measure. In the first row of table 5, the economic unit is defined to be

the nuclear family and income to be total nuclear family income, exclusive of all means-tested

transfers and all private cash transfers. For the lowest schooled in our sample, the poverty rate

based on this definition is 35.6 percent. The next row adds public transfers to the definition of

income but continues to exclude private cash transfers. The poverty rate for the least-educated

group falls to 33.9 percent. Adding private transfers as well (row 3) has little effect on poverty,

reducing the rate to 33.8 percent. In the next row we expand the economic unit to include all

related family members in the household and increase income and the needs standard

accordingly. This poverty measure, which corresponds to the official Census definition, is 31.4

percent. This decline in the poverty rate indicates that related persons bring more than enough

income to the household to cover their needs (as defined by the increment in the poverty

threshold).




19
  The Census definition of poverty is based on a comparison of the income of the economic unit (defined as all
related members of a household) to an income threshold specific to the size of the unit. This measure provides a
convenient metric for judging well-being that is widely cited and easily calculated for varying sized economic units
and income measures. However, it is not without its critics. See Citro and Michael (1995) for a discussion of its
weakness and some suggested modifications.


                                                   p. 23
   In row 5, we define the economic unit to be the nuclear family with just cohabiting partners.

It might be that such an economic unit better corresponds to actual income pooling arrangements

than does the official poverty measure. Although the poverty rate falls substantially compared to

the poverty rate based on the nuclear family alone, it is quite similar to that calculated for the

related family in row 4 (the official poverty measure). When we further expand the economic

unit to include both related family members and cohabiting partners (row 6), the poverty rate

declines even further to 28.6 percent. The final row (row 7) incorporates all persons in the

household and the poverty rate drops to 26.4 percent for the least schooled and 5.9 percent for

those with the most schooling. Thus, the “choice” to live with others has the potential to improve

economic well-being substantially. In total, the poverty rate declines by over 20 percent when the

relevant unit is expanded from the nuclear family with all public and private transfers included in

income (row 3) to the extended household.

   We note, however, that these broader definitions assume that household income is shared the

same way among members of the economic unit, regardless of their relationships. Such an

assumption is almost certainly not true.


4. Conclusions and discussion

   Individuals have many dimensions over which they can adjust their behavior in response to

economic change. They may increase or decrease employment levels, retrain for a new job, alter

their reliance on public assistance programs, or give or receive private support from family and

friends. Despite the central role the family plays in current policy discussions, surprisingly little

research has examined the role of the family in providing protection against negative economic

shocks. To begin to fill this void, we provide a synthesis of several related literatures on private




                                            p. 24
transfers and then present new empirical evidence regarding the importance of these transfers

and how they vary with the economic and policy environments.

    The theoretical literature contains several well-developed models of resource sharing

between and within households that provide important insights into possible motives. Moreover,

the existing empirical literature demonstrates clearly that individuals make substantial transfers

and numerous modes of resource sharing are employed. Furthermore, recent work suggests that

the probability and amount of cash transfers depend on the resources of both the potential donors

and recipients and on the availability of public assistance programs. However, few studies have

examined simultaneously multiple modes of assistance, how transfers vary over time, or how

transfers respond to the economic environment more generally. Our empirical work begins to

fill these gaps.

    We find that transfers provide an important source of support for low-income individuals,

with coresidency being particularly important. In addition, our results indicate that, while

transfers respond significantly to macroeconomic conditions, there has also been a steady

increase in shared living arrangements that is unexplained by macroeconomic and demographic

changes. We hypothesize that these changes may be due to changes in attitudes and social norms.

    As in past studies, our investigation of cash transfers is limited by the data. Inter-household

cash transfers appear to be poorly measured in the CPS and it is thus impossible to assess

accurately their true significance. However, we do find that when such transfers are reported, the

amounts are large relative to the non-transfer incomes of the recipients. More recent surveys,

such as the Health and Retirement Study, employ more detailed questions on transfers than have

been asked in the past and will provide the opportunity to re-examine this issue in the future. We

note also that the phenomenon of income sharing within households is also poorly understood.




                                            p. 25
Although economists have developed elegant household bargaining models that predict that the

income of household members is unlikely to be pooled completely, an understanding of exactly

how such income is shared awaits additional empirical analyses. We do, however, emphasize

that the potential for improvement in financial status from income pooling is large.

   Finally, one of the more important avenues for additional research is an examination of the

choice of living arrangements. Decisions about coresidence depend on the living arrangement

options available to an individual, the availability of other forms of public and private support,

household production processes, and the relative value of privacy. Because of the degree of

complication involved in the decision making process, a rigorous investigation of co-residency

requires sophisticated modeling and extremely detailed data. Although difficult, an

understanding of the decision to live with others and the transfers embedded in such

arrangements are crucial for an understanding of the resources available to the low income

population.

   Despite the limitations of our study, our results suggest at least two important lessons for

public policy. First, when interpreting the effects of economic or policy changes, the potential

for changes in private support must be considered. For example, studies which find only small

effects of welfare reform on income may miss the importance of income provided by family and

friends and thus the burdens imposed on non-welfare recipients. Second, the functioning of

public assistance programs and poverty measurement depend critically on the definition of the

economic unit. Any definition makes implicit assumptions about how resources are shared

among family and household members, yet there exists relatively little empirical evidence to

justify the choice of one definition over the other. This again highlights the importance of a




                                            p. 26
additional research on private transfers and the responsiveness of these transfers to changes in

public assistance programs and in the economy.


                                           References

Altonji, Joseph, Fumio Hayashi, and Laurence Kotlikoff, 2000. “The Effects of Earnings and
Wealth on Time and Money Transfers between Parents and Children,” in A. Masson and G.
Tapinos, eds. Sharing the Wealth: Demographic Change and Ecnomic Transfers between
Generations, Oxford University Press: 306-357.

Altonji, Joseph, Fumio Hayashi, and Laurence Kotlikoff, 1997. “Parental Altruism and Inter
Vivos Transfers: Theory and Evidence,” The Journal of Political Economy, 105(6):1121-1166.

Autor, David, Lawrence Katz, and Melissa Kearney, 2004. “Trends in U.S. Wage Inequality: A
Re-Assessment of the Revisionists,” Harvard University manuscript.

Barro, Robert, 1974. “Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?” Journal of Political Economy,
82(6): 1095-1117.

Becker, Gary, 1974. “A Theory of Social Interactions,” The Journal of Political Economy
82(6):1063-1093.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, Andrei Shleifer and Lawrence Summers, 1985. “The Strategic Bequest
Motive,” The Journal of Political Economy, 93(6):1045-1076.

Bitler, Mariane, Jonah Gelbach, and Hilary Hoynes, 2004. “Welfare Reform and Children’s
Living Arrangements,” University of Maryland manuscript.

Blank, Rebecca, 2002. “Evaluating Welfare Reform in the United States,” Journal of Economic
Literature, 40(4):1105-66.

Blank, Rebecca and Robert Schoeni, 2003. “Changes in the Distribution of Children’s Family
Income Over the 1990s,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 93(2):304-308.

Blau, David and Janet Currie, 2004. “Preschool, Day Care, and Afterschool Care: Who’s
Minding the Kids?” NBER Working paper 10670.

Cancian, Maria and Dan Meyer, 2005. “How are Child Support Payments Affected by the
Economic Cycle?” in Shifting Resources: The Next Generation of Research on Economic
Changes, Public Policy Changes and Poverty, eds., Rebecca Blank, Sheldon Danziger and
Robert Schoeni.

Citro, Constance F., and Robert T. Michael, 1995. Measuring Poverty: A New Approach.
National Research Council, National Academy Press: Washington, DC.



                                           p. 27
Costa, Dora, 1999. “A Home of Her Own,” The Journal of Public Economics,” 72(1):39-59.

Couch, Kenneth, Mary Daly and Douglas Wolf, 1999. “Time? Money? Both? The Allocation of
Resources to Older Parents,” Demography, 36(2):219-232.

Cox, Donald, 1990. “Intergenerational Transfers and Liquidity Constraints,” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 105(1):187-217.

Cox, Donald, 1987. “Motives for Private Income Transfers,” The Journal of Political Economy,
95(3):508-546.

Cox, Donald and George Jakubson. 1995. “The Connection Between Public Transfes and
Private Interfamily Transfers,” Journal of Public Economics, 57(1):129-167.

Cox, Donald and Tullio Jappelli. 1990. “Credit Rationing and Private Transfers: Evidence from
Survey Data,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 72(3): 445-454.

Current Population Survey. 2002. “Current Population Survey: Design and Methodology.”
Burea u of Labor Statistics Technical Paper 63RV.

Danziger, Sheldon, Colleen Heflin, Mary Corcoran, Elizabeth Oltmans, and Hui-Chen Wang,
2002. “Does It Pay to Move from Welfare to Work?” Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management, 21(Fall):671-692.

DeLeire, Thomas and Ariel Kalil, 2005. "How Do Cohabiting Couples with Children Spend
Their Money?" Journal of Marriage and Family, 67:285-294.

Department of Health and Human Services, 1998. “Informal Caregiving Compassion in Action,”
Washington, D.C. DHHS: Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation.

Dynarski, Susan and Jonathan Gruber, 1997. “Can Families Smooth Variable Earnings?”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1997(1):229-303.

Edin, Kathryn and Laura Lein, 1997. Making Ends Meet, New York, Russell Sage Foundation.

Engelhardt, Gary, Jonathan Gruber, and Cynthia Perry, 2002 “Social Security and Elderly Living
Arrangements,” NBER working paper number 8911.

Epler, Elizabeth 1954. “Old-Age Assistance: Plan Provisions on Children’s Responsibility for
Parents,” Social Security Bulletin, April:3-12.

Gale, William and John Karl Scholz, 1994. “Intergenerational Transfers and the Accumulation of
Wealth,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 8 (4) : 145-160.




                                         p. 28
Gruber, Jonathan, 1997. “The Consumption Smoothing Benefits of Unemployment Insurance,”
The American Economic Review, 87(1):192-205.

Haider, Steven J., Alison Jacknowitz, and Robert F. Schoeni. 2003. “Food Stamps and the
Elderly: Why Is Participation so Low?” Journal of Human Resources, 38(S):1080-1111.

Klerman, Jacob, and Steven J. Haider. 2004. “A Stock-Flow Analysis of the Welfare Caseload.”
Journal of Human Resources, 39(4):865-886.

Korbin, Frances, 1976. “The Fall in Household Size and the Rise of the Primary Individual,”
Demography, 13:127-138.

Kotlikoff, Laurence and Avia Spivak, 1981. “The Family as an Incomplete Annuities Market,”
The Journal of Political Economy, 89(2):372-391.

Lampman, Robert and Timothy Smeeding, 1983. "Interfamily Transfers as Alternative to
Government Transfers to Persons," Review of Income and Wealth, 29:45-66.

Light, Audrey and Kathleen McGarry, 2004. “Why Parents Play Favorites: Explanations for
Unequal Bequests,” The American Economic Review, 39(4):624-648.

Lundberg, Shelly and Robert Pollak, and Terence Wales, 1997. “Do Husbands and Wives Pool
Their Resources? Evidence from the United Kingdom Child Benefit.” Journal of Human
Resources, 32(3):463-480.

Magnuson, Katherine and Timothy Smeeding, 2005. “Earnings, Transfers and Living
Arrangements in Low-income Families: Who Pays the Bills?” paper presented at the National
Poverty Center conference “Mixed Methods Research on Economic Conditions, Public Policy,
and Family and Child Well-being, Ann Arbor, MI.

McGarry, Kathleen and Robert Schoeni, 1995, “Transfer Behavior in the Health and Retirement
Study: Measurement and the Redistribution of Resources within the Family,” Journal of Human
Resources, 30(S):184-226.

McGarry, Kathleen and Robert Schoeni, 1997, “Transfer Behavior Within the Family: Results
From the Asset and Health Dynamics Study,” The Journals of Gerontology Series B, 52B:82-92.

MetLife Mature Market Institute, 2004. Market Survey of Nursing Home and Home Health Care
Costs, Westport, CT : MetLife Mature Market Institute.

Meyer, Bruce and Dan Rosenbaum, 1999. “Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and the
Labor Supply of Single Mothers,” NBER working paper 7363.

Michael, Robert, Victor Fuchs and S. Scott, 1980. “Changes in the Propensity to Live Alone:
1950-1976,” Demography 17:39-53.




                                         p. 29
Moffitt, Robert and Katie Winder, 2005. “Does It Pay to Move From Welfare to Work? A
Comment on Danziger, Heflin, Corcoran, Oltmans, and Wang.” Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management, 24(2):399-409.

Moffitt, Robert, Robert Reville, and Anne Winkler, 1998. “Beyond Single Mothers:
Cohabitation and Marriage in the AFDC Program,” Demography, 35(3):259-278.

Pampel, Fred, 1983. “Changes in the Propensity to Live Alone: Evidence from Consecutive
Cross-Sectional Surveys, 1960-1976,” Demography, 20(4):433-448.

Patterson, James T., 2000. America’s Struggle against Poverty in the Twentieth Century.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Rosenzweig, Mark and Kenneth Wolpin, 1993. “Intergenerational Support and the Life-Cycle
Incomes of Young Men and Their Parents: Human Capital Investments, Coresidence, and
Intergenerational Financial Transfers,” Journal of Labor Economics, 11(1):84-112.

Rosenzweig, Mark and Kenneth Wolpin, 1994. “Parental and Public Transfers to Young Women
and Their Children,” The American Economic Review, 84 (5):1195-1212.

Rowe, Gretchen and Victoria Russell, 2004. “The Welfare Rules Databook: State Polices as of
July 2002,” Urban Institute Discussion Paper 04-06.

Schoeni, Robert, 1997. “Does Aid to Families with Dependent Children Displace Familial
Assistance?” University of Michigan manuscript.

Schoeni, Robert, 2002. “Does Unemployment Insurance Displace Familial Assistance?” Public
Choice 110(1-2): 99-119.

Schoeni, Robert and Rebecca Blank, 2000. “What Has Welfare Reform Accomplished? Impacts
on Welfare Participation, Employment, Income, Poverty, and Family Structure,” University of
Michigan manuscript.

Schwartz, Saul, Sheldon Danziger, and Eugene Smolensky, 1984. “The Choice of Living
Arrangements Among the Aged,” in Retirement and Economic Behavior, Henry Aaron and Gary
Burtless, eds. Washington, D.C. : Brookings Institute.

Thomas, Duncan, 1990. “Intra-household Resource Allocation: An Inferential Approach.”
Journal of Human Resources, 25(4):635-664.

Townsend, Robert, 1994. “Risk and Insurance in Village India,” Econometrica, 62(3):539-591.

Townsend, Robert, 1995. “Consumption Insurance: An Evaluation of Risk-Bearing Sustems in
Low-Income Economies,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 9(3):83-102.




                                         p. 30
Whittington, Leslie and Elizabeth Peters, 1996. “Economic Incentives for Financial and
Residential Independence.” Demography, 33(1):82-97.




                                         p. 31
                 Table 1: Income by Source, Family Unit, and Education, 2003

                                                         Less HS          HS          More HS
All women
Observations                                              7,007         16,926         32,821

Mean nuclear family income                                35,248         51,034        77,756
Percent of nuclear family income by source §
 Earnings                                                  78.6           85.1          87.4
 Private financial transfers                                0.5            0.5           0.9
 Means-tested transfers†                                    8.2            3.0           1.0
 Other‡                                                    12.7           11.4          10.7

Mean household income                                     42,089         57,906        83,900
Percent of household income by source
 Nuclear family income                                     84.6           89.0          92.1
 Related family income                                      5.8            3.6           1.8
 Cohabiting family income                                   4.9            4.3           2.7
 Non-related family income                                  4.6            3.1           3.3

Single mothers
Observations                                              1,034          1,976          2,981

Mean nuclear family income                                31,568        32,339         54,126
Percent of nuclear family income by source §
 Earnings                                                  73.1           79.0          80.4
 Private financial transfers                                0.3            0.7           0.4
 Means-tested transfers†                                   11.7            6.0           2.5
 Other‡                                                    15.0           14.3          16.6

Mean household income                                       41,145        46,179         64,974
Percent of household income by source
  Nuclear family income                                      77.2           76.8          85.3
  Related family income                                      13.0           12.7           9.0
  Cohabiting family income                                    6.4           7.4            3.8
  Non-related family income                                   3.3           3.1            1.9
§
  These tabulations are the mean across families of the fraction of income by source; nuclear
families with zero total income are excluded.
†
  Means-tested transfers include income from the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
(TANF) program and the Supplemental Security Income (SSI) program.
‡
  Other income includes transfers from the unemployment insurance, disability insurance, and
workers’ compensation programs, alimony and child support, asset income, retirement benefits,
and other miscellaneous income.




                                          p. 32
                      Table 2: Transfers by Source and Education, 2003

                              Private financial transfers       Non-nuclear family income
                            Less HS      HS        More HS     Less HS    HS      More HS
                              (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)      (5)        (6)
Proportion receiving any     0.011      0.013       0.022       0.236    0.190      0.146

Amount of transfers among recipients
 Observations                  64       196         583          1,643    3,224   4,425
   th
 25 percentile                960       900        2,000        12,156   14,400   16,014
 Median                      2,000     2,000       4,500        21,800   26,000   30,200
 75th percentile             7,920     5,000       9,000        37,400   45,676   51,696
 Mean                        6,574     5,182       7,621        28,987   36,258   42,116
 Standard error of mean      1,388      685         409           707      779     692

Characteristics of recipients
 Observations                    64      196        583          1,643    3,224   4,425
 Nuclear family income        24,683   26,072     31,318        17,169   26,619   37,105
 Household income             26,615   30,285     41,542        46,156   62,877   79,221
 Age                           34.5     31.3       28.9           31.9     33.3    32.2
 Proportion married            0.200    0.266      0.212         0.232    0.193   0.139
 Proportion with children      0.493    0.460      0.280         0.486    0.420   0.284
 Proportion in school          0.105    0.126      0.379         0.095    0.047   0.173

Characteristics of non-recipients
 Observations                  6,943   16,730     32,238         5,364   13,702   28,396
 Nuclear family income        35,362   51,369     78,817        40,833   56,743   84,699
 Household income             42,257   58,277     84,868        40,833   56,743   84,699
 Age                           33.8     37.1       36.8           34.3     37.9    37.4
 Proportion married            0.472    0.571      0.580         0.542    0.654   0.646
 Proportion with children      0.624    0.539      0.508         0.664    0.566   0.541
 Proportion in school          0.126    0.039      0.094         0.135    0.038   0.087




                                        p. 33
              Table 3: OLS Model for Fraction of Household Income by Source

                                                                             Non-nuclear family
                                Nuclear family income sources                   income sources
                                   Private        Means-                     Related    Unrelated
Regressor               Earnings transfers        tested      Other           indiv.      indiv

Unemployment rate         -0.522       0.024        0.186        0.320        0.009        -0.017
                        (0.044)**    (0.008)**    (0.022)**    (0.030)**     (0.020)      (0.027)

Mean of the dep var        77.99         0.42         3.22         9.59         2.77         6.01
R-squared                  0.200        0.010        0.110        0.040        0.040        0.160
The estimates for these tables are based on equation 1 from the text. The regressions are based
on a sample of 736,024 observations.




                                          p. 34
     Table 4: Percent Poor by Alternative Definitions of Economic Unit and Income, 2003

                                                           Less HS       HS         More HS

(1) Nuclear family, excluding public & private transfers    35.6        16.6              8.7
(2) Nuclear family, excluding private transfers             33.9        15.7              8.4
(3) Nuclear family                                          33.8        15.6              7.8
(4) Nuclear + related family (official rate)                31.4        14.1              7.1
(5) Nuclear + cohabitor family                              31.0        13.8              7.0
(6) Nuclear + related + cohabitor family                    28.6        12.4              6.3
(7) Entire household                                        26.4        11.3              5.4




                                          p. 35
Figure 1: Components of Total Household Income

                                             Nuclear Family Income
                             1.00
                             0.98
                             0.96



Share of Household Income
                             0.94
                                    0.94
                             0.92                                                            Less HS
                             0.90                                                            HS
                             0.88                                                            More HS
                             0.86
                                                                                      0.85
                             0.84
                             0.82
                             0.80
                               79

                                     82

                                            85

                                                 88

                                                       91

                                                              94

                                                                   97

                                                                         00

                                                                              03
                             19

                                    19

                                            19

                                                 19

                                                      19

                                                            19

                                                                   19

                                                                        20

                                                                              20
                                    Unrelated/Cohabitor Family Income
                             0.20
                             0.18
                             0.16
 Share of Household Income




                             0.14
                             0.12                                                            Less HS
                             0.10                                                            HS
                             0.08                                                            More HS
                             0.06                                                     0.06
                             0.04
                                    0.02
                             0.02
                             0.00
                               79

                                     82

                                            85

                                                 88

                                                       91

                                                              94

                                                                   97

                                                                        00

                                                                              03
                             19

                                    19

                                            19

                                                 19

                                                      19

                                                            19

                                                                   19

                                                                        20

                                                                              20




                                             Related Family Income
                             0.20
                             0.18
                             0.16
 Share of Household Income




                             0.14
                             0.12                                                            Less HS
                             0.10                                                  0.10      HS
                             0.08                                                            More HS
                             0.06
                             0.04
                             0.02    0.03

                             0.00
                               79

                                     82

                                            85

                                                 88

                                                       91

                                                              94

                                                                   97

                                                                        00

                                                                              03
                             19

                                    19

                                            19

                                                 19

                                                      19

                                                            19

                                                                   19

                                                                        20

                                                                              20




                                                      p. 36
                            Figure 2: Decomposition of Decline in Nuclear Family Income

                                                         Decomposition for 1979-2003

                            10.0           9.5

                             9.0
                             8.0
                                                   7.1                  6.9
 Percentage Point Decline



                             7.0
                             6.0                                              5.7

                             5.0

                             4.0
                                                                                                  2.8
                             3.0                           2.4                                            2.3
                             2.0                                                     1.2
                             1.0                                                                                  0.5

                             0.0
                                                 Less HS                      HS                        Some HS

                           Total Change              Change Due to Living Arrange.         Change Due to Income Shares



                                                         Decomposition for 1994-2003
                            10.0
                             9.0
                             8.0
Percentage Point Decline




                             7.0
                             6.0
                             5.0
                             4.0

                             3.0           2.4
                             2.0                                       1.6
                                                   1.1     1.2                1.4
                                                                                                  1.1     0.9
                             1.0                                                     0.3                        0.2
                             0.0
                                                 Less HS                      HS                        Some HS

                            Total Change             Change Due to Living Arrange.         Change Due to Income Shares




                                                                 p. 37
        Figure 3: Components of Nuclear Family Income

                                                            Earnings
                                 0.95

                                 0.90




Share of Nuclear Fam. Income
                                 0.85
                                                                                                  Less HS
                                 0.80                                                             HS
                                                                                        0.79      More HS
                                 0.75   0.75


                                 0.70

                                 0.65
                                   79

                                        82

                                                 85

                                                      88

                                                            91

                                                                   94

                                                                        97

                                                                              00

                                                                                    03
                                 19

                                        19

                                               19

                                                      19

                                                           19

                                                                 19

                                                                        19

                                                                             20

                                                                                   20
                                                    Means Test Transfers
                                 0.30

                                 0.25
  Share of Nuclear Fam. Income




                                 0.20
                                                                                                  Less HS
                                 0.15                                                             HS
                                                                                                  More HS
                                 0.10

                                 0.05
                                                                                           0.03
                                 0.00   0.02
                                   79

                                         82

                                                 85

                                                      88

                                                            91

                                                                   94

                                                                        97

                                                                             00

                                                                                   03
                                 19

                                        19

                                               19

                                                      19

                                                           19

                                                                 19

                                                                        19

                                                                             20

                                                                                   20




                  Financial Transfers, Alimony and Child Support
                                 0.30

                                 0.25
Share of Nuclear Fam. Income




                                 0.20
                                                                                                  Less HS
                                 0.15                                                             HS
                                          0.13                                                    More HS
                                 0.10
                                                                                           0.08
                                 0.05

                                 0.00
                                   79

                                        82

                                                 85

                                                      88

                                                            91

                                                                   94

                                                                        97

                                                                              00

                                                                                    03
                                 19

                                        19

                                               19

                                                      19

                                                           19

                                                                 19

                                                                        19

                                                                             20

                                                                                   20




                                                           p. 38
                                           Other Related Family Income
                               0.30

                               0.25




Share of Nuclear Fam. Income
                               0.20
                                                                                          Less HS
                               0.15                                                       HS
                                                                                          More HS
                                      0.11
                               0.10                                                0.10

                               0.05

                               0.00
                                 79

                                      82

                                             85

                                                  88

                                                        91

                                                               94

                                                                    97

                                                                         00

                                                                              03
                               19

                                      19

                                             19

                                                  19

                                                       19

                                                             19

                                                                    19

                                                                         20

                                                                              20




                                                       p. 39
 Figure 4: Regression-Adjusted Trends in the Fraction of Household Income by Source for All
                                           Women


               3

               2

               1
                                                                          Earnings
                                                                          Priv. Tran.
               0
         Percent




                                                                          Mns. Test.
                                                                          Other
            88

                     90

                            92

                                  94

                                         96

                                               98

                                                     00

                                                            02
              -1
         19

                   19

                          19

                                 19

                                       19

                                              19

                                                    20

                                                          20
                                                                          Related
              -2                                                          Unrelated


              -3

              -4


The estimates for these figures are based on equation 1 from the text.




                                           p. 40
                                          Appendix

               Table A1: Decomposing Change in Nuclear Family Income Shares

                                                     Less HS        HS        More HS
1979-2003 Change

Total change in nuclear family income share           -9.49        -6.93       -2.80
 Change due to changing living arrangements           -7.06        -5.70       -2.33
 Change due to changing income shares                 -2.43        -1.23       -0.46

Changes in living arrangements by household type       -7.06       -5.70       -2.33
  married                                             -13.15      -11.02       -3.60
  unmarried, nuclear family only                        1.20       0.63        -0.85
  unmarried, related and nuclear family only            1.49       1.42        0.83
  unmarried, any unrelated family                       3.39       3.28        1.28

Changes in income shares by household type            -2.43        -1.23       -0.46
  married                                             -1.47        -0.89       -0.36
  unmarried, nuclear family only                       0.00        0.00        0.00
  unmarried, related and nuclear family only          -0.27        -0.22       -0.11
  unmarried, any unrelated family                     -0.68        -0.12       0.01

1994-2003 Change

Total change in nuclear family income share           -2.35        -1.64       -1.06
 Change due to changing living arrangements           -1.15        -1.37       -0.91
 Change due to changing income shares                 -1.21        -0.28       -0.15

Changes in living arrangements by household type      -1.15        -1.37       -0.91
  married                                             -1.14        -4.41       -2.02
  unmarried, nuclear family only                      -0.65        1.98        0.30
  unmarried, related and nuclear family only          -0.42        0.12        0.09
  unmarried, unrelated family with cohabitor           1.31        1.14        0.85
  unmarried, unrelated family, no cohabitor           -0.24        -0.19       -0.13

Changes in income shares by household type            -1.21        -0.28       -0.15
  married                                             -0.23        -0.31       0.00
  unmarried, nuclear family only                       0.00        0.00        0.00
  unmarried, related and nuclear family only          -0.36        0.17        -0.03
  unmarried, unrelated family, with cohabitor         -0.27        -0.10       0.00
  unmarried, unrelated family, no cohabitor           -0.35        -0.04       -0.12




                                         p. 41
                Table A2: OLS Model for Fraction of Household Income by Source


                                                                            Non-nuclear family
                                  Nuclear family income sources               income sources
                                     Private         Means-                Related    Unrelated
Regressor               Earnings transfers            tested     Other      indiv.        indiv
Unemployment rate          -0.522       0.024         0.186      0.320      0.009        -0.017
                        (0.044)** (0.008)** (0.022)** (0.030)**            (0.020)      (0.027)
Less than HS              -15.427       -0.141        8.675      2.037      3.026        1.830
                        (0.106)** (0.018)** (0.053)** (0.071)**           (0.049)** (0.066)**
HS degree                  -4.241       -0.113        1.688      0.299      1.434        0.933
                        (0.075)** (0.013)** (0.037)** (0.050)**           (0.035)** (0.046)**
Age                        -0.035       -0.006        0.023      0.365      -0.091       -0.256
                        (0.004)** (0.001)** (0.002)** (0.003)**           (0.002)** (0.002)**
Enrolled in school         7.277        0.777         -3.768     5.929      -1.574       -8.641
                        (0.144)** (0.025)** (0.072)** (0.096)**           (0.067)** (0.089)**
Child present              1.002        -0.226        3.346      -0.416     2.262        -5.968
                        (0.071)** (0.012)** (0.036)** (0.048)**           (0.033)** (0.044)**
Married                   26.019        -0.395        -5.616     -5.412     -2.688      -11.908
                        (0.077)** (0.013)** (0.038)** (0.051)**           (0.036)** (0.048)**
Black                      -3.139       -0.016        5.290      -0.395     2.417        -4.158
                        (0.107)**      (0.018)     (0.054)** (0.072)**    (0.050)** (0.067)**
Hispanic                   -0.513       -0.006        0.923      -1.797     1.931        -0.539
                        (0.117)**      (0.020)     (0.059)** (0.078)**    (0.054)** (0.073)**
Other                      -3.509       0.830         1.401      -0.137     1.856        -0.441
                        (0.165)** (0.028)** (0.083)**           (0.110)   (0.076)** (0.103)**
Year-1988                  -0.447       0.123         0.080      0.040      -0.070       0.273
                         (0.204)*    (0.035)**       (0.102)    (0.137)    (0.095)     (0.127)*
Year-1989                  -0.747       0.031         -0.091     0.190      0.049        0.567
                        (0.206)**      (0.035)       (0.103)    (0.138)    (0.095)    (0.128)**
Year-1990                  -1.085       0.103         0.207      -0.063     0.253        0.585
                        (0.203)** (0.035)**         (0.102)*    (0.136)   (0.094)** (0.126)**
Year-1991                  -1.170       0.054         0.318      -0.344     0.275        0.868
                        (0.202)**      (0.035)     (0.101)**   (0.135)*   (0.094)** (0.126)**
Year-1992                  -1.557       0.028         0.338      -0.287     0.398        1.079
                        (0.208)**      (0.036)     (0.104)**   (0.139)*   (0.097)** (0.130)**
Year-1993                  -2.799       0.108         0.725      0.058      0.485        1.423
                        (0.202)** (0.035)** (0.101)**           (0.135)   (0.094)** (0.126)**
Year-1994                  -2.296       0.105         0.481      -0.081     0.538        1.253
                        (0.199)** (0.034)** (0.100)**           (0.133)   (0.092)** (0.124)**
Year-1995                  -2.064       0.048         0.168      -0.358     0.685        1.522
                        (0.200)**      (0.034)       (0.100)  (0.134)**   (0.093)** (0.125)**
Year-1996                  -2.239       0.052         0.002      -0.130     0.568        1.746
                        (0.201)**      (0.035)       (0.101)    (0.135)   (0.093)** (0.125)**
Year-1997                  -2.371       0.059         -0.323     0.152      0.447        2.035


                                         p. 42
                      (0.206)**    (0.035)    (0.103)**     (0.138)   (0.095)**   (0.128)**
Year-1998               -1.521      0.107       -0.769       0.100      0.386       1.696
                      (0.211)**   (0.036)**   (0.106)**     (0.141)   (0.098)**   (0.131)**
Year-1999               -1.801      0.054       -1.116       0.004      0.563       2.297
                      (0.216)**    (0.037)    (0.108)**     (0.144)   (0.100)**   (0.134)**
Year-2000               -1.452      0.065       -1.271       -0.261     0.582       2.336
                      (0.220)**    (0.038)    (0.110)**     (0.147)   (0.102)**   (0.137)**
Year-2001               -1.011      0.117       -1.478       -0.304     0.394       2.282
                      (0.207)**   (0.036)**   (0.104)**    (0.138)*   (0.096)**   (0.129)**
Year-2002               -0.833      0.134       -1.661       -0.647     0.482       2.525
                      (0.197)**   (0.034)**   (0.099)**   (0.132)**   (0.091)**   (0.123)**
Year-2003               -1.174      0.145       -1.465       -0.528     0.566       2.457
                      (0.196)**   (0.034)**   (0.098)**   (0.131)**   (0.091)**   (0.122)**
Mean of the dep var     77.99        0.42        3.22         9.59       2.77        6.01
Observations           736,024     736,024     736,024     736,024     736,024     736,024
R-squared               0.200       0.010       0.110        0.040      0.040       0.160




                                      p. 43
