NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

NATIVE INTERNAL MIGRATION AND THE
LABOR MARKET IMPACT OF IMMIGRATION
George J. Borjas
Working Paper 11610
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11610
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2005

Robert W. Scrivner Professor of Economics and Social Policy, Kennedy School of Government, Harvard
University; and Research Associate, National Bureau of Economic Research. I am grateful to Alberto
Abadie, Richard Freeman, Edward Glaeser, Daniel Hamermesh, Lawrence Katz, Robert Rowthorn, Jonathan
Skinner, Stephen Trejo, and two anonymous referees for very helpful comments on an earlier draft, and to
the Smith-Richardson Foundation for research support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by George J. Borjas. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Native Internal Migration and the Labor Market Impact of Immigration
George J. Borjas
NBER Working Paper No. 11610
September 2005
JEL No. J61, R23
ABSTRACT
This paper presents a theoretical and empirical study of how immigration influences the joint
determination of the wage structure and internal migration behavior for native-born workers in local
labor markets. Using data from the 1960-2000 decennial censuses, the study shows that immigration
is associated with lower in-migration rates, higher out-migration rates, and a decline in the growth
rate of the native workforce. The native migration response attenuates the measured impact of
immigration on wages in a local labor market by 40 to 60 percent, depending on whether the labor
market is defined at the state or metropolitan area level.
George J. Borjas
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
gborjas@harvard.edu

1

NATIVE INTERNAL MIGRATION AND THE LABOR MARKET
IMPACT OF IMMIGRATION
George J. Borjas*
I. Introduction
Immigrants in the United States cluster in a small number of geographic areas. In 2000,
for example, 69.2 percent of working-age immigrants resided in six states (California, New
York, Texas, Florida, Illinois, and New Jersey), but only 33.7 percent of natives lived in those
states. Similarly, 38.4 percent of immigrants lived in four metropolitan areas (New York, Los
Angeles, Chicago, and San Francisco), but only 12.2 percent of natives lived in the four
metropolitan areas with the largest native-born populations (New York, Chicago, Los Angeles,
and Philadelphia).
Economic theory suggests that immigration into a closed labor market affects the wage
structure in that market by lowering the wage of competing workers and raising the wage of
complements. Most of the empirical studies in the literature exploit the geographic clustering of
immigrants to measure the labor market impact of immigration by defining the labor market
along a geographic dimension—such as a state or a metropolitan area. Beginning with Grossman
(1982), the typical study relates a measure of native economic outcomes in the locality (or the
change in that outcome) to the relative quantity of immigrants in that locality (or the change in

*

Robert W. Scrivner Professor of Economics and Social Policy, Kennedy School of Government, Harvard
University; and Research Associate, National Bureau of Economic Research. I am grateful to Alberto Abadie,
Richard Freeman, Edward Glaeser, Daniel Hamermesh, Lawrence Katz, Robert Rowthorn, Jonathan Skinner,
Stephen Trejo, and two anonymous referees for very helpful comments on an earlier draft, and to the SmithRichardson Foundation for research support.

2
the relative number).1 The regression coefficient, or “spatial correlation,” is then interpreted as
the impact of immigration on the native wage structure.
There are two well-known problems with this approach. First, immigrants may not be
randomly distributed across labor markets. If immigrants tend to cluster in areas with thriving
economies, there would be a spurious positive correlation between immigration and wages either
in the cross-section or in the time-series. This spurious correlation could attenuate or reverse
whatever measurable negative effects immigrants might have had on the wage of competing
native workers.2
Second, natives may respond to the entry of immigrants into a local labor market by
moving their labor or capital to other localities until native wages and returns to capital are again
equalized across areas. An inter-region comparison of the wage of native workers might show
little or no difference because the effects of immigration are diffused throughout the national
economy, and not because immigration had no economic effects.
In view of these potential problems, it is not too surprising that the empirical literature
has produced a confusing array of results. The measured impact of immigration on the wage of
native workers in local labor markets fluctuates widely from study to study, but seems to cluster
around zero. In recent work (Borjas, 2003), I show that by defining the labor market at the
national level—which more closely approximates the theoretical counterpart of a closed labor
market—the measured wage impact of immigration becomes much larger. By examining the
evolution of wages in the 1960-2000 period within narrow skill groups (defined in terms of

1

See also Altonji and Card (1991); Borjas (1987); Card (1990, 2001); LaLonde and Topel (1991); and
Schoeni (1997). Friedberg and Hunt (1995) survey the literature.
2

Borjas (2001) argues that income-maximizing immigrants would want to cluster in high-wage regions,
helping to move the labor market towards a long-run equilibrium. The evidence indeed suggests that, within
education groups, new immigrants tend to locate in those states that offer the highest rate of return for their skills.

3
schooling and labor market experience), I concluded that a 10-percent immigrant-induced
increase in the number of workers in a particular skill group reduces the wage of that group by 3
to 4 percent.
In this paper, I explore the disparate findings implied by the two approaches by focusing
on a particular adjustment mechanism that native workers may use to avoid the adverse impacts
of immigration on local labor markets: internal migration. A number of studies already examine
if native migration decisions respond to immigration. As with the wage-impact literature, these
studies offer a cornucopia of strikingly different findings, with some studies finding strong
effects (Filer 1992; and Frey 1995), and other studies reporting little connection (Card 2001; and
Kritz and Gurak2001).3
This paper can be viewed as an attempt to reconcile two related, but so far unconnected,
strands in the immigration literature. I present a theoretical framework that jointly models wage
determination in local labor markets and the native migration decision. The theory yields
estimable equations that explicitly link the parameters measuring the wage impact of
immigration at the national level, the spatial correlation between wages and immigration in local
labor markets, and the native migration response. The model clearly shows that the larger the
native migration response, the greater will be the difference between the estimates of the national
wage effect and the spatial correlation. The model also implies that it is possible to use the
spatial correlations to calculate the “true” national impact of immigration as long as one has
information on the migration response of native workers.
I use data drawn from all the Census cross-sections between 1960 and 2000 to estimate
the key parameters of the model. The data indicate that the measured wage impact of

4
immigration depends intimately on the geographic definition of the labor market, and is larger as
one expands the size of the market—from the metropolitan area, to the state, to the Census
division, and ultimately to the nation. In contrast, although the measured impact of immigration
on native migration rates also depends on the geographic definition of the labor market, these
effects become smaller as one expands the size of the market. These mirror-image patterns
suggest that the wage effects of immigration on local labor markets are more attenuated the
easier that natives find it to “vote with their feet.” In fact, the native migration response can
account for between 40 to 60 percent of the difference in the measured wage impact of
immigration between the national and local labor market levels, depending on whether the local
labor market is defined by a state or by a metropolitan area.

II. Theory
I use a simple model of the joint determination of the regional wage structure and the
internal migration decision of native workers to show the types of parameters that spatial
correlations identify, and to determine if these parameters can be used to measure the national
labor market impact of immigration.4 Suppose that the labor demand function for workers in skill
group i residing in geographic area j at time t can be written as:

3

See also Borjas, Freeman, and Katz (1997); Card and DiNardo (2000); Walker, Ellis, and Barff (1992);
White and Hunter (1993); White and Liang (1998); and Wright, Ellis, and Reibel (1997).
4

The model is an application of the Blanchard and Katz (1992) framework that analyzes how local labor
market conditions respond to demand shocks. It builds on a framework developed by Borjas, Freeman, and Katz
(1997, unpublished appendix), and further elaborated in Borjas (1999). The current presentation differs from the
earlier iterations in several ways, particularly by incorporating the presence of internal migration flows before the
immigrant influx begins and by deriving estimable equations that can be used to identify the key theoretical
parameters.

5
η

wijt = X ijt Lijt ,

(1)

where wijt is the wage of workers in cell (i, j, t); Xijt is a demand shifter; Lijt gives the total
number of workers (both immigrants, Mijt, and natives, Nijt); and η is the factor price elasticity
(with η < 0). It is convenient to interpret the elasticity η as the “true” impact that an immigrant
influx would have in a closed labor market in the short run, a labor market where neither capital
nor native-born labor responds to the increased supply.
Suppose the demand shifter is both time-invariant and region-invariant (Xijt = Xi). This
simplification implies that wages for skill group i differ across regions only because the stock of
workers is not evenly distributed geographically.5 I assume that the total number of native
workers in a particular skill group in the national economy is fixed at N i . It would not be
difficult to extend the model to allow for differential rates of growth (across region-skill groups)
in the size of the native workforce.
Suppose that Nij,-1 native workers in skill group i reside in region j in the pre-immigration

period (t = −1). This geographic sorting of native workers does not represent a long-run
equilibrium; some regions have too many workers and other regions too few. The regional wage
differentials induce a migration response by native workers even prior to the immigrant influx. In
particular, region j experiences a net migration of ∆Nij0 natives belonging to skill group i
between t = −1 and t = 0.

5

The extension of the model to incorporate differences in the level of the demand curve would be very
cumbersome unless the determinants of the regional differences in demand are well specified. The assumption that
the demand shifter is time-invariant implies that the immigrant influx will necessarily lower the average wage in the
economy. This adverse wage effect could be dampened by allowing for endogenous capital growth (or for capital
flows from abroad).

6
Beginning at time 0, the local labor market (as defined by a particular skill-region cell)
receives an influx of Mijt immigrants. The immigrant influx continues in all subsequent periods.
A convenient (but restrictive) assumption is that region j receives the same number of
immigrants in each year. The annual immigrant influx for a particular skill-region cell can then
be represented by Mij.6
For simplicity, I assume that immigrants do not migrate internally within the United
States—they enter region j and remain there.7 Natives continue to make relocation decisions, and
region j experiences a net migration of ∆Nij1 natives in period 1, ∆Nij2 natives in period 2, and so
on. The labor demand function in (1) implies that the wage for skill group i in region j at time t is
given by:8

log wijt = log Xi + η log [Nij,-1 + (t + 1)Mij + ∆Nij0 + ∆Nij1 + . . . + ∆Nijt],

(2)

which can be rewritten as:

6

The model can incorporate a time-varying immigrant influx to each region as long as the growth rate of
the immigrant stock in group (i, j) is constant. It is worth noting, however, that the location decisions of new
immigrants may shift over time. In the 1990s, for example, the traditional immigrant gateways of New York and Los
Angeles attracted relatively fewer immigrants as the new immigrants began to settle in areas that did not have
sizable foreign-born populations; see Funkhouser (2000) and Zavodny (1999).
7 The initial evidence reported in Bartel (1989) and Bartel and Koch (1991) suggested that immigrants had
lower rates of internal migration than natives and that the internal migration decisions of immigrants were not as
sensitive to regional wage differences, but instead were heavily influenced by the location decisions of earlier
immigrant waves. However, more recent evidence reported in Gurak and Kritz (2000) indicates that the interstate
migration rate of immigrants is almost as high as that of natives and that immigrant migration decisions are
becoming more sensitive to economic conditions in the state of origin; see also Belanger and Rogers (1992) and
Kritz and Nogle (1994).
8

Note that the model assumes the market clears and ignores the participation decision of native workers.
However, part of the adjustment mechanism to the immigrant-induced supply shifts may occur through a decline in
labor force participation or an increase in unemployment in the native population. The corresponding decline in the
number of working natives would attenuate the wage response and reduce the need for native internal migration; see
Rowthorn and Glyn (2003) for a related discussion.

7

log wijt ≈ log wij,-1 + η [(t + 1) mij + vij0 + vij1+ … + vijt ],

(3)

for t ≥ 0,

where mij = Mij / Nij,-1, the flow of immigrants in a particular skill group entering region j relative
to the initial native stock; and vijt = ∆Nijt / Nij,-1, the net migration rate of natives. Note that wij,-1
gives the wage offered to workers in group (i, j) in the pre-immigration period.
I assume that the internal migration response of native workers occurs with a lag. For
example, immigrants begin to arrive at t = 0. The demand function in equation (3) implies that
the wage response to immigration is immediate, so that wages fall in the immigrant-penetrated
regions. The immigrant-induced migration decisions of natives, however, are not observed until
the next period. The lagged supply response that describes the native migration decisions is
given by:

− ),
vijt = σ (log wij,t-1 – log w
i,t-1

(4)

− is the equilibrium wage (for skill group i) that will
where σ is the supply elasticity, and log w
i,t-1

be observed throughout the national economy once all migration responses to the immigrant
influx that has occurred up to time t − 1 have been made.9 Income-maximizing behavior on the
part of native workers implies that the elasticity σ is positive. If σ is sufficiently “small,” the

More precisely, log −
wi,t-1 = log −
wi,-1 + η(tmi), where mi gives the flow of immigrants in skill group i
relative to the total number of natives in that skill group. The model implicitly assumes that the native population is
large enough (relative to the immigrant stock) to be able to equalize the number of workers across labor markets
through internal migration.
9

8
migration response of natives may not be completed within one period.10 Note that the migration
decision is made by forward-looking native workers who compare the current wage in region j to
the wage that region j will eventually attain. Therefore, natives have perfect information about
the eventual outcome that results from immigration. Workers are not making decisions based on
erroneous information (as in the typical cobweb model). Instead, the lags arise because it is
difficult to change locations immediately.11
As noted above, the existence of regional wage differentials at time t = −1 implies that
native internal migration was taking place even prior to the beginning of immigration. It is useful
to describe the determinants of the net migration flow vij0. In the pre-immigration period, the
equilibrium wage that would be eventually attained in the economy is:

− = X + η log N * ,
log w
i,-1
i
i

(5)

where N i* represent the number of native workers in skill group i that would live in each region
once long-run equilibrium is attained.12 The pre-existing net migration rate of native workers is
then given by:

10

The migration behavior underlying equation (4) is analogous to the firm’s behavior in the presence of
adjustment costs (Hamermesh 1993). The staggered native response can be justified a number of ways. The labor
market is in continual flux, with persons entering and leaving the market. Because migration is costly, workers may
find it optimal to time the lumpy migration decision concurrently with these transitions. Workers may also face
constraints that prevent them from taking immediate advantage of regional wage differentials, including various
forms of “job-lock” or short-term liquidity constraints.
11

It may seem preferable to specify the supply function so that natives take into account the expected
impact of continued future immigration. In a sense, however, the flow of immigrants (mij) is a “sufficient statistic”
because I have assumed that the region receives the same number of immigrants in every period.
12

This number equals the total number of natives in a skill group divided by the number of regions.

9
(6)

− ) = ησ λ ,
vij0 = σ (log wij,-1 – log w
i,-1
ij

where λ ij = log( N ij ,−1 / N i* ). By definition, the variable λij is negative when the initial wage in
region j is higher than the long-run equilibrium wage (in other words, there are fewer workers in
region j than there will be after all internal migration takes place). Equation (6) then implies that
the net migration rate in region j is positive (since η < 0).
Native net migration continues concurrently with the immigrant influx. The mathematical
appendix shows that the native net-migration rate can be written as:

(7)

vijt = ησ (1 + ησ)t λij + [1 – (1 + ησ)t] mi – [1 – (1 + ησ)t] mij ,

where mi = M i / N i , and Mi gives the per-period flow of immigrants in skill group i. I assume that
the restriction 0 < (1 + ησ) < 1 holds throughout the analysis.
The total number of native workers in cell (i, j, t) is then given by the sum of the initial
stock (Nij,-1) and the net migration flows defined by equation (7), or:

log N ijt = log N ij ,−1 + [(1 + ησ)t +1 − 1] λ ij

(8)

 t
(1 + ησ) [1 − (1 + ησ)t ] 
+
+
 m it
t
+
1
ησ
(
t
+
1)


 t
(1 + ησ) [1 − (1 + ησ)t ] 
−
+
 m ijt ,
ησ
(t + 1)
t +1


10
where m it = (t + 1)mi gives the stock of immigrants with skill i who have migrated as of time t
relative to the number of natives with comparable skills; and m ijt = (t + 1)mij gives the relative
stock of immigrants with skill i who have migrated to region j as of time t.13 The wage for
workers in cell (i, j, t) is then given by:

log wijt = log wij ,−1 + η[(1 + ησ)t +1 − 1] λ ij
 t
(1 + ησ) [1 − (1 + ησ)t ] 
+ η
+
 m it
(t + 1)
ησ
t +1


(9)

 1
(1 + ησ) [1 − (1 + ησ)t ] 
+ η
−
 m ijt .
t
+
ησ
t
+
1
(
1)



Equations (8) and (9) describe the evolution of Nijt and wijt for a particular skill group in a
local labor market. The first two terms in each equation indicate that the (current) stock of native
workers and the (current) wage level depend on pre-existing conditions. The equations also show
how the size of the native workforce and wages adjust to the immigrant-induced shifts in supply.
In particular, consider the behavior of the coefficients of the region-specific immigration stock
variable ( m ijt ) in each of these equations. As t grows large, the coefficient in the native
workforce regression (which should be negative) converges to –1, while the coefficient in the
wage regression (which should also be negative) converges to zero. Put differently, the longer
the time elapsed between the beginning of the immigrant influx and the measurement of the
dependent variables, the more likely that native migration behavior has completely neutralized

13

A tilde above a variable indicates that the variable refers to the stock of immigrants at a particular point
in time (rather than the flow). The multiplicative factor used to define the stocks is (t + 1) rather than t because the
immigrant influx began in period 0.

11
the immigrant-induced local supply shifts and the less likely that the spatial correlation approach
will uncover any wage effect on local labor markets.
Equally important, the two coefficients of the region-specific immigrant stock variable
provide an intuitive interpretation of how the spatial correlation—that is, the impact of
immigration on wages that can be estimated by comparing local labor markets—relates to the
factor price elasticity η that gives the national wage impact of immigration. In particular, let γNt
be the coefficient of the immigrant stock variable in the native workforce equation, and let γWt be
the respective coefficient in the wage equation. Equations (8) and (9) then imply that:

γWt = η (1 + γNt).

(10)

The coefficient γNt approximately gives the number of natives who migrate out of a particular
labor market for every immigrant who settles there ( γ Nt ≈ ∂N / ∂M t ).14 The factor price elasticity
η can be estimated by “blowing up” the spatial correlation, where the division factor is the
number of natives who do not move per immigrant who enters the country. To illustrate, suppose
that the coefficient γNt is –0.5, indicating that 5 fewer natives choose to reside in the local labor
market for every 10 immigrants entering that market. Equation (10) then implies that the spatial
correlation that can be estimated by comparing native wages across local labor markets is only
half the size of the true factor price elasticity.15

14

In particular, note that γ Nt = ∂ log Nijt / ∂m
 ijt and that m ijt = M ijt / N , where N is a (fixed) native baseline.

15 It is important to emphasize that the model presented here, although useful from an empirical
perspective, is very restrictive. For instance, the model assumes that native workers anticipate the future impact of
immigration, but ignores the fact that firms have similar expectations and that the capital stock will adjust in an
optimal fashion to the immigrant-induced increase in labor supply, likely dampening the adverse wage effects of

12

Empirical Specification

In the next section, I use data drawn from the 1960-2000 Censuses to estimate the key
parameters of the model. These data provide five observations for Nijt, wijt, and M ijt (one for each
Census cross-section) for labor markets defined by skill groups and geographic regions. The
available data, therefore, are not sufficiently detailed to allow me to estimate the dynamic
evolution of the native workforce and wage structure as summarized by equations (8) and (9).
These equations, after all, have time-varying coefficients for the variable measuring the regionspecific immigrant influx, and these coefficients are highly nonlinear in time. I instead simplify
the framework by applying the approximation (1 + x)t ≈ (1 + xt). Equations (8) and (9) can then
be rewritten as:16

(11)

log Nijt = log Nij,-1 + ησ λij + ησ (t λij) – ησ m it + ησ m ijt ,

(12)

log wijt = log wij,-1 + η2 σ λij + η2 σ (t λij) – η2 σ m it + η(1 + ησ) m ijt .

Equations (11) and (12) can be estimated by stacking the available data on the size of the
native workforce, wages, and immigrant stock across skill groups, regions, and time. Many of
the regressors in equations (11) and (12) are absorbed by including appropriately defined vectors

immigration and the need for native internal migration to equilibrate the labor market. Similarly, the asymptotic
properties of the model result from restrictive assumptions about how the native workforce is distributed across skill
groups, the nature of the immigrant inflows, the absence of capital flows, and the shape of the production function. It
would be important to determine how these factors alter the interpretation of spatial correlations. Finally, a more
complete analysis would explicitly incorporate the assumption that all agents—native workers, immigrants, and
firms—have rational expectations about future immigration.
16 I also use the approximation that t is relatively large so that the ratio t/(t +1) ≈ 1 and 1/t ≈ 0; in other
words, the wage convergence process has been going on for some time before we observe the data points.

13
of fixed effects in the regressions. For example, the inclusion of fixed effects for the various
skill-region cells absorbs the vector of variables (Nij,-1, λij) in equation (11) and the vector (wij,-1,
λij) in equation (12). Similarly, interactions between skill and time fixed effects absorb the
variable m it in both equations.
In addition to these fixed effects, the regression models in (11) and (12) suggest the
presence of two regressors that vary by skill, region, and time. The first, of course, is the regionspecific measure of the immigrant stock (m ijt ) , the main independent variable in any empirical
study that attempts to estimate spatial correlations. The second is the variable (t λij), which is
related to the (cumulative) net migration of natives that would have been observed as of time (t –
1) had there been no immigration, and also introduces the initial conditions in the labor market
into the regression analysis. This variable is not observable. In the empirical work reported
below, I proxy for this variable by including regressors giving either a lagged measure of the
number of natives in the workforce or the lagged growth rate of the native workforce in the
particular labor market.
The regression models in (11) and (12) provide some insight into why there is so much
confusion in the empirical literature regarding the link between native internal migration and
immigration or between wages and immigration. Even abstracting from the interpretation of the
coefficient of the immigrant stock variable (which represent an amalgam of various structural
parameters), this coefficient is estimated properly only if local labor market conditions are
properly accounted for in the regression specification.
Suppose, for instance, that immigrants enter those parts of the country that pay high
wages. If the initial wage is left out of the wage regression, the observed impact of immigration
on wages will be too positive, as the immigrant supply variable is capturing unobserved pre-

14
existing characteristics of high-wage areas. Similarly, suppose that immigrants tend to enter
those parts of the country that also attract native migrants. If the regression equation does not
control for the pre-existing migration flow, equation (11) indicates that the impact of
immigration on the size of the native workforce will also be too positive. In fact, Borjas,
Freeman, and Katz (1997, p. 30) provide a good example of how controlling for pre-existing
conditions can actually change the sign of the correlation between net migration and
immigration. In particular, they show that the rate of change in the number of natives living in a
state is positively correlated with a measure of concurrent immigrant penetration in the crosssection. But this positive correlation turns negative when they add a lagged measure of native
population growth into the regression.
The regression models also suggest that the geographic definition of a labor market is
likely to influence the magnitude of the measured spatial correlations. In both regressions, the
coefficient of the region-specific immigrant stock variable depends on the value of the parameter
σ, the elasticity measuring the native migration response. The spatial correlation estimated in the
native workforce regression depends negatively on σ, while the spatial correlation estimated in
the wage regression depends positively on σ. The supply elasticity will probably be larger when
migration is less costly, implying that σ will be greater when the labor market is geographically
small.17 Equations (11) and (12) then imply that the spatial correlation between the size of the
native workforce and the immigrant stock variable will be more negative when the model is
estimated using geographically smaller labor markets, and that the spatial correlation between

17 Put differently, it is cheaper to migrate across metropolitan areas to escape the adverse affects of
immigration than it is to migrate across states or Census divisions.

15
the wage and the immigrant stock variable will be more negative for larger labor markets. I will
show below that the data indeed confirms this mirror-image implication of the theory.
Finally, it is worth stressing that the coefficients of the immigrant stock variable in this
linearized version of the two-equation model satisfy the multiplicative property given by
equation (10). In sum, the theory provides a useful foundation for linking the results of very
different conceptual and econometric frameworks in the study of the economic impact of
immigration.

III. Data and Descriptive Statistics

The empirical analysis uses data drawn from the 1960, 1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000
Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) of the U.S. Census. The 1960 and 1970
samples represent a 1 percent sample of the population, while the 1980, 1990, and 2000 samples
represent a 5 percent sample.18 The analysis is initially restricted to the subsample of men aged
18-64, who do not reside in group quarters, are not enrolled in school, and worked in the civilian
sector in the calendar year prior to the Census.19 A person is defined to be an immigrant if he was
born abroad and is either a non-citizen or a naturalized citizen; all other persons are classified as
natives.
As in my earlier work (Borjas, 2003), I use both educational attainment and work
experience to sort workers into particular skill groups. The key idea underlying this classification
is that similarly educated workers with very different levels of work experience are unlikely to
be perfect substitutes (Welch 1979; Card and Lemieux 2001). I classify the men into four distinct

18

The person weights provided in the public use files are used in the calculations.

16
education groups: workers who are high school dropouts (they have less than twelve years of
completed schooling), high school graduates (they have exactly twelve years of schooling),
persons who have some college (they have between thirteen and fifteen years of schooling), and
college graduates (they have at least sixteen years of schooling).
The classification of workers into experience groups is imprecise because the Census
does not provide any measure of labor market experience or of the age at which a worker first
enters the labor market. I assume that the age of entry (AT) into the labor market is 17 for the
typical high school dropout, 19 for the typical high school graduate, 21 for the typical person
with some college, and 23 for the typical college graduate. The measure of work experience is
then given by (Age – AT).20 I restrict the analysis to persons who have between 1 and 40 years of
experience. Welch (1979) suggests that workers in adjacent experience cells are more likely to
influence each other’s labor market opportunities than workers in cells that are further apart. I
capture the similarity among workers with roughly similar years of experience by aggregating
the data into five-year experience intervals, indicating if the worker has 1 to 5 years of
experience, 6 to 10 years, and so on. There are eight experience groups.
A skill group i then contains workers who have a particular level of schooling and a
particular level of experience. There are 32 such skill groups in the analysis (four education
groups and eight experience groups). Consider a group of workers who have skills i, live in

19

The analysis uses the information provided by the variable giving the person’s labor force status in the
survey week to exclude persons in the military.
20

This definition of work experience is reasonably accurate for native men, but surely contains
measurement errors when applied to working women, particularly in the earlier cross-sections when the female labor
force participation rate was much lower. The definition also does not capture correctly the level of “effective”
experience—the number of years of work experience that are valued by an American employer—in the sample of
immigrants. Borjas (2003) finds that correcting for this problem does not greatly affect the measured wage impact of
immigration.

17
region j, and are observed in calendar year t. The (i, j, t) cell defines a particular labor market at a
point in time. The immigrant share in this labor market is defined by:

pijt =

(13)

M ijt
M ijt + N ijt

,

where M ijt gives the stock of foreign-born workers in skill group i who have entered region j as
of time t, and Nijt gives the number of native workers in that cell. The variable pijt thus measures
the fraction of the workforce that is foreign-born in a particular labor market at a particular point
in time.
I begin the empirical analysis by describing how immigration affected different labor
markets in the past few decades. As indicated earlier, most of the immigrants who entered the
United States in the past 40 years have clustered in a relatively small number of states. Figure 1
shows the trends in the immigrant share, by educational attainment, for three groups of states:
California, the other main immigrant-receiving states (Florida, Illinois, New Jersey, New York,
and Texas), and the rest of the country. Not surprisingly, the largest immigrant-induced supply
increase occurred in California for the least-educated workers. By 2000, almost 80 percent of
high-school dropouts in California were foreign-born, as compared to only 50 percent in the
other immigrant-receiving states, and 20 percent in the rest of the country. Although the scale of
the immigrant influx is smaller for high-skill groups, there is still a large disparity in the size of
the supply increase across the three areas. In 2000, for example, over a quarter of college
graduates in California were foreign-born, as compared to 18 percent in the other immigrantreceiving states, and 8 percent in the rest of the country.

18
Figures 2 and 3 continue the descriptive analysis by showing the trends in the immigrant
share for some of the specific schooling-experience groups used in the analysis. To conserve
space, I only illustrate these profiles for the two education groups most affected by immigration:
high school dropouts (Figure 2) and college graduates (Figure 3).
These figures show that there is significant dispersion in the relative size of the
immigrant population over time and across experience groups, even when looking at a particular
level of education and a particular part of the country. In 1980, for example, the immigration of
high school dropouts in California was particularly likely to affect the labor market opportunities
faced by workers with around 15 years of experience, where around half of the relevant
population was foreign-born. In contrast, only 30 percent of the workers with more than 30 years
of experience were foreign born. By 2000, however, over 80 percent of all high school dropouts
with 10 to 35 years of experience were foreign-born. These patterns differed in other parts of the
country. In the relatively non-immigrant rest of the country, immigration of high school dropouts
was relatively rare prior to 1990, accounting for less than 10 percent of the workers in the
relevant labor market. By 2000, however, immigrants made up more than 30 percent of the high
school dropouts with 5 to 15 years of experience.
The data summarized in these figures, therefore, suggest that there has been a great deal
of dispersion in how immigration affects the various skill groups in different regional labor
markets. In some years, it affects workers in certain parts of the region-education-experience
spectrum. In other years, it affects other workers. This paper exploits this variation to measure
how wages and native worker migration decisions respond to immigration.
Before proceeding to a formal analysis, it is instructive to document that the raw data
reveals equally strong differences in the way that natives have chosen to sort themselves

19
geographically across the United States. More important, these location choices seem to be
correlated with the immigrant-induced supply shifts. Figure 4 illustrates the aggregate trend. As
first reported by Borjas, Freeman, and Katz (1997), the share of the native-born population that
chose to live in California stopped growing around 1970, at the same time that the immigrant
influx began. This important trend is illustrated in the top panel of Figure 4. The data clearly
show the relative numbers of native workers living in California first stalling, and eventually
declining, as the scale of the immigrant influx increased rapidly.21
The middle panel of Figure 4 illustrates a roughly similar trend in the other immigrant
states. As immigration increased in these states (the immigrant share rose from about 8 percent in
1970 to 22 percent in 2000), the fraction of natives who chose to live in those states declined
slightly, from 26 to 24.5 percent.
Finally, the bottom panel of the figure illustrates the trend in the relatively non-immigrant
areas that form the rest of the country. Although immigration also increased over time in this
region, the increase has been relatively small (the immigrant share rose from 2.5 percent in 1970
to 7.5 percent in 2000). At the same time, the share of natives living in this region experienced
an upward drift, from 64.5 percent in 1970 to 66.5 percent in 2000. The evidence summarized in
Figure 4, therefore, tends to suggest a link between native location decisions and immigration.
This link is also evident at more disaggregated levels of geography and skills. I used all
of the Census data available between 1960 and 2000 to calculate for each (i, j) cell the growth
rate of the native workforce during each decade (defined as the log of the ratio of the native
workforce at the decade’s two endpoints) and the corresponding decadal change in the immigrant
share. The top panel of Figure 5 presents the scatter diagram relating these decadal changes at

21

Undoubtedly, other factors also account for California’s demographic trends in the past twenty years,

20
the state level after removing decade effects. The plot clearly suggests a negative relation
between the growth rate of a particular class of native workers in a particular state and
immigration. The bottom panel of the figure illustrates an even stronger pattern when the decadal
changes are calculated at the metropolitan area level. In sum, the raw data clearly reveal that the
native workforce grew fastest in those labor markets that were least affected by immigration.
Finally, Table 1 provides an alternative way of looking at the data that also links native
migration decisions and immigration. Beginning in 1970, the Census contains information not
only on the person’s state of residence as of the Census date, but also on the state of residence
five years prior to the survey. These data can be used to construct net-migration rates for each of
the skill groups in each geographic market, as well as in-migration and out-migration rates. (The
construction of these rates will be described in detail later in the paper). To easily summarize the
basic trends linking migration rates and immigration, I again break up the United States into
three regions: California, the other immigrant-receiving states, and the rest of the country. A
native worker is then defined to be an internal migrant if he moves across these three regions in
the five-year period prior to the Census.
The differential trends in the net-migration rate across the three regions are revealing.
Within each education group, there is usually a steep decline in the net migration rate into
California, a slower decline in the net migration rate into the other immigrant states, and a slight
increase in the net migration rate into the rest of the country. In other words, the net migration of
natives fell most in those parts of the country most heavily hit by immigration.
The other panels of Table 1 show that the relative decline in net migration rates in the
immigrant-targeted states arises because of both a relative decline in the in-migration rate and a

including the impact of the defense cutbacks of the late 1980s and the high-tech boom of the late 1990s.

21
relative increase in the out-migration rate. For example, the in-migration rate of native high
school dropouts into California fell from 7.6 to 4.0 percent between 1970 and 2000, as compared
to a respective increase from 1.8 to 2.5 percent in the rest of the country. Similarly, the outmigration rates of high school dropouts rose from 7.8 to 9.5 percent in California and from 3.6 to
5.6 percent in the other immigrant states, but fell from 1.8 to 1.6 percent in those states least hit
by immigration.

IV. Immigration and Wages

In earlier work (Borjas, 2003), I showed that the labor market impact of immigration at
the national level can be estimated by examining the wage evolution of skill groups defined in
terms of educational attainment and experience. This section of the paper re-estimates some of
the models presented in my earlier paper, and documents the sensitivity of the wage impact of
immigration to the geographic definition of the labor market.
I measure the wage impact of immigration using four alternative definitions for the
geographic area covered by the labor market. In particular, I assume that the labor market facing
a particular skill group is: (1) a closed national labor market, so that the wage impact of
immigration estimated at this level of geography presumably measures the factor price elasticity
η in the model; (2) a labor market defined by the geographic boundaries of the nine Census
divisions; (3) a labor market that operates at the state level; or (4) a labor market bounded by the
metropolitan area.22

22

The metropolitan area is defined in a roughly consistent manner across Censuses beginning in 1980. The
analysis conducted at the metropolitan area level, therefore, uses only the 1980-2000 cross-sections and excludes all
workers residing outside the identifiable metropolitan areas.

22
Let log wijt denote the mean log weekly wage of native men who have skills i, work in
region j, and are observed at time t.23 I stack these data across skill groups, geographic areas, and
Census cross-sections and estimate the model:

log wijt = θW pijt + si + rj + πt + (si × rj) + (si × πt) + (rj × πt) + ϕijt,

(14)

where si is a vector of fixed effects indicating the group’s skill level; rj is a vector of fixed effects
indicating the geographic area of residence; and πt is a vector of fixed effects indicating the time
period of the observation. The linear fixed effects in equation (14) control for differences in labor
market outcomes across skill groups, regions, and over time. The interactions (si × πt) and (sj ×
πt) control for secular changes in the returns to skills and in the regional wage structure during
the 1960-2000 period. Finally, the inclusion of the interactions (si × rj) implies that the
coefficient θW is being identified from changes in wages and immigration that occur within skillregion cells.
Note that the various vectors of fixed effects included in (14) correspond to the vectors of
fixed effects implied by the estimating equation derived from the model [equation (12)]. The
only exception is that (14) also includes interactions between region and Census year. These
interactions would clearly enter the theory if demand shocks were allowed to differentially affect
regions over time.
The regression coefficients reported in this section come from weighted regressions,
where the weight is the sample size used to calculate the mean log weekly wage in the (i, j, t)

23

The mean log weekly wage for each cell is calculated in the sample of salaried workers who do not
reside in group quarters, are not enrolled in school, are in the civilian workforce, and report a positive value for
annual earnings, weeks worked, and usual hours worked in the calendar year prior to the Census.

23
cell.24 The standard errors are clustered by skill-region cells to adjust for the possible serial
correlation that may exist within cells.
Finally, the specification I use in the empirical analysis uses the immigrant share, p,
rather than the relative number of immigrants as of time t, m = M / N , as the measure of the
immigrant-induced supply increase. It turns out that the relation between the various dependent
variables and the relative number of immigrants is highly nonlinear, and is not captured correctly
by a linear term in m . The immigrant share approximates log m , so that using the immigrant
share introduces some non-linearity into the regression model. In fact, the wage effects
(appropriately calculated) are similar when including either log m or a second-order polynomial
in m as the measure of the immigrant supply shift.25

Consider initially the first three columns of Table 2, which present the basic estimates of
the adjustment coefficient θW obtained from the sample of working men. The first row
summarizes the regression results when the geographic reach of the labor market is assumed to
encompass the entire nation.26 The estimated coefficient is -0.533, with a standard error of 0.203.
It is easier to interpret this coefficient by converting it to an elasticity that gives the percent

24

The coefficients of the immigrant share variable are quite similar when the regressions are not weighted.

 (and
To illustrate, a regression of the log weekly wage on the relative number of immigrants variable m
all the fixed effects) has a coefficient of -0.160 (with a standard error of 0.082). The same regression on the log of
 in 2000 (0.172),
the relative number variable has a coefficient of -0.071 (.027). Evaluated at the mean value of m
the implied wage elasticity is -0.41. A regression specification that includes a second-order polynomial in the
relative number variable yields coefficients of -0.558 (0.214) and 0.298 (0.124), implying a wage elasticity of -0.45.
The wage elasticity obtained from the immigrant share specification reported in Table 2 is -0.39. It is evident that
 greatly understates the wage impact of immigration.
the linear specification in m
25

26

The specification of the national level regression differs slightly from the generic model presented in
equation (14). In particular, the regression equation includes the immigrant share variable, fixed effects indicating
the skill group, and fixed effects indicating the time period. Because it is impossible to introduce interactions
between the skill group and the time period, I instead introduce all two-way interactions between the following three
vectors: fixed effects indicating the group’s educational attainment, fixed effects indicating the group’s labor market
experience, and fixed effects indicating the time period.

24
change in wages associated with a percent change in labor supply. In particular, define the wage
elasticity as:

(15)

θW
∂ log w
=
.
∂m
(1 + m ) 2

By 2000, immigration had increased the size of the workforce by 17.2 percent. Equation (15)
implies that the wage elasticity—evaluated at the mean value of the relative number of
immigrants—can be obtained by multiplying θW by 0.73. The wage elasticity for weekly earnings
is then −0.39 (or −0.532 × 0.73). Put differently, a 10 percent immigrant-induced supply
increase—that is, an immigrant flow that increases the number of workers in a skill group by 10
percent—reduces weekly earnings in that group by almost 4 percent.
Suppose now that the worker’s state of residence defines the geographic area
encompassed by the labor market. The data then consists of stacked observations on the
immigrant share and the mean log weekly wage for cell (i, j, t). The first row of Panel III in
Table 2 reports the estimated coefficient of the immigrant share variable when equation (14) is
estimated at the state level. The adjustment coefficient is -0.217, with a standard error of .033. At
the mean immigrant-induced supply shift, the state-level regression implies that a 10 percent
increase in supply reduces the native wage by only 1.6 percent, roughly 40 percent of the
estimated impact at the national level. Note that the derivative in equation (15) is precisely the
wage impact of immigration captured by the region-specific immigrant stock variable in equation
(12). In terms of the parameters of the theoretical model, this derivative estimates the product of
elasticities η(1 + ση).

25
As discussed earlier, the model suggests that the log wage regression—when estimated at
the local labor market level—should include a variable that approximately measures the lagged
relative number of natives who would have migrated in the absence of immigration. The second
row of the panel adds a variable giving the log of the size of the native workforce 10 years prior
to the Census date.27 The inclusion of lagged employment does not alter the quantitative nature
of the evidence. The adjustment coefficient is -0.220 (0.033). Finally, the third row of the panel
introduces an alternative variable to control for the counterfactual native migration flow, namely
the rate of growth in the size of the native workforce in the 10-year period prior to the census
date. Again, the estimated wage effects are quite similar.
The remaining panels in Table 2 document the behavior of the coefficient θW as the
geographic boundary of the labor market is either expanded (to the Census division level) or
narrowed (to the metropolitan area level). The key result implied by the comparison of the
various panels is that the adjustment coefficient grows numerically larger as the geographic
reach of the labor market expands. Using the simplest specification in row 1 in each of the
panels, for example, the adjustment coefficient is -0.043 (0.025) at the metropolitan area level;
increases to -0.217 (0.033) at the state level; increases further to -0.274 (0.053) at the division
level; and jumps to -0.533 (0.203) at the national level.
Up to this point, I have excluded working women from the analysis because of the
inherent difficulty in measuring their labor market experience and classifying them correctly into
the various skill groups. Nevertheless, the last three columns of Table 2 replicate the entire
analysis using both working men and women in the regression models. The national-level
coefficient is almost identical to that obtained when the regression analysis used only working

27

I used the 1950 Census to calculate the lagged workforce variable pertaining to the skill-region cells

26
men. Equally important, the regressions reveal the same clear pattern of a numerically smaller
adjustment coefficient as the labor market becomes geographically smaller: from -0.352 (0.061)
in the division-level regression, to -0.266 (0.037) in the state-level regression, to -0.057 (0.024)
in the regressions estimates at the level of the metropolitan area. The results, therefore, are quite
robust to the inclusion of working women.
The theoretical model presented earlier suggests an interesting interpretation for this
correlation between the geographic size of the labor market and the measured wage effect of
immigration. As the geographic region becomes smaller, there is more spatial arbitrage—due to
interregional flows of labor—that tends to equalize opportunities for workers of given skills
across regions.
An alternative explanation for the pattern is that the smaller wage effects measured in
smaller geographic units may be due to attenuation bias. The variable measuring the immigrant
stock will likely contain more measurement errors when it is calculated at more disaggregated
levels of geography. As I show in the next section, it is unlikely that attenuation bias can explain
the monotonic relation between the adjustment coefficient and the geographic reach of the labor
market.
Overall, the evidence seems to indicate that even though immigration has a sizable
adverse effect on the wage of competing workers at the national level, the analysis of wage
differentials across regional labor markets conceals much of that impact. The remainder of this
paper examines if these disparate findings can be attributed to native internal migration
decisions.

drawn from the 1960 cross-section.

27
V. Immigration and Internal Migration

I now estimate a variety of models—closely linked to the theoretical discussion in
Section II—to determine if the evolution of the native workforce or the internal migration
behavior of natives is related to immigrant-induced supply increases in the respective labor
markets.

A. The Size of the Native Workforce

Consider the following regression model:

(16)

log Nijt = Xijt β + θN pijt + si + rj + πt + (si × πt) + (rj × πt) +(si × rj) + εijt ,

where X is a vector of control variables discussed below. As with the wage regression specified
earlier, the various vectors of fixed effects absorb any region-specific, skill-specific, and timespecific factors that affect the evolution of the native workforce in a particular labor market.
Similarly, the interactions allow for decade-specific changes in the number of workers in
particular skill groups or in particular states caused by shifts in aggregate demand. Finally, the
interaction between the skill and region fixed effects implies that the coefficient of the immigrant
supply variable is being identified from changes that occur within a specific skill-region
grouping. As before, all standard errors are adjusted for any clustering that may occur at the
skill-region level.28 I again estimate the model using three alternative definitions for the

28 The regressions presented in this section are not weighted by the size of the sample used to calculate the
dependent variable in a particular skill-region-time cell, as the weight is proportionately identical to the unlogged
value of the dependent variable in some of the cross-sections, and differs only slightly in others (due to the presence
of sampling weights in the 1990 and 2000 Censuses). A weighted regression is problematic because it introduces a
strong positive correlation between the weight and the dependent variable (observations with large values of the
dependent variable would mechanically count more in the regression analysis), and errors in the measurement of the

28
geographic area encompassed by the labor market: a Census division, a state, and a metropolitan
area. Table 3 presents alternative sets of regression specifications that show how the immigrantinduced supply shift affects the evolution of the size of the native workforce.
Consider initially the regressions estimated at the state level, reported in the middle panel
of the table. The specification in row (1) uses the sample of working men and does not include
any variables in the vector X. The estimated coefficient of the immigrant share variable is -0.381,
with a standard error of 0.094. This regression model, therefore, confirms that there is a
numerically important and statistically significant negative relation between immigration and the
rate of growth of the native workforce at the state level. The coefficient is easier to interpret by
calculating the derivative ∂N / ∂M , which gives the change in the size of the native workforce
when the stock of immigrant workers increases by one. It is easy to show that the derivative of
interest is:

(17)

θN
∂N
=
.
2
∂M (1 + m )

As before, the derivative in equation (17) can be evaluated at the mean value of the immigrant
supply increase by multiplying the regression coefficient θN by 0.73. The simplest specification
reported in Panel II of Table 3 implies that 2.8 fewer native workers chose to live in a particular
state for every 10 additional immigrants entering that state. In terms of the theoretical model,
equation (11) implies that the derivative reported in (17) estimates the product of elasticities ησ.

dependent variable would be amplified by the weighting scheme. This type of non-classical measurement error,
which has not been appreciated sufficiently in previous studies, imparts a positive bias on the adjustment coefficient
in equation (16). In fact, a weighted regression of the state-level specification reported in row 1 of Table 3 leads to
an adjustment coefficient of -0.135 (0.094).

29
The next two rows of the middle panel of Table 3 estimate more general specifications of
the regression model. As noted earlier, I adjust for pre-existing migration flows by including
either the lagged log of the number of native workers or the lagged rate of growth in the size of
the native workforce. 29 I also include variables measuring the mean log weekly wage and the
unemployment rate in the labor market (again measured at the state level).30 These additional
variables control for factors that, in addition to immigration, motivate income-maximizing native
workers to move from one market to another.
Rows 2 and 3 yield very similar results, so the evidence is not sensitive to which variable
is chosen to proxy for the lagged size of native net migration in the absence of immigration. Not
surprisingly, lagged measures of the size of the native workforce or its growth rate have a
positive impact on the current number of native workers. Similarly, the mean log wage has a
positive (sometimes insignificant) coefficient, while the unemployment rate has a negative
effect. The coefficient of the immigrant share variable falls to around −0.27 in the most general
specification.31 This estimate implies that around 2 fewer native workers choose to reside in a
particular state for every 10 additional immigrants who enter that state.
The final two rows of the middle panel add the population of working women to the
regression analysis. These regressions, in effect, examine the evolution of the entire workforce
for a particular labor market defined by skills and region. The inclusion of women in this type of

29

To avoid re-introducing the dependent variable on the right-hand-side, the regressions presented in this
section use the lagged growth rate of the native workforce 10 to 20 years prior to the Census date. For example, the
lagged growth rate for the observation referring to high school graduates in Iowa in 1980 would be the growth rate
in the number of high school graduates in Iowa between 1960 and 1970. This definition of the lagged growth rate
implies that the regression models using this specification do not include any cells drawn from the 1960 Census.
30 The mean log weekly wage and unemployment rate for each cell are calculated from the data available in
each Census cross-section.

30
regression model could be problematic because of the possibility that many women may be tied
movers or tied stayers, so that their location decisions may crucially depend on factors (such as
family composition and the distribution of skills within the family) that are ignored in the study.
Nevertheless, the state-level regressions suggest that, at least qualitatively, the inclusion of
women barely alters the results. The coefficients of the immigrant share variable are not only
negative and statistically significant, but are also roughly similar to the ones estimated in the
sample of working men.
The other panels of Table 3 re-estimate the regression models at the census division and
metropolitan area levels. The estimated impact of the immigrant supply variable typically has the
wrong sign at the division level, but with large standard errors. In contrast, the adjustment
coefficient is very negative (and statistically significant) at the metropolitan area level. The
obvious conclusion to draw by comparing the three panels of the table is that the negative impact
of the immigrant share variable gets numerically stronger the smaller the geographic boundaries
of the labor market. In the general specification reported in row 2 for working men, for example,
the estimated coefficient of the immigrant share variable is 0.055 (0.121) at the Census division
level; -0.281 (0.081) at the state level; and -0.839 (0.091) at the metropolitan area level.32 The
coefficient of the metropolitan area regression, in fact, implies that 6.1 fewer native workers
choose to reside in a particular metropolitan area for every 10 additional immigrants who enter
that locality.

31 The coefficient would be virtually identical if both the lagged level and growth rate of the native
workforce were included in the regression.
32 The metropolitan area regressions cannot be estimated with the lagged growth rate because that would
then leave only one cross-section with sufficient data to estimate the model.

31
It is worth noting that the geographic variation in the observed spatial correlation
between the size of the native workforce and immigration is an exact mirror image of the
geographic variation in the spatial correlation between wages and immigration reported in Table
2. As implied by the model, the wage effects are larger when the impact of immigration on the
size of the native workforce is weakest (at the Census division level); and the wage effects are
weakest when the impact of immigration on the size of the native workforce is largest (at the
metropolitan area level).
It would seem as if this mirror-image pattern is not consistent with an attenuation
hypothesis: more measurement error for data estimated at smaller geographic units would lead to
smaller coefficient estimates at the metropolitan area level in both Tables 2 and 3. There is,
however, one possible source of measurement error that could potentially explain the mirrorimage pattern. In particular, note that the adjustment coefficient θN estimated by equation (16)
may suffer from division bias. The dependent variable appears (in transformed form) as part of
the denominator in the immigrant share variable. If the size of the native workforce were
measured with error, the division bias would lead to downward-biased estimates of the
adjustment coefficient. One could argue that such measurement error would be more severe at
the metropolitan area level than in larger geographic regions.
I show below, however, that division bias does not play a central role in generating the
mirror-image pattern of coefficients in Tables 2 and 3. Instead, the mirror-image pattern revealed
by the two tables provides some support for the hypothesis that there is indeed a behavioral
response by the native population that is contaminating the measured wage impact of
immigration on local labor markets.

32
B. Migration Rates

Since 1970 the census contains detailed information on the person’s state of residence
five years prior to the census, and since 1980 there is similar information for the metropolitan
area of residence. These data, combined with the information on geographic location at the time
of the census, can be used to compute in-, out-, and net-migration rates for native workers in the
various skill-region groups. I now examine how these native migration rates respond to the
immigrant influx. Therefore, the results presented in this section, which examine the flows of
actual native movers, can be interpreted as providing independent confirmation of the findings
presented above that link the evolution of the size of the native workforce to the immigrant
influx.
To illustrate the calculation of the net migration rate, consider the data available at the
state level in a particular census. The worker is an out-migrant from the “original” state of
residence (that is, the state of residence five years prior to the survey) if he lives in a different
state by the time of the census. The worker is an in-migrant into the current state of residence if
he lived in a different state five years prior to the census. I define the in-migration and outmigration rates by dividing the total number of in-migrants or out-migrants in a particular skillstate-time cell by the relevant workforce in the baseline state.33 The net migration rate is then
defined as the difference between the in-migration and the out-migration rate. To make the
results in this section comparable to those reported in Table 3, I multiply all the migration rates
by two—this adjustment converts the various rates into decadal changes (which was the unit of
change implicitly used in the native workforce regressions).

33

The baseline state is the original state of residence when calculating out-migration rates and the current
state of residence when calculating in-migration rates. Let Na be the number of native workers in the baseline state
(in a particular skill group) five years prior to the Census, and let Nb be the number of workers in the same state at
the time of the Census. The denominator of the in- and out-migration rates is then given by (Na + Nb)/2.

33
I concluded the presentation of the theoretical model in Section II by deriving estimable
equations that related the size of the native workforce and the native wage to the immigrant
supply shift. This section uses a variation of the model with a different dependent variable.
Equation (7) gives the expression for the net migration rate for cell (i, j, t). By using the
approximation that (1 + x)t ≈ 1 + xt, the equation determining the net-migration rate, vijt, can be
rewritten as:

vijt = ησ λij + (ησ)2 (t λij) - ησ m it + ησ m ijt .

(18)

As before, the regression model that I actually use to analyze how migration rates
respond to immigration is:

yijt = Xijt β + θN pijt + si + rj + πt + (si × πt) + (rj × πt) +(si × rj) + εijt,

(19)

where yijt represents the net-migration, in-migration, or out-migration rate for cell (i, j, t). Note
that the coefficient of the region-specific immigrant share variable θN identifies the product of
elasticities ησ.
Table 4 summarizes the evidence. To conserve space, I only report the general
specification that includes all of the variables in the vector X. Consider initially the regression
results reported for the sample of working men in Panel II, where the dependent variable is the
net migration rate estimated at the state level. Because the dependent variable in this regression
model measures a change in the native population, I use the lagged native employment growth

34
rate as a preferred way of controlling for pre-existing conditions.34 The estimated coefficient of
the immigrant share variable in the net migration regression is -0.284, with a standard error of
0.064. As before, this coefficient is more easily interpretable by multiplying it by 0.73, indicating
that 2.1 fewer native workers (on net) move to a particular state for every 10 immigrants who
enter that state. It is worth noting that the estimated product of elasticities ησ is very similar to
the corresponding estimate reported in Table 3, when the dependent variable was the log of the
size of the native workforce.
Rows 2 and 3 of the middle panel show that the effect of immigration on net migration
rates arises both because immigration induces fewer natives to move into the immigrantpenetrated labor markets, and because immigration induces more natives to move out of those
markets. The coefficient of the immigrant share variable in the in-migration regression is -0.151
(0.042), while the respective coefficient in the out-migration regression is 0.133 (0.049). In
rough terms, an influx of 10 immigrants into a state’s workforce induces 1 fewer native worker
to migrate there and encourages 1 native worker already living there to move out.
Finally, the last row in the middle panel replicates the net migration rate regression in the
sample of workers that includes both men and women. The adjustment coefficient is negative
and significant (-0.232, with a standard error of 0.057). As before, the inclusion of women into
the analysis does not fundamentally change the results.
The top and bottom panels of Table 4 reproduce the earlier finding that the negative
impact of immigration on native migration rates is numerically larger as the geographic area that
encompasses the labor market becomes smaller. In the sample of working men, the estimated

34

The use of the lagged native employment variable (instead of the lagged employment growth rate) would
lead to very similar coefficients. In the state-level regressions, for example, the analogous specification to that
reported in row 1 of the middle panel yields a coefficient of -0.291 (0.064).

35
coefficient of the immigrant share variable on the net migration rate is -0.076 (0.046) at the
division level; -0.284 (0.064) at the state level; and -0.396 (0.086) at the metropolitan area
level.35 The evidence, therefore, again suggests that natives find it much easier to respond to
immigration by voting with their feet when the geographic area is relatively small, and that this
response is attributable to both fewer in-migrants and more out-migrants.
More importantly, this mirror image pattern—relative to the respective pattern in the
spatial correlations between wages and immigration—cannot be attributed to measurement error
or division bias. After all, both the dependent variable (the net migration rate) and the
independent variable (the immigrant share) have a measure of the year t native workforce in the
denominator. If the size of the native workforce were measured with error, the division bias
would now induce a positive bias in the adjustment coefficient θN. It seems plausible to argue
that this bias would be most severe at the metropolitan area level—where the adjustment
coefficient (although not as negative as the respective coefficient in Table 3) is still negative and
numerically large. In short, the mirror-image pattern in the spatial correlations that is evident
when comparing Tables 2 and 4, cannot be solely attributed to measurement error. It seems to be
the result of a systematic behavioral response by native workers that helps to attenuate the wage
impact of immigration on local labor markets.

C. Sensitivity of the Evidence

As suggested by the descriptive evidence summarized earlier, the regression results
reported in Tables 3 and 4 consistently reveal a numerically sizable and statistically significant

35

The inclusion of the lagged native workforce variable in the metropolitan area regressions implies that
the regressions can only include the 1990 and 2000 cross-sections, as the 1970 Census does not contain the required
information.

36
relation between native migration decisions and immigration. I have already shown that the
results are unchanged when women are included in the analysis. I now examine whether the
results are also robust to other major specification changes.
Table 5 summarizes the sensitivity experiments that I conducted on the various regression
models. To conserve space, the table reports the coefficients of the immigrant share variables
estimated at the state level from the size-of-workforce and net migration regressions. For
convenience, the top row of the table reproduces the “baseline” results obtained in the sample of
working men that has been the focus of the discussion up to this point.
I have used a 5-year experience aggregation to define the various skill groups. Although
this classification attempts to capture the insight that workers with roughly the same level of
experience are more likely to be perfect substitutes, the choice of the aggregation interval is
arbitrary. The results, however, are robust to different classification schemes. Row 2 of Table 5
reports the estimated coefficients when experience groups are defined in terms of 10-year
groupings (1-10 years of experience, 11-20 years, and so on). The table clearly indicates that the
coefficient of the immigrant share in all of the regressions is quite similar to that reported in the
baseline specification.
Similarly, the very different nature of the migration behavior of native workers who have
just completed their schooling or who are about to retire might be confounding the underlying
correlations. Row 3 of the table re-estimates the basic model (once again returning to the 5-year
experience classification), but excludes workers who have fewer than 5 or more than 35 years of
work experience. This specification of the model leads to regression coefficients that are quite
similar to those reported in the baseline specification (though somewhat smaller in magnitude).

37
As I showed earlier, the state of California has played a central role in the resurgence of
large-scale immigration in the past few decades. California has atypical labor market
characteristics; it is a very large state with historically high native net-migration rates, a
relatively high-skill workforce, and a huge immigrant influx. These characteristics could
contaminate many of the results presented above. It is important, therefore, to determine if the
sign or magnitude of the estimated coefficients are driven by the outlying observations that
describe the outcomes for specific skill groups in California. Row 4 of Table 5 re-estimates the
baseline regression models in the subsample of skill-state-year cells that excludes all the
California observations. Remarkably, despite the demographic importance of California, there is
very little change in the regression coefficients: the adjustment coefficient in either the size-ofworkforce or the net migration rate regressions still hovers around -0.3.
As I showed earlier, many of the outlying skill-region (in terms of the size of the
immigrant influx) likely contain workers who are high school dropouts, and the determinants of
the migration behavior of native high school dropouts may differ substantially from that of native
workers with higher levels of educational attainment.36 It is important, therefore, to assess the
sensitivity of the results to the presence of these outlying observations. Row 5 re-estimates the
model using the subsample of workers who have at least 12 years of schooling (so there are now
only 3 education groups in the analysis). The coefficient of the immigrant share variable in the
native workforce regression becomes even more negative (-0.97, with a standard error of 0.18)

36

Many studies, including some of the classic articles in the economics of internal migration, analyze the
strong positive correlation between migration propensities and education (Sjaastad 1962; Ladinksy 1967; and the
survey by Greenwood 1997). The analysis in this paper assumes that the elasticity measuring the marginal response
of immigrant-induced supply increases to native migration propensities is the same for all skill groups. The inclusion
of skill-specific fixed effects throughout the regression analysis, however, allows the various groups to differ in their
migration propensities.

38
when the high school dropouts are excluded from the sample, but the coefficient in the net
migration regression is stable at around -0.28.
Finally, row 6 reports an equally interesting exercise when we redefine the high school
dropout category to include only those workers who have between 9 and 11 years of schooling.
In 2000, 22.1 percent of immigrants had 8 or fewer years of schooling. It is doubtful that these
very low-skill immigrants are competing in the same labor market as the native high school
dropouts, 80 percent of whom have between 9 and 11 years of schooling. To analyze the
sensitivity of the results to this potential mismatch within the high school dropout category, I
simply omitted from the study any workers who have 8 or fewer years of schooling. The high
school dropout category, therefore, now is composed entirely of workers who have 9 to 11 years
of schooling. The last row of Table 5 shows that the coefficient of the immigrant share variable
in the size-of-workforce regression is large and negative, while the coefficient in the netmigration rate regression still hovers at -0.3.
In sum, the sensitivity experiments summarized in this section show that major changes
in the specification of the regression models do not alter the qualitative (and often quantitative)
nature of the evidence. Immigrant-induced increases in labor supply are associated with lower
native net migration rates, lower in-migration rates, higher out-migration rates, and a smaller
growth rate in the size of the native workforce in the affected labor markets.
It is important to emphasize that there is a striking contrast between the robustness of the
evidence summarized here and the evidence reported in prior studies. The nature of the link
between native internal migration and immigration has attracted a great deal of attention in both
the economics and geography literatures. A number of studies, led by Filer (1992), Frey (1995,
1996), Frey et al. (1996), and White and Hunter (1993), reported evidence consistent with a

39
“demographic balkanization” of natives and immigrants: natives respond to immigration by
moving to areas that had not been affected by immigration. Subsequent studies, including those
of Wright, Ellis, and Reibel (1997), White and Imai (1994), Card and DiNardo (2000), Card
(2001), and Kritz and Gurak (2001), presented opposing evidence that questioned the
demographic importance of this presumed relation. It should be noted, however, that the studies
differ greatly in the time periods analyzed, in sample design, in definitions of the geographic
region, and in the methodological framework (see the survey-like discussion in Kritz and Gurak,
2001, pp. 133-135). As a result, it is difficult to determine exactly why there is so much
dispersion in the evidence across studies.
The empirical analysis presented in this paper differs from the existing literature in three
distinct ways. First, the study is strongly embedded in a theoretical framework that emphasizes
the importance of netting out pre-existing conditions when attempting to measure the nature of
the link between native migration and immigration. As I noted earlier, there is evidence that the
sign of the correlation between native migration and immigration can easily switch depending on
how a particular study controls for pre-existing conditions (Borjas, Freeman, and Katz, 1997). To
illustrate, some states have been long-time recipients of native internal migrants. These states
may also have become important gateways for new immigrants, thus introducing a spurious
positive correlation between native net migration and immigration. The correct measure of the
impact of immigration on native migration would then depend on how the net migration rate of
natives into these states changed relative to what it was in the pre-immigration regime.
The current study uses a far longer panel of data than other studies in the literature, many
of which have used a single census cross-section to uncover what is undoubtedly a relation that
has a crucial time dimension. Card (2001) and Kritz and Gurak (2001), for example, estimate

40
correlations using data exclusively from the 1990 census. Although it is unclear what such crosssection correlations actually measure, it is evident that they do not measure the parameters of
interest in the context of a dynamic model of native location decisions. The use of a forty-year
panel that includes repeated observations on the location decision of native workers and
immigrant-induced supply increases experienced by specific groups allows the empirical analysis
to net out the long-run trends that undoubtedly characterize internal migration flows for
particular groups or particular regions, and thus helps to isolate the impact of immigration.
Second, I emphasize the common-sense (though obviously restrictive) notion that
income-maximizing natives will respond to immigration only if their economic opportunities are
affected. The immigration of one particular skill group will likely affect the earnings of that skill
group more than the earnings of other groups, and one would expect a corresponding differential
effect on native migration rates. The empirical study presented here defined skill groups in terms
of years of education and work experience—and it is partly this narrower focus on the
composition of the skill groups affected by large-scale immigration that allows me to measure a
consistent correlation that seems to have been missed by some of the earlier studies.
Finally, my analysis builds on the strong theoretical implication that there exists a
systematic relation between the wage structure, native migration decisions, and immigration—
and that the nature of this relation is closely linked to the geographic reach of the labor market.
The empirical confusion on the nature of the correlation between native migration decisions and
immigration is not unique in the immigration literature. As noted earlier, there is an equally
confusing set of results contained in the studies that attempt to estimate the labor market impact
of immigration by correlating wages in the local labor market and measures of immigrant
penetration (see Borjas, 2003, for a discussion). The analysis presented here argues that the

41
empirical confusion in these two seemingly unrelated literatures is, in fact, intimately linked. In
an important sense, this paper attempts to reconcile the diverse set of findings in two literatures
that have not been closely linked before: the impact of immigration on wages and the impact of
immigration on native location decisions.

D. Synthesis

The theoretical model presented in Section II suggests that the national wage effect of
migration and the spatial correlations estimated between wages and immigration across local
labor markets are linked through a parameter that measures the native migration response. I now
examine whether the large difference actually estimated in Section III in the wage impacts for
different geographic definitions of the labor market can be “explained” by the impact of
immigration on native location decisions.
Table 6 summarizes the key results of the study. The first row of the table reports that the
wage effect at the national level was estimated to be -0.389 (or the coefficient of −0.533 in Table
2 times 0.73). I assume that the national labor market approximates the concept of a closed
economy, so that this coefficient estimates the factor price elasticity η.37 The theoretical model
presented in this paper implies that the estimated wage effect of immigration will not equal this
factor price elasticity whenever the corresponding wage regression is estimated using
observations on local labor markets where natives can respond to immigration by moving across
markets. The spatial correlation will be numerically smaller, and the gap between the spatial
correlation and the true factor price elasticity should reflect the native migration effect.

37

Put differently, I assume that the supply elasticity σ = 0 at the national level.

42
Row 2 of Table 6 summarizes the estimated migration effects reported earlier (again
multiplied by 0.73).38 This row, therefore, reports the value of the derivative γ N = ∂N / ∂M .
These migration responses allow me to predict what the spatial correlations should be by using
the multiplicative property of the model summarized in equation (10). In particular, let
γW = ∂ log w / ∂m , the wage effect of immigration at a particular geographic level. The theory
then predicts that the spatial correlation between wages and immigration, γˆ W , is given by:

(20)

γˆ W = η (1 + γ N ).

Row 3 of Table 6 uses this equation to mechanically predict the spatial correlations that
should be observed if the only adjustment mechanism contaminating the estimation procedure
was the internal migration of native workers. To illustrate, consider the migration response
revealed by the simplest specification of the size-of-workforce regression at the state level. This
regression implies that γN = −0.278. The theory then implies that the wage elasticity estimated by
relating native wages across states and immigration should be −0.28 (or −0.389 × (1 − 0.278)),
roughly a cut of one-quarter in the estimated national wage effect. At the metropolitan area level,
the migration response is quite large, implying that the spatial correlation between wages and
immigration measurable at the metropolitan area level should be −0.17. If I instead use the
migration responses estimated in the net migration regressions, the predicted spatial correlations
are −0.31 and −0.28 at the state and metropolitan area levels, respectively.

38 The estimated effects for the size of the native workforce are drawn from rows 1 and 2 of Table 3, and
row 1 of Table 4.

43
Finally, row 4 of Table 6 reports the actual spatial correlations estimated in the data (and
first reported in Table 2). At the state level, the wage impact of immigration is around −0.16. The
evidence summarized in Table 6, therefore, indicates that the internal migration response of
native workers accounts for about 40 percent of the gap between the wage effects estimated at
the state level and at the national level. At the metropolitan area level, the data indicate that the
native internal migration response may account for as much as 60 percent of the difference.
This synthesis fails to explain the difference between the national wage effect and the
spatial correlation between wages and immigration estimated at the Census division level. It may
well be that Census divisions are not an economically meaningful analogue to a labor market. It
is also the case that much of the migration that takes place in the United States is within
divisions. Between 1995 and 2000, for example, 11.6 percent of the working-age population
migrated across metropolitan areas; 9.4 percent migrated across states; and only 6.8 percent
migrated across divisions. The use of division-level data, therefore, is probably masking a great
deal of the native migration response to immigrant-induced supply shifts.

VI. Summary

The empirical literature that attempts to estimate the labor market impact of immigration
faces an important puzzle. Studies that examine how immigration alters economic opportunities
across local labor markets tend to find that immigration has a negligible impact on the wage of
competing native workers, while studies that examine how immigration alters economic
opportunities at the national level tend to find substantial wage effects. This paper presented a
theoretical and empirical analysis of one possible adjustment mechanism that can explain the
disparate findings: the internal migration decisions made by native workers.

44
The theoretical model presented in this paper illustrates how native migration flows
diffuse the impact of immigration across the entire economy, making it difficult to measure the
“true” wage impact of immigration by comparing conditions across local labor markets. More
importantly, the theory provides a framework that explicitly links the parameters measuring the
national wage effect of immigration, the spatial correlation estimated across local labor markets,
and the impact of immigration on native migration decisions.
The empirical analysis used data drawn from the 1960-2000 decennial Censuses. The
evidence indicates that native internal migration decisions are sensitive to immigrant-induced
increases in labor supply. The native population in a particular skill group grew slowest in those
parts of the country that experienced the largest immigrant influx. This native supply response is
evident both in terms of a decline in native in-migration and an increase in native out-migration.
The net native migration response is sizable: for every 10 immigrants who enter a particular state
two fewer natives choose to live in that state. The response is even larger at the metropolitan area
level: for every 10 immigrants who choose to enter a particular metropolitan area between 3 and
6 natives will choose not to live in that locality.
These migration responses are sufficiently large to explain an important part of the
disparate findings obtained in studies that estimate the wage effects of immigration at the
national and local labor market levels. At the state level, the native migration response explains
about 40 percent of the gap in wage effects. At the metropolitan area level, the migration
response may explain as much as 60 percent of the gap.
Naturally, labor markets adjust to immigration in many other ways. Although native
migration can explain a good part of the adjustment mechanism, it is likely that flows of goods or

45
capital are also important ingredients in the story. The magnitude, economic significance, and
labor market consequences of those flows are yet to be determined.

46
Mathematical Appendix

To simplify the mathematical derivations, it is useful to start with a simpler version of the
immigrant influx, a one time supply increase. In particular, Mij0 immigrants enter region j at time
0. Native migration will then occur for two reasons: a response to the initial disequilibrium, and a
response to the impact of immigrants on the wage structure. It is useful to consider these two
responses separately. As a result of the initial disequilibrium, equation (6) in the text shows that
vijo = ησ λij. By solving the model recursively, it follows that vijt = ησ (1 + ησ)t λij.
The native response to the one-time immigrant supply increase will depend on the
geographic sorting of immigrants relative to the geographic sorting of the native population.
Suppose region j has (in the pre-immigration regime) a fraction qij of the native population in
skill group i and receives a fraction ρij of the immigrants in that skill group. The region-specific
supply increase is then given by:

(A-1)

mij 0 =

M ij 0
N ij 0

=

ρij M i
qij N i

= kij mi ,

where kij = ρij / qij, a measure of the penetration of immigrants into region j relative to the
region’s pre-immigration size (for a particular skill group). Immigration is distributed neutrally if
kij = 1.
The impact of the one-time immigrant supply on native migration can be solved
recursively. In particular, the supply increase induces ησ(kij – 1)mi natives to move in period 1,

47
ησ(1 + ησ)(kij – 1)mi in period 2, and ησ(1 + ησ)t(kij – 1)mi in period t. Combining both sources
of native migration flows, the native net migration rate in year t is then given by:

(A-2)

vijt = ησ (1+ ησ)t λ ij − ησ (1 + ησ)t −1 (1 − kij ) mi .

I assume that 0 < (1 + ησ) < 1.
The total (or cumulative) net migration rate of natives at time t is then given by:

t

(A-3)

t

Vijt = ∑ ησ(1+ ησ) τ λ ij − ∑ ησ (1 + ησ) τ−1 (1 − kij ) mi
τ= 0

τ=1

= [(1 + ησ) − 1] λ ij + [1 − (1 + ησ)t ](1 − kij )mi .
t

The model can now be more easily extended to the case where the immigrant influx
continues indefinitely. The last term of equation (A-3), call if Yijt, gives the (cumulative) net
migration rate of natives as of time t induced by a period-0 immigrant supply increase. Consider
now what the native response would be to a similarly-sized supply increase occurring at t = 1.
The net migration rate of natives induced by the period-1 migration flow would be Yij,t-1. The
total net migration of natives in period t attributable to a supply increase of kjjmi in region j
between periods 0 and t-1 is then given by:

t −1
 (1 + ησ)

(A-4) Vijt* = [(1 + ησ)t − 1] λ ij + ∑ Yijt = [(1 + ησ)t − 1] λ ij + t +
[1 − (1 + ησ)t ] (1 − kij ) mi .
ησ
τ= 0



Equation (7) in the text can be obtained by differencing (A-4). In particular:

48

(A-5)

vijt = Vijt* − Vij*,t −1 = ησ (1 + ησ)t λ ij + [1 − (1 + ησ)t ] (1 − kij ) mi .

Equation (7) follows directly by noting that kijmi= mij. Equations (8) and (9) can be derived by
substituting (A-4) in both the equation that determines the current size of the workforce in a
particular labor market and in the labor demand function.

49
References

Altonji, Joseph G., and David Card. 1991. “The Effects of Immigration on the Labor
Market Outcomes of Less-Skilled Natives.” In Immigration, Trade, and the Labor Market, ed.
John M. Abowd and Richard B. Freeman, 201-34. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Bartel, Ann P. 1989. “Where Do the New U.S. Immigrants Live?” Journal of Labor
Economics 7(4):371-91.
Bartel, Ann P. and Marianne J. Koch. 1991. “Internal Migration of U.S. Immigrants.” In
Immigration, Trade, and the Labor Market, ed. John M. Abowd and Richard B. Freeman, 12134. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Belanger, Alain and Andrei Rogers. 1992. “The Internal Migration and Spatial
Redistribution of the Foreign-Born Population in the United States, 1965-70 and 1975-80.”
International Migration Review 26(4):1342-69.
Blanchard, Olivier Jean and Lawrence F. Katz. 1992. “Regional Evolutions.” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity (1):1-75.
Borjas, George J. 1987. “Immigrants, Minorities, and Labor Market Competition.”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 40(3):382-92.
Borjas, George J. 1999. “The Economic Analysis of Immigration.” In Handbook of Labor
Economics, Vol. 3A, ed. Orley C. Ashenfelter and David Card, 1697-1760. Amsterdam:
Elsevier.
Borjas, George J. 2001. “Does Immigration Grease the Wheels of the Labor Market?”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (1):69-119.
Borjas, George J. 2003. “The Labor Demand Curve Is Downward Sloping: Reexamining
the Impact of Immigration on the Labor Market.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(4):133574.
Borjas, George J., Richard B. Freeman, and Lawrence F. Katz. 1997. “How Much Do
Immigration and Trade Affect Labor Market Outcomes?” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity (1):1-67.
Card, David. 1990. “The Impact of the Mariel Boatlift on the Miami Labor Market.”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 43(2):245-57.
Card, David. 2001. “Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Labor Market
Impacts of Higher Immigration.” Journal of Labor Economics 19(1):22-64.
Card, David and John DiNardo. 2000. “Do Immigrant Inflows Lead to Native Outflows?”
American Economic Review 90(2):360-67.

50

Card, David, and Thomas Lemieux. 2001. “Can Falling Supply Explain the Rising Return
to College for Younger Men? A Cohort-Based Analysis.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
116(2):705-46.
Filer, Randall K. 1992. “The Impact of Immigrant Arrivals on Migratory Patterns of
Native Workers.” In Immigration and the Work Force: Economic Consequences for the United
States and Source Areas, ed. George J. Borjas and Richard B. Freeman, 245-69. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Frey, William H. 1995. “Immigration and Internal Migration ‘Flight’ from U.S. Metro
Areas: Toward a New Demographic Balkanization.” Urban Studies 32(4-5):733-57.
Frey, William H., Kao Lee Liaw, Yu Xie, and Marcia J. Carlson. 1996. “Interstate
Migration of the U.S. Poverty Population: Immigration ‘Pushes’ and White Magnet ‘Pulls’.”
Population and Environment 17(6):491-533.
Friedberg, Rachel M., and Jennifer Hunt. 1995. “The Impact of Immigration on Host
Country Wages, Employment and Growth.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 9(2):23-44.
Funkhouser, Edward. 2000. “Changes in the Geographic Concentration and Location of
Residence of Immigrants.” International Migration Review 34(2): 489-510.
Greenwood, Michael. 1997. “Internal Migration in Developed Countries.” In Handbook
of Population and Family Economics, Volume 1B, ed. Mark R. Rosenzweig and Oded Stark,
647-720. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Grossman, Jean Baldwin. 1982. “The Substitutability of Natives and Immigrants in
Production.” Review of Economics and Statistics 54(4):596-603
Gurak, Douglas T. and Mary M. Kritz, 2000. “The Interstate Migration of U.S.
Immigrants: Individual and Contextual Determinants.” Social Forces 78(3):1017-39.
Hamermesh, Daniel. 1993. Labor Demand. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Kritz, Mary M. and Douglas T. Gurak. 2001. “The Impact of Immigration on the Internal
Migration of Natives and Immigrants.” Demography 38(1):133-45.
Kritz, Mary M. and June Marie Nogle. 1994. “Nativity Concentration and Internal
Migration among the Foreign-Born.” Demography 31(3):509-24.
LaLonde, Robert J., and Robert H. Topel. 1991. “Labor Market Adjustments to Increased
Immigration.” In Immigration, Trade, and the Labor Market, ed. John M. Abowd and Richard B.
Freeman, 167-99. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

51
Ladinsky, Jack. 1967. “The Geographic Mobility of Professional and Technical
Manpower.” Journal of Human Resources 2(4):475-94.
Rowthorn, Robert and Andrew Glyn. 2003. “Convergence and Stability in U.S. Regional
Employment.” Department of Economics Discussion Paper Series, No. 92. Oxford: Oxford
University.
Schoeni, Robert F. 1997. “The Effect of Immigrants on the Employment and Wages of
Native Workers: Evidence from the 1970s and 1980s.” Santa Monica, CA: The RAND
Corporation.
Sjaastad, Larry A. 1962. “The Costs and Returns of Human Migration.” Journal of
Political Economy 70(Supplement):80–93
Walker, Robert, Mark Ellis, and Richard Barff. 1992. “Linked Migration Systems:
Immigration and Internal Labor Flows in the United States.” Economic Geography 68(3):234-38.
Welch, Finis. 1979. “Effects of Cohort Size on Earnings: The Baby Boom Babies’
Financial Bust.” Journal of Political Economy 87(5, Part 2):S65-S97.
White, Michael J. and Hunter, Lori. 1993. “The Migratory Response of Native-Born
Workers to the Presence of Immigrants in the Labor Market.” Providence, RI: Brown University.
White, Michael J. and Zai Liang, 1998. “The Effect of Immigration on the Internal
Migration of the Native-Born Population, 1981-1990.” Population Research And Policy Review
17(2):141-66.
Wright, Richard A., Mark Ellis, and Michael Reibel. 1997. “The Linkage between
Immigration and Internal Migration in Large Metropolitan Areas in the United States.”
Economic Geography 73(2):234-54.
Zavodny, Madeline. 1999. “Determinants of Recent Immigrants’ Locational Choices.”
International Migration Review 33(4):1014-30.

52
Figure 1. The immigrant share of the male workforce,
by education and area of country

High school dropouts

High school graduates

0.8

0.4
California

0.6
0.5

Immigrant share

Immigrant share

0.7

Other imm.
states

0.4
0.3
0.2

Rest of
country

0.1
0.0
1950

0.3
California
0.2

Rest of country
1960

1970

1980

1990

0.0
1950

2000

Year

0.20

0.25

California
Other imm.
states

0.05

Rest of country
1960

1970

1980
Year

Immigrant share

Immigrant share

0.30

0.10

1970

1980

1990

2000

College graduates

0.25

0.15

1960

Year

Some college

0.00
1950

Other imm.
states

0.1

California
0.20
0.15
Other imm.
states

0.10
0.05

1990

2000

0.00
1950

Rest of country
1960

1970

1980
Year

Note: The “other immigrant states” include Florida, Illinois, New Jersey, New York, and Texas.

1990

2000

53
Figure 2. Immigrant share for high school dropouts, by years of work experience
1

A. California

Immigrant share

2000
0.8
1990

0.6
1980

0.4

1970

0.2

1960

0
0

10

20

30

40

Years of experience

0.6

2000

B. Other immigrant states

Immigrant share

0.5
0.4

1990

0.3
1980
0.2
1970
0.1
1960

0
0

10

20

30

40

Years of experience

0.4

Immigrant share

C. Rest of the country
0.3
2000
0.2

0.1

1990

1960

1980

1970

0
0

10

20

30

Years of experience
Note: The “other immigrant states” include Florida, Illinois, New Jersey, New York, and Texas.

40

54
Figure 3. Immigrant share for college graduates, by years of work experience

A. California

Immigrant share

0.4

0.3

2000
1990

0.2
1980
0.1

1970
1960

0
0

10

20

30

40

Years of experience

0.25

B. Other immigrant states

Immigrant share

2000
0.2
1980

0.15

1990

0.1
1970

0.05

1960

0
0

10

20

30

40

Years of experience

C. Rest of the country

Immigrant share

0.12
2000
0.09
1980
0.06

1990
1970

0.03
1960
0
0

10

20

30

Years of experience

Note: The “other immigrant states” include Florida, Illinois, New Jersey, New York, and Texas.

40

55
Figure 4. Geographic sorting of native workforce and immigration
A. California
38.0%
Native trend

9.0%

30.0%

8.0%

22.0%
Immigration

7.0%
6.0%

14.0%

Immigrant share

Percent of natives
living in region

10.0%

6.0%
1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
Year

B. Other immigrant states

25.5%

24.0%
Native trend

18.0%

24.5%

Immigration

23.5%

12.0%

Immigrant share

Percent of natives
living in region

26.5%

6.0%
1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
Year

C. Rest of the country
16.0%
Native trend

12.0%

66.0%

8.0%
65.0%

4.0%

Immigrant share

Percent of natives
living in region

67.0%

Immigration

64.0%

0.0%
1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
Year

Note: The “other immigrant states” include Florida, Illinois, New Jersey, New York, and Texas.

56
Figure 5. Scatter diagram relating the growth rate
of the native workforce and immigration
A. State level data

B. Metropolitan area level data

Notes: Each data point represents the decadal change (for the 1960-2000 period in the top panel and the 1980-2000
period in the bottom panel) in the log size of the native workforce and in the immigrant share for a particular skill
group in a particular geographic area. Both plots remove decade effects from the data.

57
Table 1. Trends in inter-area migration rates of native workers
Year
Area
Net migration rates
High school dropouts
High school graduates
Some college
College graduates

In-migration rates
High school dropouts
High school graduates
Some college
College graduates

Out-migration rates
High school dropouts
High school graduates
Some college
College graduates

1970

1980

1990

2000

California
Other immigrant states
Rest of country
California
Other immigrant states
Rest of country
California
Other immigrant states
Rest of country
California
Other immigrant states
Rest of country

-0.2%
0.3
-0.1
0.3
0.0
0.0
1.3
-0.4
-0.2
4.4
0.3
-1.0

-2.2%
-0.2
0.3
-1.4
-0.1
0.2
-1.0
-0.3
0.4
3.3
-0.3
-0.4

-2.3%
-1.6
0.8
-0.8
-0.8
0.4
0.3
-0.9
0.3
4.5
-0.8
-0.5

-5.4%
-1.4
1.0
-4.5
-0.9
0.7
-3.4
-0.8
0.9
1.9
-0.4
-0.1

California
Other immigrant states
Rest of country
California
Other immigrant states
Rest of country
California
Other immigrant states
Rest of country
California
Other immigrant states
Rest of country

7.6
3.8
1.8
8.7
5.4
2.7
8.6
7.0
4.4
14.3
11.9
6.2

6.9
4.7
2.3
8.3
6.0
2.8
8.8
8.1
4.8
14.1
11.9
6.3

6.2
4.5
2.6
7.7
5.2
2.6
7.8
6.7
4.0
13.0
10.0
5.4

4.0
4.2
2.5
4.9
4.6
2.5
5.3
6.2
3.6
11.1
9.4
4.8

California
Other immigrant states
Rest of country
California
Other immigrant states
Rest of country
California
Other immigrant states
Rest of country
California
Other immigrant states
Rest of country

7.8
3.6
1.8
8.3
5.4
2.7
7.3
7.4
4.6
9.9
11.7
7.2

9.1
4.9
2.0
9.7
6.1
2.6
9.8
8.4
4.4
10.8
12.1
6.7

8.5
6.1
1.9
8.5
6.0
2.3
7.5
7.6
3.7
8.4
10.8
5.9

9.5
5.6
1.6
9.5
5.5
1.7
8.7
7.0
2.8
9.2
9.8
4.9

Notes: This table breaks up the country into three distinct areas: California, the other immigrant states, and the rest
of the country. The “other immigrant states” include Florida, Illinois, New Jersey, New York, and Texas.
A native worker is defined to migrate if he moves from one of these areas to another in the five-year period prior to
the Census.

58
Table 2. Impact of immigration on log weekly earnings,
by geographic definition of the labor market

Men

Regression
model:
I. National
(1)

Lagged
native
Lagged
employment
Immigrant
native
growth
share
employment
-0.533
(0.203)

II. Census division
(1)
-0.274
(0.053)
(2)
-0.273
(0.053)
(3)
-0.274
(0.052)
III. State
(1)
(2)
(3)

Men and women

-0.217
(0.033)
-0.220
(0.033)
-0.215
(0.033)

IV. Metropolitan area
(1)
-0.043
(0.025)
(2)
0.021
(0.048)
(3)
0.048
(0.047)

Immigrant
share

Lagged
native
employment

Lagged
native
employment
growth

---

---

-0.532
(0.189)

---

---

---

---

---

---

-0.043
(0.019)
---

---

-0.352
(0.061)
-0.350
(0.061)
-0.351
(0.062)

-0.040
(0.017)
---

---

0.048
(0.014)

---

---

-0.027
(0.007)
---

--0.033
(0.005)

---

---

-0.016
(0.012)
---

--0.030
(0.008)

-0.266
(0.037)
-0.271
(0.037)
-0.265
(0.037)
-0.057
(0.024)
-0.001
(0.051)
0.024
(0.050)

---0.033
(0.007)
---

0.048
(0.015)
---

0.035
(0.006)

---

---

-0.010
(0.012)
---

--0.030
(0.008)

Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are clustered at the region-skill group level. All regressions
are weighted by the size of the sample used to calculate the mean of weekly earnings in the specific region-skill-year
cell. The regressions estimated at the national level have 160 observations; the regressions estimated at the region
level have 1,440 observations; the regressions estimated at the state level have 8,160 observations (8,083
observations when lagged native employment is included); and the regressions estimated at the metropolitan area
level have 25,184 (14,848) observations. The regressors in the national-level regression include a vector of skill
fixed effects, a vector of time fixed effects, and all possible two-way interactions between a vector of education
fixed effects, a vector of experience fixed effects, and a vector of time fixed effects. The regressions presented in the
bottom three panels include a vector of skill fixed effects, a vector of (appropriately defined) region fixed effects, a
vector of time fixed effects, and all possible two-way interactions among these vectors.

59
Table 3. Impact of immigration on the size of the native workforce
(Dependent variable = log of number of natives in workforce)

Independent variables

Geographic area
and sample
I. Census divisions
1. Men
2. Men
3. Men
4. Men and women
5. Men and women
II. State
1. Men
2. Men
3. Men
4. Men and women
5. Men and women
III. Metropolitan area
1. Men
2. Men
3. Men and women

Immigrant
share
-0.023
(0.158)
0.055
(0.121)
0.139
(0.147)
0.106
(0.107)
0.243
(0.133)
-0.381
(0.094)
-0.281
(0.081)
-0.273
(0.085)
-0.300
(0.082)
-0.218
(0.083)
-0.785
(0.060)
-0.839
(0.091)
-0.712
(0.087)

Lagged
native
employment

Lagged
native
employment
growth

---

---

0.243
(0.042)
---

---

0.306
(0.048)
---

0.094
(0.031)
--0.085
(0.034)

---

---

0.056
(0.015)
---

---

0.106
(0.015)
---

0.037
(0.011)
--0.043
(0.011)

---

---

-0.402
(0.022)
-0.365
(0.021)

-----

Mean log
wage
--0.172
(0.116)
0.264
(0.158)
0.072
(0.124)
0.071
(0.167)
--0.020
(0.048)
0.117
(0.056)
-0.002
(0.047)
0.075
(0.054)
--0.072
(0.044)
0.057
(0.044)

Unemployment
rate
---1.327
(0.437)
-1.485
(0.529)
-1.282
(0.402)
-1.816
(0.483)
---0.376
(0.194)
-0.635
(0.208)
-0.597
(0.176)
-0.611
(0.184)
---0.307
(0.151)
-0.237
(0.125)

Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are clustered at the region-skill group level. The regressions
estimated at the region level have 1,440 observations (1,152 observations when the lagged native employment
growth is included); the regressions estimated at the state level have 8,160 (6,451) observations; and the regressions
estimated at the metropolitan area level have 25,183 (14,848) observations. All regressions include a vector of skill
fixed effects, a vector of (appropriately defined) region fixed effects, a vector of time fixed effects, and all possible
two-way interactions among these vectors.

60
Table 4. Impact of immigration on migration rates of native workers

Independent variable

Geographic area and specification
I. Census division
1. Net migration rate, men
2. In-migration rate, men
3. Out-migration rate, men
4. Net migration rate, men and women
II. State
1. Net migration rate, men
2. In-migration rate, men
3. Out-migration rate, men
4. Net migration rate, men and women
III. Metropolitan area
1. Net migration rate, men
2. In-migration rate, men
3. Out-migration rate, men
4. Net migration rate, men and women

Immigrant
share

Lagged native
employment
growth

Mean log
wage

Unemployment
rate

-0.076
(0.046)
-0.103
(0.034)
-0.027
(0.033)
-0.082
(0.042)

0.060
(0.023)
-0.016
(0.010)
-0.076
(0.018)
0.066
(0.019)

0.147
(0.056)
0.110
(0.040)
-0.037
(0.040)
0.071
(0.051)

-0.048
(0.206)
0.151
(0.143)
0.200
(0.165)
0.059
(0.189)

-0.284
(0.064)
-0.151
(0.042)
0.133
(0.049)
-0.232
(0.057)

-0.019
(0.014)
-0.055
(0.009)
-0.036
(0.012)
-0.005
(0.015)

0.012
(0.070)
0.018
(0.035)
0.007
(0.052)
0.051
(0.058)

0.242
(0.216)
0.026
(0.127)
-0.216
(0.171)
-0.125
(0.187)

-0.396
(0.086)
-0.114
(0.057)
0.282
(0.062)
-0.336
(0.073)

-0.084
(0.015)
-0.077
(0.009)
0.007
(0.010)
-0.093
(0.015)

-0.046
(0.042)
-0.018
(0.027)
0.028
(0.028)
-0.057
(0.037)

0.094
(0.137)
0.054
(0.092)
-0.041
(0.095)
0.029
(0.104)

Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are clustered at the region-skill group level. The regressions
estimated at the region level have 1,152 observations; the regressions estimated at the state level have 6,528
observations; and the regressions estimated at the metropolitan area level have 14,848 observations. All regressions
include a vector of skill fixed effects, a vector of (appropriately defined) region fixed effects, a vector of time fixed
effects, and all possible two-way interactions among these vectors.

61
Table 5. Sensitivity of migration results at state level
(Coefficient of immigrant share variable)

Dependent variable

1. Baseline (men)

Log size of
workforce
-0.281
(0.081)

Net migration
rate
-0.284
(0.064)

In-migration
rate
-0.151
(0.042)

Out-migration
rate
0.133
(0.049)

2. Uses 10-year experience groups

-0.331
(0.194)

-0.244
(0.076)

-0.105
(0.045)

0.139
(0.058)

3. Excludes workers with less than 5
or more than 35 years of experience

-0.224
(0.085)

-0.227
(0.065)

-0.116
(0.044)

0.112
(0.050)

4. Excludes California

-0.293
(0.087)

-0.262
(0.071)

-0.140
(0.047)

0.122
(0.049)

5. Excludes high school dropouts

-0.966
(0.164)

-0.283
(0.218)

-0.251
(0.123)

0.032
(0.158)

6. Excludes workers with 8 or fewer
years of schooling

-0.896
(0.119)

-0.303
(0.121)

-0.175
(0.085)

0.129
(0.082)

Notes: Standard errors reported in parentheses; all standard errors are clustered by skill and region. The baseline
male regressions on the log of the native workforce have 8,160 observations (6,528 observations in the migration
rate regressions); the regressions using the 10-year experience groupings have 4,045 (3,264) observations; the
regressions excluding workers with fewer than 5 or more than 35 years of experience have 6,058 (4,896)
observations; the non-California regressions have 7,906 (6,398) observations; the regressions for workers with at
least a high school education have 6,039 (4,892) observations; and the regressions estimated in the sample of
workers with at least 9 years of education has 8,043 (6,522) observations. All regressions include a vector of skill
fixed effects, a vector of (appropriately defined) region fixed effects, a vector of time fixed effects, all possible twoway interactions among these vectors, and the mean log weekly wage and unemployment rate in the labor market. In
addition, the regressions on the log size of the native workforce include the lagged value of the log of the native
workforce, while the migration rate regressions include the lagged value of the growth rate of the native workforce.

62
Table 6. Synthesis of wage and migration effects

Metropolitan
area
-0.389

Census
division
-0.389

-0.389

2. Estimate of migration effect:
Simple specification: native workforce
Complete specification: native workforce
Complete specification: net migration

-0.017
0.040
-0.055

-0.278
-0.205
-0.207

-0.573
-0.612
-0.289

3. Predicted estimate of wage elasticity at local level:
Simple specification: native workforce
Complete specification: native workforce
Complete specification: net migration

-0.382
---0.368

-0.281
-0.309
-0.308

-0.166
-0.151
-0.277

4. Wage elasticity actually estimated at local level:
Simple specification
Complete specification

-0.200
-0.199

-0.158
-0.161

-0.031
0.015

1. Estimate of factor price elasticity (in national
labor market)

State

Notes: The synthesis is based on the theory-based interpretation of the coefficients reported in Tables 2, 3, and 4.
See the text for details.

