                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        TRADE LIBERALIZATION, POVERTY AND
                    INEQUALITY: EVIDENCE FROM INDIAN DISTRICTS

                                            Petia Topalova

                                         Working Paper 11614
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11614


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2005




I am indebted to Abhijit Banerjee, Esther Duflo, Sendhil Mullainathan and Nina Pavcnik. This paper also
benefited from discussions with Robin Burgess, Shawn Cole, Eric Edmonds, Ivan Fernandez-Val, Rema
Hanna, Ann Harrison, Andrei Levchencko, the participants in the development lunches at MIT and the NBER
Conference on Globalization and Poverty. This paper is forthcoming in the NBER book "Globalization and
Poverty," edited by Ann Harrison, to be published by the University of Chicago Press. Department of
Economics, Yale University; petia@mit.edu. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Petia Topalova. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Trade Liberalization, Poverty, and Inequality: Evidence from Indian Districts
Petia Topalova
NBER Working Paper No. 11614
September 2005
JEL No. F1

                                              ABSTRACT


Although it is commonly believed that trade liberalization results in higher GDP, little is known
about its effects on poverty and inequality. This paper uses the sharp trade liberalization in India in
1991, spurred to a large extent by external factors, to measure the causal impact of trade
liberalization on poverty and inequality in districts in India. Variation in pre-liberalization industrial
composition across districts in India and the variation in the degree of liberalization across industries
allow for a difference-in-difference approach, establishing whether certain areas benefited more
from, or bore a disproportionate share of the burden of liberalization. In rural districts where
industries more exposed to liberalization were concentrated, poverty incidence and depth decreased
by less as a result of trade liberalization, a setback of about 15 percent of India's progress in poverty
reduction over the 1990s. The results are robust to pre-reform trends, convergence and time-varying
effects of initial district-specific characteristics. Inequality was unaffected in the sample of all Indian
states in both urban and rural areas. The findings are related to the extremely limited mobility of
factors across regions and industries in India. The findings, consistent with a specific factors model
of trade, suggest that to minimize the social costs of inequality, additional policies may be needed
to redistribute some of the gains of liberalization from winners to those who do not benefit as much.


Petia Topalova
Yale University
Department of Economics
28 Hillhouse Avenue
New Haven, CT 06520
petia@mit.edu
    Trade Liberalization, Poverty and Inequality: Evidence from
                                            Indian Districts

                                                Petia Topalova∗†




1        Introduction

After the Second World War, India, along with other developing countries, chose a strategy of
import substitution as a means of industrializing. In the past two decades, however, many coun-
tries have begun to favor global economic integration, and in particular trade liberalization, as a
development strategy. Although there is a general presumption that trade liberalization results
in a higher Gross Domestic Product, much less is known about its eﬀects on income distribution.
The distributional impacts of trade are particularly important in developing countries, where in-
come inequality is typically pronounced and there are large vulnerable populations. If economic
integration leads to further growth in income inequality and an increase in the number of poor
in developing economies, the benefits of liberalization may be realized at a substantial social
cost unless additional policies are devised to redistribute some of the gains from the winners to
the losers.
        Standard economic theory (Hecksher-Ohlin model) predicts that gains to trade should flow
to abundant factors, which suggests that in developing countries, unskilled labor would benefit
    ∗
        I am indebted to Abhijit Banerjee, Esther Duflo, Sendhil Mullainathan and Nina Pavcnik. This paper also
benefited from discussions with Robin Burgess, Shawn Cole, Eric Edmonds, Ivan Fernandez-Val, Rema Hanna,
Ann Harrison, Andrei Levchencko, the participants in the development lunches at MIT and the NBER Conference
on Globalization and Poverty. This paper is forthcoming in the NBER book "Globalization and Poverty," edited
by Ann Harrison, to be published by the University of Chicago Press. The views expressed herein are those of
the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
   †
     Department of Economics, Yale University; petia@mit.edu.



                                                        1
most from globalization. The rising skill-premium in the U.S. is often cited in support of standard
trade theory. However, recently these sharp predictions have been challenged.1 According to
the new theories, trade liberalization could reduce the wages of unskilled labor even in a labor
abundant country, thereby widening the gap between the rich and the poor. Moreover, even
if global economic integration induces faster economic growth in the long run and substantial
reductions in poverty, the adjustment might be costly, with the burden falling disproportionately
on the poor (Banerjee and Newman, 2004). Due to the ambiguity of the theory, the question of
how trade liberalization aﬀects poverty and inequality remains largely an empirical one.
      Recent empirical work has attempted to address the question, focusing mostly on the eﬀect of
trade liberalization on within country income inequality. Studies using cross-country variation
typically find little relationship between trade liberalization and levels or rates of change of
inequality.2 However, these studies face significant problems: cross-country data may not be
comparable, sample sizes are small, and changes in liberalization may be highly correlated with
other variables important to income processes. A promising alternative is to use micro evidence
from household and industry surveys. Several studies examine the relationship between trade
reforms and skill-premia, returns to education, industry-premia, and the size of informal labor
markets. However, the findings of these studies are typically based on correlations and may
not always be given a causal interpretation. And while there is some evidence on the eﬀect of
liberalization on industrial performance and wage inequality, the literature has so far ignored
the next logical step: the impact of these performance changes on poverty.
      This paper investigates the impact of trade reforms on poverty and inequality in Indian
districts. Does trade liberalization aﬀect everyone equally or does it help those who are already
relatively well oﬀ while leaving the poor behind? How does it aﬀect income distributions within
rural and urban areas? And is the eﬀect of liberalization felt equally across regions in India?
      India presents a particularly relevant setting to seek the answers to these questions. First,
India is the home of one third of the world’s poor.3               Second, the nature of India’s trade
  1
      See Davis (1996), Feenstra and Hanson (1997), Stiglitz (1970), Cunat and Maﬀezzoli (2001), Banerjee and
Newman (2004), Kremer and Maskin (2003).
  2
    See Edwards (1997), Lundberg and Squire (1999), Rama (2003), Dollar and Kraay (2002) and Milanovic
(2002).
   3
     Based on 2001 World Bank estimates. See http://www.worldbank.org/research/povmonitor/.



                                                      2
liberalization—sudden, comprehensive and largely externally imposed—facilitates a causal inter-
pretation of the findings. India liberalized its international trade as part of a major set of
reforms in response to a severe balance of payments crisis in 1991. Extremely restrictive poli-
cies were abandoned: the average duty rate declined by more than half and the percentage of
goods importable without license or quantitative restriction rose sharply. The lower average
tariﬀs, combined with changes in the tariﬀ structure across industries, provide ample variation
to identify the causal eﬀects of trade policy on income processes.
   Coincident with these tariﬀ reductions were significant changes in the incidence of poverty
and income inequality. To determine whether there is a causal link between liberalization and
changes in poverty and inequality, this paper exploits the variation in the timing and degree
of liberalization across industries, and the variation in the location of industries in districts
throughout India. The interaction between the share of a district’s population employed by
various industries on the eve of the economic reforms and the reduction in trade barriers in
these industries provides a measure of the district’s exposure to foreign trade. In a regression
framework, this paper establishes whether district poverty and inequality are related to the
district-specific trade policy shocks. Because industrial composition is predetermined and trade
liberalization was sudden and externally imposed, it is appropriate to causally interpret the
correlation between the levels of poverty and inequality and trade exposure. Of course if there
were migration across districts in response to changes in factor prices, an analysis comparing
districts over time may not give the full extent of the impact of globalization on inequality
and poverty in India. However, the analysis still gives a well defined answer to the question of
whether inequality and poverty increased more (or less) in districts that were aﬀected more by
trade liberalization.
   The study finds that trade liberalization led to an increase in poverty and poverty gap in
the rural districts where industries more exposed to liberalization were concentrated. The eﬀect
is quite substantial. According to the most conservative estimates, compared to a rural district
experiencing no change in tariﬀs, a district experiencing the mean level of tariﬀ changes saw a 2
percent increase in poverty incidence and a 0.6 percent increase in poverty depth. This set back
represents about 15 percent of India’s progress in poverty reduction over the 1990s.
   It is important to note that this exercise does not study the level eﬀect of liberalization on


                                               3
poverty in India, but rather the relative impact on areas more or less exposed to liberalization.
Thus, while liberalization may have had an overall eﬀect of increasing or lowering the poverty
rate and poverty gap, this paper captures the fact that these eﬀects were not equal throughout
the country, and certain areas and certain segments of the society benefited less (or suﬀered
more) from liberalization.
   The finding of any eﬀect of trade liberalization on regional outcomes is puzzling in the trade
theorist’s hypothetical world, where factors are mobile both across geographical regions within
a country and across industries. Factor reallocation would equate incidence of poverty across
regions. In a closely related study, Topalova (2004b) presents evidence that the mobility of
factors is extremely limited in India. The geographical inequalities are explained by the lack
of relocation: migration is remarkably low, with no signs of an upward trend after the 1991
reforms. Topalova (2004b) further examines the mechanisms through which trade liberalization
aﬀected poverty and inequality, establishing that the lack of geographical mobility is combined
with a lack of intersectoral mobility. Changes in relative output prices led to changes in relative
sector-returns to sector specific factors. As those employed in traded industries were not at the
top of the income distribution on the eve of the trade reform, the reduction in income caused
some to cross the poverty line or fall even deeper into poverty.
   This study is related to several strands of literature. First, it fits into the recent large
empirical literature on the eﬀects of trade reforms on wage inequality. This literature has largely
dealt with the experience of Latin American countries: Cragg and Epelbaum (1996), Revenga
(1996), Hanson and Harrison (1999), Feliciano (2001), Goldberg et al. (2001) and Attanasio et
al. (2004). Currie and Harrison (1997) study the eﬀect of trade liberalization in Morocco. These
papers typically find small eﬀects of trade on wage inequality of workers in the manufacturing
sector. This paper extends this type of analysis, by focusing not only on the eﬀect of trade
reforms on relative wages in manufacturing, but by looking at regional outcomes in general,
thus capturing how trade eﬀects seeped from the directly aﬀected manufacturing and agricultural
workers to the their dependents, as well as people involved in non-traded goods sectors.
   This is also one of the first studies to examine the link between trade liberalization and
poverty. So far Porto (2004) and Goldberg and Pavcnik (2004) have analyzed the relationship
between trade and poverty in the case of Argentina and Colombia respectively. While Porto’s


                                                4
approach has several advantages: it provides a general equilibrium analysis of the relationship
between trade liberalization and poverty, by simultaneously considering the labor market and
consumption eﬀects of trade liberalization, his results rely on simulations based on cross-sectional
data. Goldberg and Pavcnik (2004), exploiting cross-sectional and time-series variation at the
industry level, find little evidence of a link between the Colombian trade reforms and poverty.
Yet, as the study focuses on urban areas, and people involved in manufacture, it may be missing
the really poor. This paper relates plausibly exogenous changes in trade policy to poverty
and inequality, studying both manufacturing and agricultural workers in both urban and rural
areas. In addition, by defining the district as the unit of observation, it overcomes important
selection and composition eﬀects that studies at the industry level may face. Finally, the paper
contributes to the literature on industry wage premia and their relation to trade protection.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the Indian reforms
of 1991 focusing on trade liberalization while Section 3 presents the data used in the analysis.
In Section 4 the empirical strategy is explained, and the results follow in Section 5. Section 6
concludes.


2    The Indian Trade Liberalization

India’s post-independence development strategy was one of national self-suﬃciency, and stressed
the importance of government regulation of the economy. Cerra et al. (2000) characterized it as
“both inward looking and highly interventionist, consisting of import protection, complex indus-
trial licensing requirements, pervasive government intervention in financial intermediation and
substantial public ownership of heavy industry.” In particular, India’s trade regime was amongst
the most restrictive in Asia, with high nominal tariﬀs and non-tariﬀ barriers, including a com-
plex import licensing system, an “actual user” policy that restricted imports by intermediaries,
restrictions of certain exports and imports to the public sector (“canalization”), phased man-
ufacturing programs that mandated progressive import substitution, and government purchase
preferences for domestic producers.
    It was only during the second half of the 1980s, when the focus of India’s development
strategy gradually shifted toward export led growth, that the process of liberalization began.



                                                 5
Import and industrial licensing were eased, and tariﬀs replaced some quantitative restrictions,
although even as late as 1989/90 a mere 12 percent of manufactured products could be imported
under an open general license; the average tariﬀ was still one of the highest, greater than 90
percent. (Cerra et al., 2000)
   However, the gradual liberalization of the late 1980s was accompanied by a rise in macro-
economic imbalances–namely fiscal and balance of payments deficits– which increased India’s
vulnerability to shocks. The sudden increase in oil prices due to the Gulf War in 1990, the
drop in remittances from Indian workers in the Middle East, and the slackened demand of im-
portant trading partners exacerbated the situation. Political uncertainty, which peaked in 1990
and 1991 after the poor performance and subsequent fall of a coalition government led by the
second largest party (Janata Dal) and the assassination of Rajiv Gandhi, the chairman of the
Congress Party, undermined investor confidence. With India’s downgraded credit-rating, com-
mercial bank loans were hard to obtain, credit lines were not renewed and capital outflows began
to take place.
   To deal with its external payments problems, the government of India requested a stand-by
arrangement from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in August 1991. The IMF support
was conditional on an adjustment program featuring macroeconomic stabilization and structural
reforms. The latter focused on the industrial and import licenses, the financial sector, the tax
system, and trade policy. On trade policy, benchmarks for the first review of the Stand-By
Arrangement included a reduction in the level and dispersion of tariﬀs and a removal of a large
number of quantitative restrictions (Chopra et al., 1995). Specific policy actions in a number
of areas — notably industrial deregulation, trade policy and public enterprise reforms, and some
aspects of financial sector reform — also formed the basis for a World Bank Structural Adjustment
Loan, as well as sector loans.
   The government’s export-import policy plan (1992-97) ushered in radical changes to the
trade regime by sharply reducing the role of the import and export control system. The share of
products subject to quantitative restrictions decreased from 87 percent in 1987/88 to 45 percent
in 1994/95. The actual user condition on imports was discontinued. All 26 import licensing lists
were eliminated and a “negative” list was established (Hasan et al., 2003). Thus, apart from
goods in the negative list, all goods could be freely imported (subject to import tariﬀs) (Goldar,


                                                6
2002). In addition to easing import and export restrictions, tariﬀs were drastically reduced
(Figure 1, Panel A and B). Average tariﬀs fell from more than 80 percent in 1990 to 37 percent
in 1996, and the standard deviation of tariﬀs dropped by 50 percent during the same period. The
structure of protection across industries changed (Figure 1 Panel G). Figure 1 Panel H shows
the strikingly linear relationship between the pre-reform tariﬀ levels and the decline in tariﬀs the
industry experienced. This graph reflects the guidelines according to which tariﬀ reform took
place,4 namely reduction in the general level of tariﬀs, reduction of the spread or dispersion of
tariﬀ rates, simplification of the tariﬀ system and rationalization of tariﬀ rates, along with the
abolition of numerous exemptions and concessions. Agricultural products, with the exception
of cereals and oil seeds, faced an equally sharp drop in tariﬀs, though the non-tariﬀ barriers
of these products were lifted only in the late 1990s (Figure 1, Panels C-F). There were some
diﬀerences in the magnitude of tariﬀ changes (and especially NTBs) according to industry use
type: i.e. Consumer Durables, Consumer Nondurables, Capital goods, Intermediate and Basic
goods (Figure 1, Panel D and F). Indian authorities first liberalized Capital goods, Basic and
Intermediates, while Consumer Nondurables and agricultural products were slowly moved from
the “negative” list to the list of freely importable goods only in the second half of the 1990s. The
Indian Rupee was devalued 20 percent against the dollar in July 1991 and further devalued in
February 1992. By 1993, India had adopted a flexible exchange rate regime (Ahluwalia, 1999).
      Following the reduction in trade distortions, the ratio of total trade in manufactures to
GDP rose from an average of 13 percent in the 1980s to nearly 19 percent of GDP in 1999/00
(Figure 2). Export and import volumes also increased sharply from the early 1990s, outpacing
growth in real output (Figure 2). India’s imports were significantly more skilled-labor intensive
than India’s exports and remained so throughout the 1990s, as shown in Figure 3 which plots
cumulative export and import shares by skill intensity in 1987, 1991, 1994 and 1997.
      India remained committed to further trade liberalization, and since 1997 there have been
further adjustments to import tariﬀs. However, at the time the government announced the
export-import policy in the Ninth Plan (1997-2002), the sweeping reforms outlined in the pre-
vious plan had been undertaken and pressure for further reforms from external sources had
abated.
  4
      The guidelines were outlined in the Chelliah report of The Tax Reform Commission constituted in 1991.



                                                       7
3        Data

The data for this analysis were drawn from three main sources. Household survey data is avail-
able from the 1983-84, 1987-88, 1993-94 and 1999-2000 (“thick”) rounds of the Indian National
Sample Survey (NSS). The NSS provide household level information on expenditure patterns,
occupation, industrial aﬃliation (at the 3 digit NIC level) and various other household and
individual characteristics. The surveys usually cover all states in India and collect information
on about 75,000 rural and 45,000 urban households.5 Using this data, I construct district level
measures of poverty (measured as headcount ratio and poverty gap)6 and inequality (measured
as the standard deviation of the log of per capita expenditure and the logarithmic deviation of
per capita expenditure). Following Deaton (2003a, 2003b), I adjust these estimates in two ways.
First, I use the poverty lines proposed by Deaton as opposed to the ones used by the Indian
Planning Commission, which are based on defective price indices over time, across states and
between the urban and rural sector. The poverty lines are available for the 16 bigger states in
India and Delhi to which I restrict the analysis.7 In addition, the 1999-2000 round is not directly
comparable to the 1993-1994 round. The 1999-2000 round introduced a new recall period (7
days) along with the usual 30-day recall questions for the household expenditures on food, pan
and tobacco. Due to the way the questionnaire was administered, there are reasons to believe
that this methodology leads to an overestimate of the expenditures based on the 30-day recall
period, which in turn aﬀects the poverty and inequality estimates. To achieve comparability
with earlier rounds, I follow Deaton and impute the correct distribution of total per capita ex-
penditure for each district from the households’ expenditures on a subset of goods for which
    5
        The NSS follows the Indian Census definition of urban and rural areas. To be classified urban, an area needs
to meet several criteria regarding size and density of the population, and the share of male working population
engaged in non-agricultural pursuits.
   6
     These measures are explained in detail in Section 4.2. The head count ratio represents the proportion of
the population below the poverty line, while the poverty gap index is the normalized aggregate shortfall of poor
people’s consumption from the poverty line.
   7
     Poverty lines were not available for some of the smaller states and union territories, namely: Arunachal
Pradesh, Goa, Daman and Diu, Jammu and Kashmir, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura,
Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Chandigarh, Pondicherry, Lakshwadweep, Dadra Nagar and Haveli. The results
are not sensitive to the inclusion of these states, with poverty lines assumed to be the same as those of the
neighboring states.


                                                           8
the new recall period questions were not introduced. The poverty and inequality measures were
derived from this “corrected” distribution. Throughout the 1990s there were substantial changes
in the administrative division of India, with districts’ boundaries changing as new districts were
carved out of existing ones. As I compare districts over time, I construct consistent time-series
of district identifiers using Census Atlases and other maps of India. These were also used to
match the NSS and Census district definitions.
        For industrial data, I use the Indian Census of 1991, which reports the industry of em-
ployment at the 3-digit National Industrial Classification (NIC) code for each district in India.
Because the Census does not distinguish among crops produced by agricultural workers, I use
the 43rd round of the NSS to compute agricultural employment district weights. There are
about 450 industry codes of which about 190 are traded agricultural, mining or manufacturing
industries.
        Finally, I use tariﬀs to measure changes in Indian trade policy. While non-tariﬀ barriers
(NTB) have historically played a large role in Indian trade policy, data are not available at a
disaggregated enough level to allow the construction of a time-series of NTBs across sectors.8
Instead, I construct a database of annual tariﬀ data for 1987-2001 at the six-digit level of
the Indian Trade Classification Harmonized System (HS) Code based on data from various
publications of the Ministry of Finance. I then match 5,000 product lines to the NIC Codes,
using the concordance of Debroy and Santhanam (1993), to calculate average industry-level
tariﬀs. The little data on NTBs available comes from various publication of the Directorate
General of Foreign Trade as well as the 1992 study of the Indian Trade Regime by Aksoy (1992).


4        Empirical Strategy

The Indian liberalization was externally imposed, comprehensive, and the Indian government
had to meet strict compliance deadlines. The period immediately before the reform, and the
five-year plan immediately following, give rise to an excellent natural experiment. India’s large
    8
        In addition, the experience of other developing countries shows that NTB coverage ratios are usually highly
correlated with tariﬀs, thus estimates based on tariﬀs may capture the combined eﬀect of trade policy changes
(Goldberg and Pavcnik, 2004). This relationship seems to hold in the case of India as well, based on the patchy
data available.



                                                          9
size and diversity (India was divided into approximately 450 districts in 27 states at the time
of the 1991 Census) allows for a cross-region research design. The identification strategy is
straightforward: districts whose industries faced larger liberalization shocks are compared to
those whose industries remained protected. Gordon Hanson employs a similar strategy in his
study of the eﬀect of globalization on labor income in Mexico in this volume.
   However, unlike Hanson’s, the identification strategy of this paper exploits variation in the
“initial” industrial composition across districts in India and the timing of liberalization across
industries. I construct a measure of district trade exposure as the average of industry-level
tariﬀs weighted by the workers employed in that industry in 1991 as a share of all registered
workers. The variation in industrial composition will generate diﬀerential response of the district
level trade exposure to the exogenous changes in tariﬀs. In a regression framework, the baseline
specification takes the following form:

                               ydt = α + β · Tariﬀdt + γ t + δ d + εdt                           (1)

Where ydt is district level outcome such as measures of poverty and inequality, and Tariﬀdt is
the district exposure to international trade. The coeﬃcient of interest, β, captures the average
eﬀect of trade protection on regional outcomes. The inclusion of district fixed eﬀects (δ d ) absorbs
unobserved district-specific heterogeneity in the determinants of poverty and inequality, while
the year dummies (γ t ) control for macroeconomic shocks that aﬀect equally all of India.
   The above methodology will capture the short to medium-run eﬀect of trade liberalization in
a specific district. Note that in the presence of perfect factor mobility across regions, one would
expect no eﬀect of liberalization on regional outcomes. If workers can easily migrate in response
to adverse price changes, the eﬀect of liberalization captured in β would be zero. A further
advantage of this identification strategy is that it will uncover the general equilibrium eﬀect
of trade liberalization within a geographical unit. Previous studies have focused on the eﬀect
of trade opening on manufacturing workers, who, in developing countries, typically represent a
small fraction of the population, though often a large share of income. This strategy will capture
not only the eﬀect of trade liberalization on manufacturing and agricultural workers, but also
on their dependents, and individuals in allied sectors.
   It is important to emphasize that this empirical strategy can not tell us anything about the


                                                 10
first order eﬀect of trade on poverty. First, trade liberalization is likely to have eﬀects common
across India, through prices, availability of new goods, faster growth etc.9 Second, it would
be very diﬃcult to draw a causal lesson using only time variation in trade liberalization and
poverty levels, since the Indian economy was subject to numerous other influences over the
period studied. This study, based on regional variation, does not reflect these eﬀects, and does
not seek to answer questions about overall levels. Instead, it answers the questions of whether all
district derived similar benefits (or suﬀered similar costs) from liberalization, or whether some
areas suﬀered disproportionately. This is an important question for policy makers who might
need to devise additional policies to redistribute some of the gains from the winners to those
who do not win as much in order to minimize potential social cost of inequality.
      The balance of this section addresses two potential complications. First, the process of trade
liberalization is explored in detail, including the possibility that liberalization was correlated
with other factors that aﬀect regional poverty and inequality. Second, the measures used to
quantify poverty and inequality are described, including careful attention to possible problems
with the data, and their solution.


4.1      Endogeneity of Trade Policy

There are strong theoretical reasons (Grossman and Helpman, 2002) to believe that in the
absence of external pressure, trade policy is an endogenous outcome to political and economic
processes. As the empirical strategy of this paper exploits the interaction of regional industrial
composition and diﬀerential degree of liberalization across industries to identify the eﬀect of
trade liberalization on poverty and inequality, understanding the source of variation in the tariﬀ
levels is of utmost importance. In particular, there are two dimensions that suggest endogeneity
of trade policy may be a concern. First, the initial decrease in tariﬀs might have been just
a continuation of a secular trend. The timing of trade reform might have reflected Indian
authorities’ perception of domestic industries as mature enough to face foreign competition, and
labor and credit markets as flexible enough to ease the intersectoral reallocation that would
ensue. Second, the cross-sectional variation in levels of protection might be related to economic
and political factors. The relatively less eﬃcient industries might have enjoyed higher degree of
  9
      To a certain extent the eﬀect of cheaper goods should be reflected in the deflators for the poverty lines.



                                                          11
protection; the political strength of labor as well as business is also often cited as a determinant
of trade protection. If less productive industries or industries with higher lobbying ability are
more concentrated in poorer areas, then one might see a positive correlation between district
poverty rates and the district level tariﬀs. These two concerns are addressed in sequence below.
       As already discussed in Section 2, the external crisis of 1991 opened the way for market-
oriented reforms in India, such as trade liberalization. The Indian government required IMF
support to meet external payments obligations, and was thus compelled to accept the conditions
that accompanied the support. “Given several earlier attempts to avoid IMF loans and the
associated conditionalities, the large number of members of the new cabinet who had been
cabinet members in past government with inward-looking trade policies and the heavy reliance
on tariﬀs as a source of revenues, these reforms came as a surprise.” (Hasan et al., 2003).
According to a study on the political economy of economic policy in India, “the new policy
package was delivered swiftly in order to complete the process of changeover so as not to permit
consolidation of any likely opposition to implementation of the new policies. The strategy
was to administer a ‘shock therapy’ to the economy. . . There was no debate among oﬃcials or
economists prior to the oﬃcial adoption. . . The new economic policy did not originate out of an
analysis of the data and information or a well thought out development perspective,” (Goyal,
1996).10
       Varshney (1999) describes the political environment in which the trade reforms were passed.
Mass political attention at the time was focused on internal politics (ethnic conflict in particular),
and trade reforms pushed through by a weak coalition government apparently escaped general
attention, in contrast to the failed reform attempts of the much stronger Congress Party in 1985.
As late as 1996, fewer than 20% of the electorate had any knowledge of the trade reform, while
80% had opinions on whether India should implement caste-based aﬃrmative action. While
some liberalization eﬀorts (for example privatization) were diluted or delayed due to popular
opposition, trade liberalization was generally successful. As Bhagwati wrote: “Reform by storm
  10
       This view is confirmed in a recent interview with Dr. Chelliah, one of the masterminds of the reforms
"We didn’t have the time to sit down and think exactly what kind of a development model we needed...there
was no systematic attempt to see two things; one, how have the benefits of reforms distributed, and two, ul-
timately what kind of society we want to have, what model of development should we have?", July 5, 2004
http://in.rediﬀ.com/money/2004/jul/05inter.htm


                                                      12
has supplanted the reform by stealth of Mrs. Gandhi’s time and the reform with reluctance
under Rajiv Gandhi.”
   There are several reasons why trade policy remained part of elite politics. Trade constitutes
a relatively small part of GDP in India. Though tariﬀs were vastly reduced, consumer goods
and agricultural products were initially not liberalized. And though there surely is an important
link between mass welfare and trade policy, even when trade is a small share of the national
product, these links are subtle and not yet established empirically.
   Even if the timing of the sharp drop in average tariﬀs (Figure 1) appears exogenous, there
is significant variation in the tariﬀ changes across industries, which could confound inference.
More precisely, it is important to understand whether the changes in tariﬀs reflected authorities’
perceptions on industry’s ability to compete internationally, or the lobbying power of the indus-
try. Ideally, this concern could be alleviated by knowledge of the “true” intentions of Indian
policymakers or, failing that, through a detailed study of the political economy behind tariﬀ
changes in India over the period. In the absence of objective and detailed analyses of such
policy changes, the data may be examined for possible confounding relationships.
   First, I examine to what extent tariﬀs moved together. An analysis of the tariﬀ changes of
the 5,000 items in the dataset for 1992-96, the Eighth Plan, and for 1997-2001, the Ninth Plan,
suggests that movements in tariﬀs were strikingly uniform until 1997 (Figure 4). During the
first 5-year that incorporated the economic reforms of 1991, India had to meet certain exter-
nally imposed benchmarks, and the majority of tariﬀ changes across products exhibited similar
behavior (either increased, decreased, or remained constant). After 1997, tariﬀ movements were
not as uniform. This suggests that policymakers were more selective in setting product tariﬀs
during 1997-2001, and the problem of potential cross-sectional endogenous trade protection is
more pronounced.
   Second, there is no evidence that policymakers adjusted tariﬀs according to industry’s per-
ceived productivity during the Eighth Plan, i.e. until 1997. In a related study, Topalova (2004a)
tests whether current productivity levels predict future tariﬀs — a relationship one would expect if
policymakers were indeed trying to protect less eﬃcient industries. Topalova (2004a) found that
the correlation between future tariﬀs and current productivity, and future tariﬀs and current
productivity growth is indistinguishable from zero for the 1989-96 period. For the period after


                                                13
1997 however, future tariﬀ levels seem to be negatively and statistically significantly correlated
with current productivity. This evidence and the evidence on uniformity in tariﬀ movements
until 1997 suggest it may not be appropriate to use trade policy variation after 1997. This study
thus focuses on the 1987-1997 period.
       A third check uses data from the Annual Survey of Industries (ASI) to test for “political
protection.” Even if the change in industry tariﬀs appears uncorrelated with the initial produc-
tivity of the industry, tariﬀs may be correlated with politically important characteristics of the
firm. Using data from the ASI, (which covers manufacturing and mining sectors), and following
the literature on political protection, I regress the change in tariﬀs between 1987 and 1997 on
various industrial characteristics in 1987.11 These characteristics include employment size (a
larger labor force may lead to more electoral power and more protection), output size, average
wage (policy makers may protect industries where relatively low skilled/vulnerable workers are
employed), concentration (as measured by the average factory size, this captures the ability of
producers to organize political pressure groups to lobby for more protection), and share of skilled
workers. The results are presented in Table 1, Panel A. Tariﬀ changes are not correlated with
any of the industry characteristics.
       Because agricultural workers are not included in the ASI data, but comprise a large share
of India’s population, I conduct a similar exercise using data from the 1987 NSS. I estimate for
all industries the average per capita expenditure, wage, poverty rate and poverty depth at the
industry level, and I check whether there is a correlation between these industry characteristics
and tariﬀ declines. Results, presented in Table 1, Panel B, show no significant relationship
between tariﬀ changes and these measures of workers’ wellbeing, once controls for industry use
type are included.
       A possible explanation for these results can be found in Gang and Pandey (1996). They
conducted a careful study of the determinants of protection across manufacturing sectors across
three plans, 1979-80, 1984-85 and 1991-92, showing that none of the economic and political fac-
tors are important in explaining industry tariﬀ levels in India.12 They explain the phenomenon
  11
       I use 1987 as the pre-reform year since the data on pre-reform poverty and inequality comes from the 43rd
round of the NSS which was collected in 1987. The results are robust to using 1988 or 1990 as the “pre” year.
  12
     In other developing countries, protection tends to be highest for unskilled, labor-intensive sectors. See Gold-
berg and Pavcnik (2001), Hanson and Harrison (1999), Currie and Harrison (1997) for evidence from Colombia,


                                                        14
with the hysteresis of policy: trade policy was determined in the Second Five Year Plan and
never changed, even as the circumstances and natures of the industries evolved.
       The evidence presented here suggests that the diﬀerential tariﬀ changes across industries
between 1991 and 1997 were as unrelated to the state of the industries as can be reasonably
hoped for in a real-world setting.
       One big exception to the otherwise haphazard pattern of tariﬀ reductions are two major
agricultural crops: cereals and oilseeds. Throughout the period of study, the imports of cereals
and oilseeds remained canalized (only government agencies were allowed to import these items)
and no change in their tariﬀ rates was observed (the tariﬀ rate for cereals was set at 0). Thus,
they were de facto non-traded goods. The delay in the liberalization of these major agricultural
crops was due to reasons of food security. However, the cultivators of these crops were also
among the poorest in India. This brings some additional complications in the analysis, which
are discussed at length in the following sections.


4.2       Measurement and Basic Patterns of Poverty and Inequality

Measuring poverty and inequality is not a trivial task. For poverty, I use both the “headcount
ratio” (HCR) and the poverty gap. The former, which I refer to as the poverty rate, represents
the proportion of the population below the poverty line. While the HCR is widely used, it does
not capture the extent to which diﬀerent households fall short of the poverty line, and is highly
sensitive to the number of poor households near the poverty line. Thus, I also analyze the poverty
gap index, defined as the normalized aggregate shortfall of poor people’s consumption from the
poverty line.13,14 Figure 5 plots the evolution of poverty in India, and indicates a substantial
decline over the past two decades.
Mexico and Morocco respectively.
 13
    Both the headcount ratio and the poverty gap are members of the Foster-Greer-Thorbecke class of poverty
                         Rz¡     ¢α
measures, defined as Pα = 0 z−y
                              z
                                    f(y)dy, where z is the poverty line and incomes are distributed according to
the density function f(y) . The headcount ratio is calculated by setting α to be 0, and the poverty gap by setting
α to be 1.

  14
       Since the survey design changed for the 1999-2000 round of the NSS, in order to obrain internally consistent
measurement of poverty and inequality, the per capita expenditure data was adjusted at the district level, following
Deaton (2003).


                                                         15
       I chose two measures of inequality, the standard deviation of log consumption and the mean
logarithmic deviation of consumption,15 both because they are standard measures, and because
similar values are obtained when they are estimated from either the micro data or the estimated
distributions. In contrast to poverty’s steady decline, inequality follows a more complicated
pattern. While it registered a substantial decline between 1987 and 1993, both measures record
a break in that trend and a slight increase in inequality after 1993 in rural India. In urban India,
after a period of decline, inequality rose between 1993 and 1999.
       As mentioned above, the measure of trade policy is the tariﬀ that a district faces, calculated
as the 1991 employment weighted average nominal ad-valorem tariﬀ at time t.16 Table A1
in the appendix provides summary statistics of the variables included in the analysis at the
district level, including a breakdown of the workers across broad industrial categories. In the
average rural district about 80 percent of main17 workers are involved in agriculture, of whom
87 percent are involved in cultivation of cereals and oilseeds. Mining and manufacturing account
for about 6 percent of the workers and the remaining 12 percent are involved in services, trade,
transportation, and construction. In urban India agricultural workers represent only 19 percent,
of which 73 percent are cultivators of cereals and oilseeds. Manufacturing and mining workers
account for another fifth of the urban population and the remaining three fifths comprise workers
in services etc.
       The district level tariﬀs are computed as follows:
                                            P
                                               Workerd,i,1991 ∗ Tariﬀi,t
                                  Tariﬀd,t = i
                                               Total Workerd,1991
Tariﬀd,t is a “scaled” version of district tariﬀs. In this measure, workers in non-traded industries
  15
     The mean deviation of consumption is part of the family of Generalized Entropy coeﬃcients. It is calculated
                                            R
according to the following formula, I(0) = µy log( µy )f (y)dy, where µ is mean income.
  16
     As described in the Data section, the 1991 population and housing census is used to compute employment by
industry for each district. The employment data is available for the urban and rural sector separately by industry
at the 3 digit (NIC) level for all workers except agricultural workers. To match agricultural workers to the tariﬀ
data, I compute district employment weights from the 43rd round of the National Sample Survey (July 1987-June
1988).
  17
     The 1991 Indian census divides workers into two categories: “main” and “marginal” workers. Main workers
include people who worked for 6 months or more during the year, while marginal workers include those who
worked for a shorter period. Unpaid farm and family enterprise workers are supposed to be included in either the
main worker or marginal worker category, as appropriate.


                                                       16
are assigned zero tariﬀ for all years. These are workers in services, trade, transportation, con-
struction as well as all workers involved in growing of cereals and oilseeds. The latter assumption
is justified by the fact that all product lines of these two industries were canalized (imports were
allowed only to the state trading monopoly) as late as 2000.18 Furthermore, the tariﬀs of all
product lines under the growing of cereals industry are 0 throughout the entire period of interest.
      One concern with the use of Tariﬀd,t is that it is very sensitive to the share of people
involved in non-traded industries, the majority of whom are the cereal and oilseed growers.
Since agricultural workers are usually at the bottom of the income distribution, Tariﬀd,t is
correlated with initial poverty levels. The interpretation of results based on this measure may
be unclear if there were (for other reasons) convergence across districts. In particular, poorer
districts, which have a large fraction of agricultural workers may experience faster reduction in
poverty due to mean-reversion or convergence. These districts may also record a lower drop
in tariﬀs, since initially the Tariﬀd,t measure is low. Thus, one might find a spurious negative
relationship between tariﬀs and poverty and erroneously conclude that trade liberalization led
to a relative increase in poverty at the district level. Alternatively, if workers in non-traded
activities are on a diﬀerent growth path than those in traded industries, Tariﬀd,t might capture
this diﬀerential growth, rather than the eﬀect of trade policies. To overcome this shortcoming,
I instrument Tariﬀd,t with TrTariﬀd,t , defined as
                                           P
                                              Workerd,i,1991 ∗ Tariﬀi,t
                            TrTariﬀd,t = i P
                                                  i Workerd,i,1991

TrTariﬀd,t , “non-scaled” tariﬀs, ignores the workers in non-traded industries. It weighs industry
tariﬀs with employment weights that sum to one for the share of people in traded goods in each
district. Thus, a district which has 1 percent workers in traded industries and another district
where 100 percent of workers are in traded industries will have the same value of TrTariﬀd,t
if, within the traded industries, the industrial composition is the same. Since the variation
in TrTariﬀd,t does not reflect the size of the traded sector within a district, the ”non-scaled”
tariﬀ would “overstate” the magnitude of any eﬀect trade policy might have. Yet, TrTariﬀd,t
forms a good instrument, as it is strongly correlated with the “scaled” tariﬀs and overcomes the
correlation with district initial poverty that is there by construction in Tariﬀd,t . Table 2 presents
 18
      These products also have minimum support prices fixed by the Government of India.



                                                      17
the results from the first stage. Following equation 1, I estimate the following specification:


                           Tariﬀdt = α + β · TrTariﬀdt + γ t + δ d + εdt                          (2)

with γ t and δ d defined as above. Columns (1) and (3) present the correlation between the scaled
and nonscaled tariﬀs. There is a very strong relationship between the non-scaled and scaled
tariﬀs in both urban and rural India.
    Another instrument is suggested by Figure 1, Panel G: tariﬀ changes are linearly related to
initial tariﬀs. One important principle in the tariﬀ changes was to standardize the tariﬀs (reduce
the standard deviation). A natural consequence of this is that the higher the tariﬀ initially, the
greater the reduction. Thus, I use pre-reform unscaled tariﬀs times a post dummy, in addition
to the unscaled tariﬀs, as instruments for tariﬀ reduction, namely:

              Tariﬀdt = α + β · TrTariﬀdt + θ · Postt ∗ TrTariﬀd1987 + γ t + δ d + εdt            (3)

Table 2 columns (2) and (4) include the interaction of the initial unscaled tariﬀ and a post-
liberalization dummy. The interaction of the non-scaled tariﬀs times a post dummy is also
strongly correlated with the scaled tariﬀs and adds explanatory power in all rural subsamples.
In the urban sector, the relationship is not as strong.
    Data on outcome variables are available for 3 years: 1987, 1993 and 1999, while tariﬀ data are
available annually. It is not known how soon national policy changes aﬀect regional outcomes,
though probably there is some lag. If the 1993 outcomes were matched to the 1991 tariﬀs, 1993
would count as a “pre” year, while if they were matched to the 1992 tariﬀs, it would be a post
year. To avoid this problem, 1993 is omitted from the analysis. I use the earliest available data,
1987, for the “pre” tariﬀ measure, and the 1997 data as the “post” measure.


5    Results

I estimate four versions of equation 1: the OLS relationship using Tariﬀd,t ; a reduced form using
TrTariﬀd,t ; instrumenting for Tariﬀd,t using TrTariﬀd,t, ; and finally instrumenting for Tariﬀd,t
with both TrTariﬀd,t and with TrTariﬀd,1987 ∗Postt , where Postt is a dummy equal to 1 in year
1999. Since the dependent variable is an estimate, I weight the observations by the square root


                                                18
of the average number of households in a district across rounds. Year dummies are included to
account for macroeconomic shocks and time trends that aﬀect outcomes equally across India,
while district fixed eﬀects absorb district-specific time-invariant heterogeneity. Outcomes of
districts within a state might be correlated, since industrial composition may be correlated
within a state, thus I cluster the standard errors at the state year level. The results for the
four outcomes of interest are presented in Table 3 Section I for rural India and Section II for
urban India. Each panel gives the results for a diﬀerent dependent variable. Columns (1) and
(5) give the OLS relationship, columns (2) and (6) the reduced form, and columns (3), (4), (7)
and (8), the IV results. In column (4) and (8), I use both the unscaled tariﬀs and the pre-reform
unscaled tariﬀs times a post reform dummy as an instrument.
   In rural India, for both measures of poverty, there is a strong statistically significant negative
relationship between district level tariﬀs and poverty. The decline in tariﬀs as a result of the
sharp trade liberalization appears to have led to a relative increase in the poverty rate and
poverty gap in districts whose exposure to liberalization was more intense. The average district
experienced 5.5 percentage point reduction in the “scaled” district tariﬀs. The point estimates of
the various specifications are similar, and suggest that this 5.5 percentage point drop would lead
to an increase in the poverty rate of 3.2 to 4.6 percentage points, and a 1.1 to 1.8 percentage
point increase in the poverty gap. Given that poverty rate in the average district decreased
by 12.7 percentage points and that poverty gap decreased by 4 percentage points during the
entire decade, the eﬀects of exposure to liberalization are rather large. Surprisingly, there is no
statistically significant relationship between trade exposure and poverty in urban India. Though
the point estimates are still negative, the magnitude of the coeﬃcients is much smaller than in
rural India. There is no statistically significant relationship between trade liberalization and
either measure of inequality for the average district in neither rural nor urban India.


5.1   Why rural

The empirical literature on trade liberalization so far has focused predominantly on the man-
ufacturing sector, and urban areas because these were the areas most commonly aﬀected by
trade liberalization (Goldberg and Pavcnik, 2004). Thus, it is rather surprising that the eﬀect




                                                19
of trade liberalization on districts is more pronounced in rural India than in urban India.19 A
close look at the evolution of tariﬀ and non-tariﬀ barriers in Figure 1 suggests an explanation.
Agriculture was not omitted from the 1991 reforms in India. Tariﬀs of agricultural products fell
in line with tariﬀs of manufacturing and other goods. While quantity restrictions and licensing
requirements on both the import and export of agricultural products (out of a concern for food
security) were removed later than on other goods, the share of agricultural products that could
be freely imported jumped from 7 percent in 1989 to 40 percent in 1998. Between 1998 and
2001 this number reached more than 80 percent.
       In addition, the agricultural tariﬀs and non-tariﬀ barriers are strongly correlated. The post-
liberalization data (the 55th round of the NSS) was collected from mid 1999 to mid 2000,
right when the bulk of the removal of NTB was taking place. Thus the tariﬀ measure may
be capturing the eﬀect of both tariﬀ and non-tariﬀ barriers and reflect the short term eﬀect
of the change in relative price of agricultural products on the extensive rural population. I
construct separate measures of agricultural tariﬀs and mining and manufacturing tariﬀs that a
district faces and regress district poverty and inequality on these measures of trade policy. Table
A2 in the appendix reveals that the results are driven by agricultural tariﬀs.20 There is little
relationship between mining and manufacturing tariﬀs and district outcomes, though, due to the
large standard errors of the point estimates, I can not reject for any of the outcomes and for any
of the subsamples, that the eﬀect of mining and manufacturing tariﬀs and of agricultural tariﬀs
is the same. The finding is not that surprising; manufacturing and mining workers represent
only 6 percent of workers in the typical rural district — thus it is plausible that even if trade
liberalization had a sizeable eﬀect on their wellbeing or relative earnings, it would not be reflected
in district-level outcomes.
       Furthermore, people involved in agriculture are the most vulnerable, often with little access
to insurance devices. There is no shortage of press accounts on farmers committing suicide in the
face of adverse shocks in India. Manufacturing workers, on the other hand, tend to be relatively
  19
       On the other hand, rural areas are where the poor people in India are concentrated. At the eve of the 1991
reforms, both poverty rates and poverty depth were almost double in rural areas (40 versus 22.8 percent poverty
rate and 9 versus 4.7 percent poverty depth).
  20
     Note that the magnitudes of the coeﬃcients in table A2 are not interpretable as the measures of agricultural
and mining and manufacturing tariﬀs are not scaled by the share of population employed in the particular sector.



                                                        20
richer than agricultural workers: significant decline in income may not be enough to push them
below the poverty line.


5.2       Robustness

The eﬀects of liberalization identified in this paper could be incorrect if measures of trade liber-
alization were correlated with omitted time-varying variables that aﬀect poverty and inequality.
In this section, I first examine whether districts with diﬀerent initial industrial compositions
were on diﬀerent growth paths. I then determine whether pre-existing conditions within dis-
tricts are correlated with subsequent tariﬀ changes. Finally, I measure whether “initial” (1987)
conditions other than industrial composition in districts are correlated with subsequent changes
in poverty, and if so, whether they are driving the results.
       To address the concern that districts with diﬀerent industrial composition may be experi-
encing diﬀerent time trends in poverty and inequality that are (spuriously) correlated with tariﬀ
changes, I perform a falsification test. In particular, I test whether changes in poverty and in-
equality in the two periods prior to the reform (from 1983 to 1987) are correlated with measures
of trade liberalization from 1987 to1997.21 I use the four specifications (OLS, reduced form, and
both IV specifications), but now using 1983 and 1987 outcomes as pre and post, rather than the
1987 and 1999 outcomes. The results are presented in Table 4. In both urban and rural areas,
there seems to be no correlation between tariﬀ changes and the pre-reform trend in any of the
outcomes.
       In Tables 5 and 6, I investigate the possibility that the results might be driven by con-
vergence or omitted variables.22 I control for time-varying eﬀect of various pre-reform district
characteristics as well as initial levels of outcomes, by including the interaction of these initial
characteristics and a post liberalization dummy, estimating:

                           ydt = α + β · Tariﬀdt + θ · Postt · Xd,1987 + γ t + δ d + εdt                            (4)

In all specifications I include in Xd,1987 initial industrial composition in the district (namely
  21
       Note that the analysis can be performed only at the region level as district identifiers are not available in the
38th round of the NSS.
  22
     I present the analysis only for the rural sample from now on as the eﬀect of trade liberalization in the urban
sector can not be precisely estimated.


                                                           21
percentage of workers in agriculture, manufacturing, mining, trade, transport, services - workers
in construction are the omitted category), percentage literate and the share of scheduled caste
and scheduled tribes population. I sequentially add as controls the initial level of the log of mean
per capita expenditure in the district, the pre-reform trend in the outcome variable (the diﬀerence
between its 1983 and 1987 value), and finally the initial value of the dependent variable itself
instrumented by its value in 1983. I also allow for diﬀerential time trends in district outcomes
across states with pro-employer, pro-worker and neutral labor laws by including post times
labor law fixed eﬀects.23 In columns (1)-(4), I use only TrTariﬀd,t as an instrument for Tariﬀd,t ,
while in columns (5)-(8), I instrument the scaled tariﬀ with both TrTariﬀd,t, and the initial level
interacted with a post liberalization dummy. Columns (4) and (8) include the instrumented
value of the lagged dependent variable, where the 1983 level is used as an instrument for the
1987 level.24
       The inclusion of district initial characteristics does not substantially change the results at
the district level. Controlling for initial per-capita expenditure or pre-reform outcome reduces
the size of the point estimates (from 0.8 to 0.44 for poverty rate and from 0.32 to 0.12 for poverty
gap when the non-scaled tariﬀ is the only instrument, and from 0.68 to 0.45 for poverty rate
and from 0.21 to 0.12 for poverty gap when both the non-scaled tariﬀ and its initial level are
used as instruments). It may be that some of the variation in poverty depth and incidence that
equation 1 attributed to trade liberalization was in fact due to convergence. According to these
corrected estimates, the decline in tariﬀs increased relative poverty incidence by about 2 and
poverty gap by 0.6 percentage points in the average district.
       I also address the concern that some other reforms concurrent with trade liberalization may
be driving the results. In particular, in 1991 the government of India increased the number
of de-licensed industries and specified a list of industries for automatic approval for foreign
direct investment.25 Substantial reforms were initiated in the financial and banking sector
  23
       Indian states are classified as having pro-worker, neutral, or pro-employer labor laws by Besley and Burgess
(2004).
  24
     Including the actual value would be equivalent to regressing changes on levels: if there is mean reversion and
measurement error, the coeﬃcient could be biased. In fact, the size of the coeﬃcient on the initial level of the
outcomes suggests implausibly strong convergence.
  25
     Foreign investment was tightly regulated prior to 1991. Foreign companies needed to obtain specific prior
approval from the Indian government and foreign investment was limited to 40 percent. In 1991, the government


                                                         22
as well. Following the same methodology as in the construction of district tariﬀs, I construct
district employment-weighted share of license-industries and district employment-weighted share
of industries that are open to foreign direct investment.26 The number of bank branches per
capita in a district captures the potentially confounding eﬀect of banking reforms.27
    In Table 6, I replicate the specifications presented in Table 5 including these time-varying
district level measures of reforms. The eﬀect of trade liberalization on poverty is completely
insensitive to the additional controls. There is no correlation between poverty and the number
of bank branches per capita nor share of industries under a license. A larger share of industries
open to FDI, however, is associated with faster reduction in poverty. As globalization is typically
defined not only as trade liberalization but also opening to foreign investment, it is important
to emphasize this finding. It also reconciles Gordon Hanson’s conclusion in another paper with
similar methodology in this volume that more globalized areas in Mexico experienced a larger
increase in labor income with the finding that trade liberalization slowed poverty reduction
in more exposed districts in India. Hanson’s definition of exposure to globalization takes into
account the share of maquiladora value added in state GDP, the share of FDI in state GDP, and
the share of imports and exports in state GDP, while the main findings of this study concern
the consequences of tariﬀ liberalization.
    In Table A3 in the appendix I investigate the role of imports versus exports, in addition to
FDI, by including the district employment-weighted industry imports and exports. I use 1987
import/export data for the pre-reform period, and the 1993-1997 annual average for the post-
reform period. Since imports and exports are the endogenous response to trade policy, exchange
rate shocks, foreign demand etc., these regressions do not warrant a causal interpretation, yet
they illustrate that imports are associated with higher, while exports with lower incidence of
poverty. These correlations are in-line with the findings in Goldberg and Pavcnik’s study in this
created a list of high technology and high investment priority industries with automatic permission for foreign
equity share up to 51 percent. Over the 1990s this list was gradually expanded.
  26
     Data on policies regarding industrial delicensing and opening to foreign direct investment were compiled from
various publications of the Handbook of Industrial Statistics.
  27
     The Indian government heavily regulates private and public banks, as it considers the banking system an
integral tool in its eﬀorts to meet a number of social goals, such as poverty reduction. Indeed, Burgess and Pande
(2004) have shown that rural bank branch expansion over the 1980s lead to reduction in poverty.




                                                       23
volume. Goldberg and Pavcnik investigate the eﬀect of Colombia’s trade liberalization on urban
unemployment, informality, minimum wage compliance and poverty, by exploiting variation in
the timing and magnitude of tariﬀ reductions across manufacturing sectors. While they find no
robust relationship between tariﬀ changes and various labor market outcomes, higher exposure
to import competition is associated with greater likelihood of unemployment, informality and
poverty, while higher exports correlate with lower informality, poverty and better minimum wage
compliance.


6    Discussion and Conclusion

So far this paper has established that, whatever the India-wide eﬀects of trade liberalization
were, rural areas with high concentration of industries that were disproportionately aﬀected by
tariﬀ reductions, experienced slower progress in poverty reduction. However, for these areas,
there was no discernible eﬀect on inequality.
    The regionally disparate eﬀects of liberalization are not consistent with standard trade theory.
In the hypothetical world of a standard trade model, with perfect factor mobility across regions,
labor would migrate in response to wage and price shocks, equalizing the incidence of poverty
across regions. Estimating equation 1 would yield an estimate of β equal to zero, indicating that
the local intensity of liberalization has no eﬀect on local poverty.
    The interpretation of estimates of equation 1 as eﬀects of liberalization on regional outcomes
is correct only if labor is immobile across geographical districts within India in the short to
medium-run, that is, if each district represents a separate labor market. While this represents
an immediate departure from standard trade theory, the assumption is realistic for the case of
India: the absence of mobility is striking. Moreover, the pattern of migration has remained
remarkably constant through time, with no visible increase after the economic reforms of 1991.
    Table 7 presents some estimates of migration for urban and rural India based on the 3
rounds of the NSS (1983, 1987 and 1999) that included questions on the migration particulars of
household members. Overall migration is not low – 20-23 percent of rural and 31-33 percent of
urban residents have changed location of residence at least once in their lifetime. Most migrants
are women relocating at marriage: around 40 percent of females in rural and urban India report



                                                24
a change in location, versus 7 percent of men in rural and 26 percent of men in urban locations.
However, the migration most relevant for this study is short-run movement (within the past 10
years) of people across district boundaries or within district across diﬀerent sectors (i.e. from an
urban area to a rural one, or vice versa). Only 3-4 percent of people living in rural areas reported
changing either district or sector within the past 10 years. Again the percentage of women so
doing is double the share of men. For people living in urban areas, the percentage of migrants
is substantially higher. Yet, less than 0.5 percent of the population in rural and 4 percent of the
population in urban areas moved for reasons economic consideration (or employment).
       These low migration figures combined with a second characteristic of India’s economy, namely
the large and growing disparities in income across Indian states, challenge the standard theoret-
ical framework. Ahluwalia(2001), Datt and Ravallion (2002), Sachs et al. (2002), Bandyopad-
hyay (2003) and others document significant diﬀerences in the level of state GDP per capita and
growth rate of state output.
       Even if there is little migration across districts, there could be high levels of reallocation
within districts, across industries. Topalova (2004b) examines whether, as standard trade theory
predicts, there is intersectoral reallocation of labor and capital. There is no evidence of significant
reallocation in the sample of all Indian states, though in the sample of Indian states with
flexible labor laws,28 employment is positively correlated with industry tariﬀs. This correlation
is consistent with previous findings of faster growth of output and employment (Besley and
Burgess, 2004) and a higher elasticity of labor demand with respect to output price in states
with flexible labor laws (Hasan et al., 2003). Topalova (2004b) also examines whether these
diﬀerences in the institutional environment and microeconomic flexibility aﬀected the impact of
liberalization: the most pronounced eﬀects on poverty occurred in areas with inflexible labor
laws (those that saw no change in industrial structure in response to trade liberalization) while
inequality rose as a result of trade liberalization in areas with flexible labor laws.
       Topalova (2004b) further investigates whether the adjustment came through the price sys-
tem, by looking at the eﬀect of tariﬀ changes on wages and wage premia and finds substantial
  28
       Besley and Burgess (2004) classify Indian states as pro-worker, pro-employer or neutral, based on amendments
of the Industrial Disputes Act. Hasan et al. (2003) combine these categories with the ranking of the investment
climate in Indian states from a survey of managers conducted by the World Bank, in order to classify states as
having flexible or inflexible labor laws. Topalova (2004b) adopts Hasan et al. (2003)’s classification.


                                                         25
adjustment in wages and industry premia, including industry premia of agricultural workers. In
the next paper in this volume Goh and Javorcik find that in Poland, workers in sectors with
the largest tariﬀ declines experienced the highest increase in wages; in India, these workers suf-
fered the highest relative decrease in wage premia. Goh and Javorcik posit that in Poland’s
case, firms responded to higher import competition by increasing productivity and rewarded
the increased labor productivity with higher wages. Topalova (2004a) finds similar results in
India: micro evidence suggests that firms in industries that were relatively more liberalized ex-
perienced higher productivity and productivity growth. However, in India, these trade induced
productivity increases were likely not shared with the workers or were insuﬃcient to oﬀset the
relative downward pressure on factor returns.
   The mechanisms discussed above are consistent with a specific factor model of trade in which
labor is the specific factor in the short run. Rigid labor markets fostered by labor market regu-
lations in parts of India prevented the reallocation of factors in the face of trade liberalization
in those areas. Changes in relative output prices led to changes in relative sector-returns to the
specific factors. As those employed in traded industries were not at the top of the income distri-
bution on the eve of the trade reform, the relative fall in wages contributed to the slower poverty
reduction. This eﬀect was aggravated by the slower overall growth in registered manufacturing
employment in areas with inflexible labor laws, which retarded the pull out of poverty of the
poorest subsistence farmers. In contrast, areas in which reallocation was easier, and growth was
faster (because of labor laws), were shielded from the eﬀect of trade liberalization. In those
areas, the changes in the income distribution seem to have taken place in the high end, as some
workers tapped into the benefits of liberalization, thereby increasing the consumption inequality.
   This is the first (to my knowledge) study to document such a relationship between trade
liberalization and poverty within a developing or developed country. The findings are important
from a policy perspective as an increasing number of developing countries pursue policies of trade
liberalization, hoping to boost economic growth, raise living standards, and reduce poverty. This
paper does not measure the overall eﬀect of trade liberalization on income growth and poverty
alleviation. There was a substantial reduction in poverty in India over the 1990s, which trade
reforms may have boosted of slowed down. This paper establishes that diﬀerent regions within
India experienced diﬀerential eﬀects of trade liberalization. Those areas that were more exposed


                                                26
to potential foreign competition did not reap as much of the benefits (or bore a disproportionate
share of the burden) of liberalization in terms of poverty reduction.
    A critical component to the findings of this study, as well as the study on Colombia in this
volume, is the absence of labor mobility in the short- to medium-run. Workers do not relocate
from sectors that should be contracting to those that should be expanding fast enough, thus
impeding one of the main mechanisms generating benefits from trade. Enhancing labor mobility
will likely minimize the adjustment costs to trade opening. This study presents some evidence
to this eﬀect: the impact of trade on relative poverty in India was most pronounced in areas
with inflexible labor laws, where labor mobility was hindered. If some of the immobility of labor
is institutionally driven, then complementary measures to trade opening, such as labor market
reform, can ease the shock of liberalization and minimize its unequalizing eﬀects.


7    References

 Ahluwalia, Montek. “India’s Economic Reforms. An Appraisal” in India in the Era of Eco-
      nomic Reforms eds. J. Sachs, A. Varshney and N. Bajpai, 1999.

 Ahluwalia, Montek. “Economic Reforms in India Since 1991: Has Gradualism Worked?” Jour-
      nal of Economic Perspectives, 2002, 16(3), pp. 67-88.

 Ahluwalia, Montek. “State-Level Performance Under Economic Reforms in India?” in Eco-
      nomic policy reforms and the Indian economy, 2002, pp. 91-122.

 Aksoy, M. A. “The Indian Trade Regime.” The World Bank Working Paper Series No. 989,
      1992.

 Attanasio, Orazio, Pinelopi Goldberg and Nina Pavcnik. “Trade Reforms and Wage Inequality
      in Columbia.” Journal of Development Economics, 2004, 74(2), pp. 331-366.

 Bandyopadhyay, Sanghamitra. "Convergence Club Empirics: Some Dynamics and Explana-
      tions of Unequal Growth across Indian States." Suntory and Toyota International Centres
      for Economics and Related Working Paper, 2003.




                                               27
Banerjee, Abhijit and Andrew Newman. “Inequality, Growth and Trade Policy.” mimeo, MIT,
    2004.

Besley, Timothy and Robin Burgess. "Can Labor Regulation Hinder Economic Performance?
    Evidence from India." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2004, 119(1), pp. 91-134.

Bhagwati, Jagdish. India in Transition: Freeing the Economy, Oxford University Press, 1993.

Burgess, Robin and Rohini Pande. “Can Rural Banks Reduce Poverty? Evidence from the
    Indian Social Banking Experiment.” forthcoming, American Economic Review.

Cerra, Valerie and Sweta Saxena. “What Caused the 1991 Currency Crisis in India?” Interna-
    tional Monetary Fund Working Paper No. 00/157, October 2000.

Chopra, Ajai, Charles Collyns, Richard Hemming, Karen Parker, Woosik Chu and Oliver
    Fratzscher. “India: Economic Reform and Growth.” International Monetary Fund Occa-
    sional Paper No. 134, December 1995.

Cragg, Michael Ian and Mario Epelbaum. “Why Has Wage Dispersion Grown in Mexico? Is
    it the Incidence of Reforms or the Growing Demand for Skills?” Journal of Development
    Economics, 1996, 51(1), pp. 99-116.

Cunat, A. and M. Maﬀezzoli. “Growth and Interdependence Under Complete Specialization.”
    Bocconi University Working Paper No. 183, 2001.

Currie, Janet and Ann Harrison. “Sharing the Costs: The Impact of Trade Reform on Capital
    and Labor in Morocco.” Journal of Labor Economics, 1997, 15(3), Part 2, pp. 44-71.

Datt, Gaurav and Martin Ravallion. “Is India’s Economic Growth Leaving the Poor Behind.”
    Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2002, 16(3), pp. 89-108.

Davis, Donald. “Trade Liberalization and Income Distribution.” National Bureau of Economic
    Research Working Paper No. 5693, 1996.

Deaton, Angus. (a) “Adjusted Indian Poverty Estimates for 1999-2000.” Economic and Political
    Weekly, 2003, pp. 322-326.


                                            28
Deaton, Angus. (b)“Prices and Poverty in India, 1987-2000.” Economic and Political Weekly,
    2003, pp. 362-368.

Deaton, Angus and Jean Dreze. “Poverty and Inequality in India: A Reexamination.” Eco-
    nomic and Political Weekly, 2002, pp. 3729-3748.

Deaton, Angus and Alessandro Tarozzi. “Prices and Poverty in India.” mimeo, 2000.

Debroy B. and A. T. Santhanam. “Matching Trade Codes with Industrial Codes.” Foreign
    Trade Bulletin, 1993, 24(1).

Dollar, David and Aart Kraay. “Growth is Good for the Poor.” Journal of Economic Growth,
    2002, 7(3), pp. 195-225.

Edwards, Sebastian. “Openness, Productivity and Growth. What Do We Really Know?”
    Economic Journal, 1998, 108(447), pp. 383-398.

Feenstra Robert and Gordon Hanson. “Foreign Direct Investment and Relative Wages: Evi-
    dence from Mexico’s Maquiladoras.” Journal of International Economics, 1997, 42(2), pp.
    371-393.

Feliciano, Zadia. “Workers and Trade Liberalization: The Impact of Trade Reforms in Mexico
    on Wages and Employment.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 2001, 55(1), pp.
    95-115.

Gang, Ira and Mihir Pandey. “Trade Protection in India: Economics vs. Politics?” University
    of Maryland Working Paper No. 27, December 1996.

Goldberg, Pinelopi and Nina Pavcnik. “Trade Protection and Wages: Evidence from the
    Colombian Trade Reforms.” NBER Working Paper No. 8575, November 2001.

Goldberg, Pinelopi and Nina Pavcnik. "Trade, Inequality, and Poverty: What Do We Know?
    Evidence from Recent Trade Liberalization Episodes in Developing Countries.” NBER
    Working Paper No. 10593, June 2004.

Goldberg, Pinelopi and Nina Pavcnik. “The Eﬀects of the Colombian Trade Liberalization on
    Urban Poverty.” October 2004, this volume.

                                           29
Goldar, Bishwanath. “Trade Liberalization and Manufacturing Employment.” International
    Labor Organization Employment Paper 2002/34, 2002.

Goyal, S.K. “Political Economy of India’s Economic Reforms.” Institute for Studies in Industrial
    Development (ISID) Working Paper, October 1996.

Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman. Interest Group and Trade Policy, Princeton University
    Press, 2002.

Hanson, Gordon and Ann Harrison. “Trade and wage inequality in Mexico.” Industrial and
    Labor Relations Review, 1999, 52(2), pp. 271—288.

Harrison, Ann and Gordon Hanson. “Who Gains From Trade Reform? Some Remaining
    Puzzles.” Journal of Development Economics, 1999, 59(1), pp. 125-154.

Hasan, Rana. “The Impact of Imported and Domestic Technologies on the Productivity of
    Firms: Panel Data Evidence From Indian Manufacturing Firms.” Journal of Development
    Economics, 2002, 69(1), pp. 23-49.

Hasan, Rana, Devashish Mitra and K. V. Ramaswamy. “Trade Reforms, Labor Regulations
    and Labor Demand Elasticities: Evidence from India.” NBER Working Paper No. 9879,
    August 2003.

Kremer, Michael and Eric Maskin. “Globalization and Inequality.” mimeo, 2003.

Lundberg, Mattias and Lyn Squire. “The simultaneous Evolution of Growth and Inequality.”
    Economic Journal, 2003, 113(487), pp. 326-344.

Milanovic, Branko. “Can We Discern the Eﬀect of Globalization on Income Distribution?
    Evidence from Household Budget Surveys.” World Bank Research Paper 2876, 2002.

Porto, Guido. “Trade Reforms, Market Access and Poverty in Argentina.” World Bank mimeo,
    2004.

Rama, Martin. “Globalization and the Labor Market.” World Bank Research Observer, 2003,
    18(2), pp. 159-186.


                                              30
Revenga, Ana. “Employment and Wage Eﬀects of Trade Liberalization: The Case of Mexican
    Manufacturing.” Journal of Labor Economics, 1996, 15(3), pp. 20-43.

Sachs, Jeﬀrey, Nirupam Bajpai and Ananthi Ramiath. “Understanding Regional Economic
    Growth in India.” CID Working Paper No. 88, March 2002.

Stiglitz, Joseph. “Factor Price Equalization in a Dynamic Economy.” Journal of Political
    Economy, 1970, 78(3), pp. 456-488.

Topalova, Petia. (a) “The Eﬀect of Trade Liberalization on Productivity: The Case of India.”
    IMF Working Paper No. 04/28, February 2004.

Topalova, Petia. (b) “Factor Immobility and Regional Eﬀects of Trade Liberalization: Evidence
    from India.” MIT mimeo, October 2004.

Varshney, Ashutosh. “Mass Politics or Elite Politics? India’s Economic Reforms in Compar-
    ative Perspective.” in India in the Era of Economic Reforms eds. J. Sachs, A. Varshney
    and N. Bajpai, 1999.

Verhoogen, Eric. “Trade, Quality Upgrading and Wage Inequality in the Mexican Manufac-
    turing Sector: Theory and Evidence from an Exchange-Rate Shock.” Center for Labor
    Economics, UC Berkeley, Working Paper No. 67, January 2004.




                                            31
                               Table 1. Tariff Declines and Pre-Reform Industrial Characteristics


Dep. Var: Tariff1987-Tariff1997              (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)          (8)

                                                     Panel A. Evidence from the ASI
Log Real Wage                             0.037
                                        (0.062)
Share of Non-production Workers                          0.312
                                                       (0.399)
Capital Labor ratio                                                    0.013
                                                                     (0.025)
Log Output                                                                           0.019
                                                                                   (0.020)
Factory size                                                                                     0.000
                                                                                               (0.000)
Log Employment                                                                                              -0.002
                                                                                                           (0.016)
Growth Log Output 82-87                                                                                                  -0.038
                                                                                                                        (0.061)
Growth Log Employment 82-87                                                                                                           0.024
                                                                                                                                    (0.083)
R2                                        0.093          0.096         0.091         0.096       0.094       0.090       0.092        0.091
Obs                                         135            135           135           135         134         135         135          135


                                        Panel B. Evidence from the NSS, Rural and Urban Pooled
Log Per Capita Expenditure               -0.040
                                        (0.051)
Log Wage                                               -0.002
                                                      (0.033)
Poverty Rate                                                         0.019
                                                                   (0.113)
Poverty Depth                                                                    -0.205
                                                                                (0.339)
R2                                         0.06          0.07         0.06         0.06
Obs                                         315           274          315          315

Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significance at the 10 percent level of confidence is represented by a *, at the 5 percent
level by **, and at the 1 percent level by ***. All regressions include indicators for industry use type: i.e. Capital goods, Consumer
Durables, Consumer Non Durables, and Intermediate. In Panel A, regressions are weighted by the square root of the number of factories.
Data are from the 1987 ASI and cover mining and manufacturing industries. In Panel B, regressions are weighted by the square root of
the number of workers in each industry in the 1987 NSS. Urban and Rural sample are pooled and an indicator for urban is included.
Separate regressions for the urban and rural sample exhibit similar patterns. Note that cereals and oilseeds cultivation has been treated as
a non-traded industry, because imports of these agricultural products were canalized (restricted only to state trading monopolies) until
2000.
           Table 2. First Stage. Relationship Between Scaled and Non-Scaled Tariffs

DepVar: Tariff                   I. RURAL                                    II. URBAN
                           (1)                 (2)                     (3)                (4)

TrTariff                0.356 ***           0.633 ***               0.407 ***          0.687 ***
                      (0.090)             (0.089)                 (0.091)            (0.150)
TrTariff*Post                               0.288 ***                                  0.214 *
                                          (0.051)                                    (0.118)

R2                       0.84                0.86                    0.91                0.91
Obs                       728                 728                     724                 724

Note: All regressions include year and district dummies. Standard errors (in parentheses) are
corrected for clustering at the state year level. Regressions are weighted by the square root of
the number of people in a district. Significance at the 10 percent level of confidence is
represented by a *, at the 5 percent level by **, and at the 1 percent level by ***.
                                           Table3. Effect of Trade Liberalization on Poverty and Inequality in Indian Districts


                                                       I. RURAL                                                                        II. URBAN

                                                                    IV-        IV-TrTariff,                                                        IV-       IV-TrTariff,
                         Tariff             TrTariff            TrTariff       Init TrTariff              Tariff            TrTariff           TrTariff      Init TrTariff
                           (1)                  (2)                 (3)                 (4)                 (5)                 (6)                (7)                (8)

                                                                Panel A. Dependent variable: Poverty Rate
Tariff Measure          -0.287 **            -0.297 ***          -0.834 ***       -0.687 ***          -0.215                  -0.065             -0.156            -0.403
                       (0.118)              (0.084)             (0.250)          (0.225)             (0.190)                 (0.156)            (0.353)           (0.275)

Obs                        725                  725                 725                725                  703                 703                703                703

                                                                Panel B. Dependent variable: Poverty Gap
Tariff Measure          -0.129 ***           -0.114 ***          -0.319 ***       -0.206 ***          -0.084                  -0.032             -0.076            -0.131
                       (0.038)              (0.021)             (0.073)          (0.075)             (0.052)                 (0.046)            (0.101)           (0.087)

Obs                        725                  725                 725                725                  703                 703                703                703

                                                           Panel C. Dependent variable: StdLog Consumption
Tariff Measure          -0.086               -0.094             -0.265           -0.161              0.092                     0.108              0.257             0.213
                       (0.154)              (0.082)            (0.228)          (0.183)            (0.094)                   (0.115)            (0.295)           (0.250)

Obs                        725                  725                 725                725                  703                 703                703                703

                                                       Panel D. Dependent variable: Log Deviation of Consumption
Tariff Measure          -0.016               -0.020              -0.057           -0.020               0.034                   0.090              0.215             0.172
                       (0.066)              (0.042)             (0.115)          (0.071)             (0.062)                 (0.066)            (0.174)           (0.144)

Obs                        725                  725                 725                725                  703                 703                703                703




Note: All regressions include year and district dummies. Standard errors (in parentheses) are corrected for clustering at the state year level. Regressions are weighted
by the square root of the number of people in a district. Significance at the 10 percent level of confidence is represented by a *, at the 5 percent level by **, and at the 1
percent level by ***.
           Table 4. Pre-Reform Test. Correlation Between Pre-Reform Trends in Outcomes and Tariff Change


                                          I. RURAL                                             II. URBAN

                                                 IV-     IV-TrTariff,                                  IV-      IV-TrTariff,
                      OLS           RF       TrTariff    Init TrTariff         OLS           RF    TrTariff     Init TrTariff
                       (1)          (2)          (3)              (4)           (5)          (6)       (7)               (8)

                                          Panel A. Dependent variable: Poverty Rate
Tariff Change        0.065                     0.842           0.746        -0.092                    0.274            0.375
                   (0.571)                   (0.851)         (0.762)       (0.373)                  (0.563)          (0.576)
TrTariff Change                  0.333                                                    0.148
                               (0.326)                                                  (0.289)

R2                   0.001       0.033                                        0.002       0.004
Obs                     62          62            62               62            60          60          60               60


                                          Panel B. Dependent variable: Poverty Gap
Tariff Change        0.007                     0.114           0.091       -0.079                    -0.194           -0.170
                   (0.197)                   (0.273)         (0.240)      (0.117)                   (0.238)          (0.211)
TrTariff Change                  0.045                                                   -0.105
                               (0.108)                                                  (0.128)

R2                   0.000       0.003                                        0.013       0.016
Obs                     62          62            62               62            60          60          60               60


                                    Panel C. Dependent variable: StdLog Consumption
Tariff Change        0.178                   0.008          -0.119       -0.055                       0.180            0.025
                   (0.131)                 (0.287)         (0.260)      (0.170)                     (0.320)          (0.260)
TrTariff Change                  0.003                                              0.097
                               (0.114)                                            (0.160)

R2                   0.027       0.000         0.002                          0.002       0.004
Obs                     62          62            62               62            60          60          60               60


                               Panel D. Dependent variable: Log Deviation of Consumption
Tariff Change        0.074                  -0.023          -0.094       -0.102                       0.118            0.041
                   (0.071)                 (0.141)         (0.119)      (0.107)                     (0.213)          (0.169)
TrTariff Change                 -0.009                                               0.064
                               (0.055)                                             (0.108)

R2                   0.011       0.000                                        0.013       0.004
Obs                     62          62            62               62            60          60          60               60

Note: Standard errors (in parentheses) are corrected for clustering at the state level. Regressions are weighted by the
square root of the number of people in the region. Dependent variables are Outcome1983 minus Outcome1987.
Significance at the 10 percent level of confidence is represented by a *, at the 5 percent level by **, and at the 1 percent
level by ***.
   Table 5. Effect of Trade Liberalization on Poverty and Inequality in Rural India Controlling for Initial Characteristics and Other Reforms

                                        I. IV-TrTariff                                               II. IV-TrTariff, Init TrTariff
                        (1)            (2)           (3)          (4)                     (5)              (6)             (7)            (8)

                                   Panel A. Dependent variable: Poverty Rate. District Level (Obs=725)
Tariff Measure      -0.607 *** -0.434 **      -0.441       -0.444 **              -0.418 ***     -0.426 ***           -0.522 **        -0.456 ***
                   (0.232)     (0.217)       (0.281)      (0.208)                (0.141)        (0.163)              (0.206)          (0.134)
Logmean                          0.469 *** 0.340 ***                                              0.469 ***            0.338 ***
                               (0.035)       (0.044)                                            (0.034)              (0.041)
Trend                                         -0.322 ***                                                              -0.322 ***
                                             (0.067)                                                                 (0.067)
Lagged 43                                                  -0.419 ***                                                                  -0.417 ***
                                                          (0.123)                                                                     (0.120)

                                   Panel B. Dependent variable: Poverty Gap. District Level (Obs=725)
Tariff Measure      -0.235 *** -0.175 *** -0.196 **        -0.118 *              -0.121 **       -0.124 **            -0.177 **        -0.118 ***
                   (0.075)     (0.066)       (0.090)      (0.069)               (0.062)         (0.063)              (0.080)          (0.041)
Logmean                          0.161 *** 0.126 ***                                              0.162 ***            0.126 ***
                               (0.015)       (0.013)                                            (0.015)              (0.013)
Trend                                         -0.319 ***                                                              -0.318 ***
                                             (0.064)                                                                 (0.064)
Lagged 43                                                  -0.576 ***                                                                  -0.576 ***
                                                          (0.144)                                                                     (0.131)

                                  Panel C. Dependent variable: StdLog Consumption. District Level (Obs=725)
Tariff Measure      -0.192         -0.244       -0.258        -0.057               -0.083          -0.078             -0.175            0.006
                   (0.258)        (0.260)      (0.249)       (0.232)              (0.197)         (0.203)            (0.187)          (0.202)
Logmean                            -0.140 *** -0.047                                               -0.136 ***         -0.045
                                  (0.035)      (0.040)                                            (0.035)            (0.041)
Trend                                           -0.635 ***                                                            -0.635 ***
                                               (0.063)                                                               (0.063)
Lagged 43                                                     -0.382                                                                   -0.410
                                                             (0.278)                                                                  (0.261)

                              Panel D. Dependent variable: Log Deviation of Consumption. District Level (Obs=725)
Tariff Measure      -0.009          -0.037       -0.095        0.044               -0.005           -0.004        -0.079                0.020
                   (0.131)         (0.120)     (0.098)       (0.108)              (0.081)          (0.082)      (0.074)               (0.097)
Logmean                             -0.078 *** -0.031 *                                             -0.077 ***    -0.030
                                   (0.018)     (0.018)                                             (0.019)      (0.019)
Trend                                            -0.584 ***                                                       -0.584 ***
                                               (0.100)                                                          (0.100)
Lagged 43                                                     -0.570 *                                                                 -0.547 *
                                                             (0.309)                                                                  (0.309)

Note: All regressions include year, district dummies, state labor laws-year dummies and pre-reform literacy, share of SC/ST population and
industrial structure interacted with a post dummy. Regressions are weighted by the square root of the number of people in a district/region. The
data are from the 43rd and 55th rounds of the NSS. Standard errors (in parentheses) are corrected for clustering at the state year level.
Significance at the 10 percent level of confidence is represented by a *, at the 5 percent level by **, and at the 1 percent level by ***. In
columns (1)-(4), the district tariff is instrumented by the non-scaled tariff. In columns (5)-(8), the district tariff is instrumented by the non-
scaled tariff and the interaction of pre-reform non-scaled tariff and a post dummy. In column (4) and (8) the level of the lagged dependent
variable is instrumented with the value of the dependent variables in 1983.
          Table 6. Effect of Trade Liberalization on Poverty and Inequality in Rural India Controlling for Initial Characteristics and Other Reforms


                                                    I. IV-TrTariff                                                  II. IV-TrTariff, Init TrTariff
                                     (1)           (2)           (3)             (4)                     (5)              (6)             (7)            (8)

                                           Panel A. Dependent variable: Poverty Rate. District Level (Obs=725)
Tariff Measure                   -0.573 *** -0.446 **      -0.428        -0.447 **               -0.413 ***    -0.402 ***             -0.495 **       -0.445 ***
                                (0.222)      (0.201)      (0.274)       (0.202)                 (0.149)       (0.152)                (0.203)         (0.129)
Logmean                                        0.485 ***    0.353 ***                                           0.486 ***              0.350 ***
                                             (0.034)      (0.043)                                             (0.033)                (0.040)
Trend                                                      -0.310 ***                                                                 -0.310 ***
                                                          (0.068)                                                                    (0.068)
Lagged 43                                                                -0.441 ***                                                                   -0.441 ***
                                                                        (0.135)                                                                      (0.133)
FDI opened industries            -0.051       -0.215 *** -0.134 *        -0.152 ***              -0.055        -0.216 ***             -0.132 *        -0.152 ***
                                (0.059)      (0.057)      (0.073)       (0.055)                 (0.059)       (0.054)                (0.069)         (0.052)
License industries                0.008        0.050        0.069         0.020                   0.012         0.051                  0.067           0.021
                                (0.059)      (0.077)      (0.074)       (0.074)                 (0.059)       (0.075)                (0.074)         (0.073)
Bank branches per capita           3802 ***     1013         1285          1293                    3787 ***      1001                   1304            1291
                                  (789)        (766)        (861)        (1125)                   (771)         (770)                  (894)          (1117)


                                           Panel B. Dependent variable: Poverty Gap. District Level (Obs=725)
Tariff Measure                   -0.224 *** -0.181 *** -0.190 **         -0.118                 -0.122 *      -0.117 *                -0.169 **       -0.115 ***
                                (0.073)      (0.069)     (0.093)        (0.073)                (0.066)       (0.063)                 (0.082)         (0.042)
Logmean                                        0.166 ***   0.128 ***                                           0.168 ***               0.129 ***
                                             (0.017)     (0.015)                                             (0.017)                 (0.014)
Trend                                                     -0.313 ***                                                                  -0.312 ***
                                                         (0.063)                                                                     (0.063)
Lagged 43                                                                -0.604 ***                                                                   -0.607 ***
                                                                        (0.160)                                                                      (0.147)
FDI opened industries            -0.008       -0.064 *** -0.028          -0.039 **              -0.011        -0.066 ***              -0.028          -0.040 ***
                                (0.018)      (0.020)     (0.024)        (0.016)                (0.019)       (0.021)                 (0.024)         (0.015)
License industries               -0.002        0.012       0.021          0.005                  0.000         0.014                   0.022           0.005
                                (0.017)      (0.021)     (0.021)        (0.019)                (0.017)       (0.021)                 (0.022)         (0.019)
Bank branches per capita          1213 ***       260         330            115                   1204 ***       242                     324             110
                                  (232)        (224)       (267)          (366)                  (224)         (219)                   (268)           (342)


                                   Panel C. Dependent variable: Log Deviation of Consumption. District Level (Obs=725)
Tariff Measure                   -0.175       -0.213        -0.244       -0.066                -0.061           -0.063                -0.162           0.004
                                (0.255)      (0.260)       (0.251)      (0.228)               (0.201)          (0.208)               (0.193)         (0.204)
Logmean                                       -0.147 *** -0.050                                                 -0.142 ***            -0.048
                                             (0.036)       (0.038)                                             (0.036)               (0.039)
Trend                                                       -0.622 ***                                                                -0.622 ***
                                                           (0.069)                                                                   (0.068)
Lagged 43                                                                -0.316                                                                       -0.356
                                                                        (0.324)                                                                      (0.295)
FDI opened industries            -0.089 *     -0.040        -0.054       -0.054                -0.092 *         -0.045                -0.057          -0.051
                                (0.049)      (0.049)       (0.052)      (0.053)               (0.049)          (0.050)               (0.051)         (0.052)
License industries                0.067        0.054         0.033        0.037                 0.070            0.059                 0.035           0.035
                                (0.042)      (0.045)       (0.051)      (0.052)               (0.044)          (0.046)               (0.052)         (0.051)
Bank branches per capita           1119         1964 *        1249         1090                  1109             1922 *                1226            1081
                                 (1057)       (1091)         (964)       (1032)                (1075)           (1109)                 (962)          (1042)


                                   Panel D. Dependent variable: Log Deviation of Consumption. District Level (Obs=725)
Tariff Measure                   -0.002       -0.022       -0.089         0.040                 0.008            0.007                -0.070           0.021
                                (0.119)      (0.116)      (0.097)       (0.104)               (0.081)          (0.083)               (0.076)         (0.095)
Logmean                                       -0.078 *** -0.029 *                                               -0.077 ***            -0.028 *
                                             (0.018)      (0.017)                                              (0.018)               (0.017)
Trend                                                      -0.579 ***                                                                 -0.579 ***
                                                          (0.102)                                                                    (0.102)
Lagged 43                                                                -0.492                                                                       -0.463
                                                                        (0.404)                                                                      (0.388)
FDI opened industries            -0.055 **    -0.029       -0.039        -0.023                -0.056 **        -0.030                -0.039          -0.025
                                (0.023)      (0.022)      (0.026)       (0.033)               (0.023)          (0.023)               (0.026)         (0.032)
License industries                0.044 **     0.037 **     0.024         0.013                 0.044 **         0.038 **              0.025           0.015
                                (0.017)      (0.018)      (0.023)       (0.027)               (0.018)          (0.019)               (0.024)         (0.026)
Bank branches per capita            258          704          423           251                   257              696                   418             253
                                  (510)        (518)        (436)         (458)                 (509)            (519)                 (436)           (455)


Note: All regressions include year, district dummies, state labor laws-year dummies and pre-reform literacy, share of SC/ST population and industrial
structure interacted with a post dummy. Regressions are weighted by the square root of the number of people in a district/region. The data are from the 43rd
and 55th rounds of the NSS. Standard errors (in parentheses) are corrected for clustering at the state year level. Significance at the 10 percent level of
confidence is represented by a *, at the 5 percent level by **, and at the 1 percent level by ***. In columns (1)-(4), the district tariff is instrumented by the
non-scaled tariff. In columns (5)-(8), the district tariff is instrumented by the non-scaled tariff and the interaction of pre-reform non-scaled tariff and a post
dummy. In column (4) and (8) the level of the lagged dependent variable is instrumented with the value of the dependent variables in 1983.
                                                                                       Table 7. Migration Patterns

                                                                                           All                               Male                    Female
                                                                               1983        1987        1999          1983    1987    1999    1983     1987    1999
                                                                                               Panel A. Rural
Place of Birth Different than Place of Residence                               0.209       0.232        0.244        0.072   0.075   0.069   0.351   0.399    0.427

Moved within the past 10 years                                                 0.094       0.102       0.097         0.047   0.048   0.040   0.144   0.160    0.156

Moved within the past 10 years, excluding migration within the same
                                                                               0.029       0.032       0.036         0.020   0.021   0.021   0.039   0.044    0.051
district and within the same sector (I.e. rural to rural and urban to urban)

Moved within the past 10 years from urban to rural                             0.011       0.013       0.013         0.010   0.011   0.011   0.012   0.015    0.016
Moved within the past 10 years because of employment, excluding
                                                                               0.005       0.005       0.004         0.008   0.009   0.007   0.002   0.002    0.001
migration within the same district and within the same sector

                                                                                              Panel B. Urban
Place of Birth Different than Place of Residence                               0.316       0.329       0.333         0.270   0.268   0.256   0.366   0.396    0.418
Moved within the past 10 years                                                 0.182       0.185       0.174         0.168   0.164   0.151   0.198   0.209    0.199

Moved within the past 10 years, excluding migration within the same
                                                                               0.131       0.132       0.131         0.125   0.121   0.118   0.138   0.144    0.146
district and within the same sector (I.e. rural to rural and urban to urban)

Moved within the past 10 years from rural to urban                             0.080       0.080       0.076         0.073   0.070   0.065   0.087   0.091    0.089
Moved within the past 10 years because of employment, excluding
                                                                               0.044       0.042       0.033         0.074   0.071   0.058   0.010   0.011    0.006
migration within the same district and within the same sector
                                                                                      Fig. 1 Evolution of Tariffs in India



                                       Panel A: Average Nominal Tariffs                                                      Panel B: Standard Deviation of Nominal Tariffs

                                                                                                             60
              120


                                                                                                             50
              100



               80                                                                                            40



               60                                                                                            30



               40                                                                                            20



               20                                                                                            10



                0                                                                                             0

                   1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001                  1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001



                              Tariffs by Broad Industrial Category
                                                                                                                               Panel D: Tariffs by Industrial Use Based
       120                                                                                                                                     Category
       100
          80                                                                                                 120
                                                                                                                                                                             Basic
          60                                                                                                 100

          40                                                                                                   80                                                            Capital
          20                                                                                                   60
                                                                                                                                                                             Consumer
               0                                                                                               40                                                            Durables
                                                                                                                                                                             Consumer Non
                                                                                                               20
                 87
                 88
                 89
                 90
                 91
                 92
                 93
                 94
                 95
                 96
                 97
                 98
                 99
                 00
                 01




                                                                                                                                                                             Durables
              19
              19
              19
              19
              19
              19
              19
              19
              19
              19
              19
              19
              19
              20
              20




                                                                                                                  0                                                          Intermediate
                                   Cereals & Oilseeds                    Agriculture
                                                                                                                87

                                                                                                                89

                                                                                                                91

                                                                                                                93

                                                                                                                95

                                                                                                                97

                                                                                                                99

                                                                                                                01
                                   Mining & Mfg-K                        Mining & Mfg-C
                                                                                                              19

                                                                                                              19

                                                                                                              19

                                                                                                              19

                                                                                                              19

                                                                                                              19

                                                                                                              19

                                                                                                              20
                          Share of Free HS Lines by Broad Industrial                                                     Panel F: Share of Free HS Lines by Industrial
                                          Category                                                                                   Use Based Category

                                                                                                             1.2
        1.2
                                                                                                                                                                         Basic
          1                                                                                                    1
        0.8                                                                                                                                                              Capital
                                                                                                             0.8
        0.6
        0.4                                                                                                  0.6                                                         Consumer Durables
        0.2
                                                                                                             0.4
          0                                                                                                                                                              Consumer Non
                           1989                1996                  1998               2001                 0.2                                                         Durables
                                                                                                                                                                         Intermediate
                                   Cereals & Oilseeds              Agriculture                                 0
                                                                                                                         1989       1996    1998         2001
                                   Mining & Mfg-K                  Mining & Mfg-C


                           Correlation of Industry Tariffs in 1997 and 1987                                                        Tariff Decline and Industry Tariffs in 1987
     200




                                                                                                                  200
                                                                                                                  150
     150




                                                                                                                   100
1997 tariff




                                                                                                             change
   100




                                                                                                                  50
     50




                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                  -50
     0




                0                 50           100                 150          200            250                       0            50           100                 150           200     250
                                                     1987 tariff                                                                                         1987 tariff
                                                                                  Fig. 2 Evolution of India's Trade

800
                                                Export, Import, and Output Indices
                                                         (1978/79 = 100)
700

600

500

400

300

200

100

          0
                           1980/81             1982/83        1984/85       1986/87     1988/89      1990/91                                         1992/93      1994/95      1996/97           1998/99   2000/01

                                                                              Import volume           Export volume                                                 Real GDP




25
                                                   Merchandise Trade
                                                  (In percent of GDP)
20


15


10


  5


  0
                        1980/81                      1983/84                1986/87             1989/90                                              1992/93            1995/96                  1998/99           2001/02

                                                                                      Exports         Imports                                             Total trade




                                                                                      Fig. 3 Pattern of Indian Trade

                                                       XM Shares on Skilled/Unskilled Ratio 90
 cumshareexportsSU90/cumshareimportsSU90




                                                                                                           cumshareexportsSU90/cumshareimportsSU90




                                                                     1987                                                                                                            1991
                                   1




                                                                                                                                             1
                            .8




                                                                                                                                      .8
                       .6




                                                                                                                                 .6
                 .4




                                                                                                                           .4
           .2




                                                                                                                     .2
     0




                                                                                                               0




                                           0             .5                       1                  1.5                                             0                   .5                        1                  1.5
                                                                skill_unskill90                                                                                                skill_unskill90
                                               cumshareexportsSU90           cumshareimportsSU90                                                               cumshareexportsSU90           cumshareimportsSU90
 cumshareexportsSU90/cumshareimportsSU90




                                                                                                           cumshareexportsSU90/cumshareimportsSU90




                                                                     1994                                                                                                            1997
                                   1




                                                                                                                                             1
                            .8




                                                                                                                                      .8
                       .6




                                                                                                                                 .6
                 .4




                                                                                                                           .4
           .2




                                                                                                                     .2
     0




                                                                                                               0




                                           0             .5                       1                  1.5                                             0                   .5                        1                  1.5
                                                                skill_unskill90                                                                                                skill_unskill90
                                               cumshareexportsSU90           cumshareimportsSU90                                                               cumshareexportsSU90           cumshareimportsSU90
                                                  Fig. 4 Direction of Tariff Changes

                                100
                                 90
                                 80
                                 70
                                 60
                                 50
                                 40
                                 30
                                 20
                                 10
                                  0
                                      1988      1990    1992      1994       1996      1998       2000

                                       % Items with tariff reductions    % Items with tariff increases



                                      Fig. 5 Trends in Rural and Urban Poverty and Inequality


             Evolution of the Head Count Ratio                                               Evolution of the Poverty Gap

0.500                                                                     0.140
0.450
                                                                          0.120
0.400
0.350                                                                     0.100
0.300                                                                     0.080
0.250
0.200                                                                     0.060
0.150                                                                     0.040
0.100
0.050                                                                     0.020
0.000                                                                     0.000
            1983        1988            1993           1999                           1983           1988           1993     1999

                           Rural        Urban                                                             Rural     Urban



        Evolution of the Log Deviation of Consumption                               Evolution of the Std Dev of Log Consumption

0.220                                                                      0.650

0.200                                                                      0.600
0.180
                                                                           0.550
0.160
                                                                           0.500
0.140

0.120                                                                      0.450

0.100                                                                      0.400
            1983         1988           1993            1999                           1983              1988        1993     1999

                            Rural       Urban                                                               Rural    Urban
                                                     Table A1. Summary Statistics

RURAL 38TH ROUND 1983                                                    URBAN 38TH ROUND 1983
Variable                            Obs   Mean     Std. Dev.             Variable                            Obs   Mean     Std. Dev.
Poverty Rate                        379   0.429      0.173               Poverty Rate                        372   0.439      0.147
Poverty Gap                         379   0.117      0.067               Poverty Gap                         372   0.122      0.051
Std Dev of Log Consumption          379   0.497      0.061               Std Dev of Log Consumption          372   0.540      0.065
Logarithmic Deviation               379   0.137      0.037               Logarithmic Deviation               372   0.163      0.042
Tariff                                      -          -                 Tariff                                      -          -
TrTariff                                    -          -                 TrTariff                                    -          -
Agricultral Tariff                          -          -                 Agricultral Tariff                          -          -
Mining and Manufacturing Tariff             -          -                 Mining and Manufacturing Tariff             -          -

RURAL 43rd ROUND 1987                                                    URBAN 43rd ROUND 1987
Variable                            Obs   Mean     Std. Dev.             Variable                            Obs   Mean     Std. Dev.
Poverty Rate                        379    0.368     0.196               Poverty Rate                        366    0.248     0.168
Poverty Gap                         379    0.088     0.064               Poverty Gap                         366    0.057     0.050
Std Dev of Log Consumption          379    0.456     0.085               Std Dev of Log Consumption          366    0.501     0.113
Logarithmic Deviation               379    0.120     0.046               Logarithmic Deviation               366    0.149     0.076
Poverty Gap Change in the 1980s     379   -0.029     0.062               Poverty Gap Change in the 1980s     364   -0.064     0.049
Poverty Rate Change in the 1980s    379   -0.061     0.164               Poverty Rate Change in the 1980s    364   -0.191     0.145
Std Dev Change in the 1980s         379   -0.040     0.081               Std Dev Change in the 1980s         364   -0.038     0.115
Log Deviation Change in the 1980s   379   -0.017     0.048               Log Deviation Change in the 1980s   364   -0.013     0.080
Tariff                              364    0.081     0.080               Tariff                              362    0.172     0.085
TrTariff                            364    0.883     0.096               TrTariff                            362    0.891     0.083
Agricultral Tariff                  364    0.822     0.142               Agricultral Tariff                  362    0.782     0.090
Mining and Manufacturing Tariff     364    0.914     0.043               Mining and Manufacturing Tariff     362    0.923     0.576
Log Mean Per Capita Expenditure     379    5.065     0.252               Log Mean Per Capita Expenditure     366    5.389     0.274
Percent Literate                    364    0.368     0.137               Percent Literate                    362    0.591     0.094
Percent SC/ST                       364    0.293     0.161               Percent SC/ST                       362    0.154     0.064
Percent Farmers                     364    0.816     0.103               Percent Farmers                     362    0.194     0.101
Percent Manufacturing               364    0.056     0.045               Percent Manufacturing               362    0.191     0.088
Percent Mining                      364    0.005     0.014               Percent Mining                      362    0.013     0.041
Percent Service                     364    0.065     0.037               Percent Service                     362    0.264     0.073
Percent Trade                       364    0.032     0.020               Percent Trade                       362    0.217     0.045
Percent Transport                   364    0.013     0.011               Percent Transport                   362    0.073     0.025

RURAL 50th ROUND 1993                                                    URBAN 50th ROUND 1993
Variable                            Obs   Mean     Std. Dev.             Variable                            Obs   Mean     Std. Dev.
Poverty Rate                        366   0.313      0.179               Poverty Rate                        354   0.191      0.098
Poverty Gap                         366   0.067      0.052               Poverty Gap                         354   0.039      0.027
Std Dev of Log Consumption          366   0.428      0.088               Std Dev of Log Consumption          368   0.539      0.056
Logarithmic Deviation               366   0.105      0.048               Logarithmic Deviation               368   0.166      0.038
Tariff                              364   0.072      0.074               Tariff                              362   0.156      0.079
TrTariff                            364   0.778      0.095               TrTariff                            362   0.812      0.082
Agricultral Tariff                  364   0.632      0.130               Agricultral Tariff                  362   0.635      0.089
Mining and Manufacturing Tariff     364   0.825      0.054               Mining and Manufacturing Tariff     362   0.837      0.063

RURAL 55th ROUND 1999                                                    URBAN 55th ROUND 1999
Variable                            Obs   Mean     Std. Dev.             Variable                            Obs   Mean     Std. Dev.
Poverty Rate                        364   0.241      0.138               Poverty Rate                        360   0.145      0.108
Poverty Gap                         364   0.048      0.035               Poverty Gap                         360   0.029      0.027
Std Dev of Log Consumption          364   0.463      0.106               Std Dev of Log Consumption          360   0.529      0.091
Logarithmic Deviation               364   0.116      0.042               Logarithmic Deviation               360   0.157      0.054
Tariff                              364   0.026      0.022               Tariff                              362   0.060      0.030
TrTariff                            364   0.306      0.060               TrTariff                            362   0.317      0.044
Agricultral Tariff                  364   0.236      0.076               Agricultral Tariff                  362   0.212      0.052
Mining and Manufacturing Tariff     364   0.341      0.022               Mining and Manufacturing Tariff     362   0.336      0.030
                       Table A2. Sectoral Tariffs and Poverty and Inequality in Rural and Urban India


                                                       I. RURAL                                          II. URBAN
                                               (1)           (2)          (3)                    (4)           (5)       (6)
                                         Panel A. Dependent Variable: Poverty Rate
Agricultural Tariff                        -0.219 ***              -0.213 ***                -0.242 **                -0.240 **
                                          (0.071)                 (0.070)                   (0.097)                  (0.102)
Mining and Manufacturing Tariff                          0.277      0.221                                  -0.154     -0.148
                                                       (0.318)    (0.297)                                 (0.163)    (0.154)


Obs                                            725           725         725                    703          703        703

                                          Panel B. Dependent variable: Poverty Gap
Agricultural Tariff                         -0.081 ***              -0.080 ***               -0.066 **                -0.065 **
                                           (0.021)                 (0.020)                  (0.027)                  (0.029)
Mining and Manufacturing Tariff                           0.062      0.041                                 -0.072     -0.071
                                                        (0.123)    (0.113)                                (0.049)    (0.047)


Obs                                            725           725         725                    703          703        703

                                     Panel C. Dependent variable: StdLog Consumption
Agricultural Tariff                        -0.110 *                 -0.110 *           0.060                           0.060
                                          (0.064)                  (0.062)           (0.091)                         (0.092)
Mining and Manufacturing Tariff                         0.030        0.002                                  0.000     -0.001
                                                      (0.220)      (0.208)                                (0.131)    (0.129)


Obs                                            725           725         725                    703          703        703

                             Panel D. Dependent variable: Log Deviation of Consumption
Agricultural Tariff                     -0.037                  -0.035                0.053                            0.053
                                       (0.025)                 (0.025)              (0.066)                          (0.066)
Mining and Manufacturing Tariff                      0.073       0.064                                      0.024      0.022
                                                   (0.109)     (0.111)                                    (0.076)    (0.074)


Obs                                            725           725         725                    703          703        703


Note: All regressions include year and district dummies. Standard errors (in parentheses) are corrected for clustering at the
state year level. Regressions are weighted by the square root of the number of people in a district. Significance at the 10
percent level of confidence is represented by a *, at the 5 percent level by **, and at the 1 percent level by ***.
                                                                Table A3. Imports, Export and Poverty in Rural India

DepVar: Poverty Rate                                 (1)               (2)             (3)              (4)                  (5)            (6)             (7)                (8)
Imports of All Traded Industries                  0.010                                                                   0.009 *
                                                (0.006)                                                                 (0.005)
Imports of Agriculture                                              0.009                             0.007                               0.017 *                           0.016 *
                                                                  (0.012)                           (0.013)                             (0.009)                           (0.009)
Imports of Mining/Manufacture                                                        0.008 ***        0.009 ***                                          0.006              0.006
                                                                                   (0.003)          (0.003)                                            (0.004)            (0.004)
Exports of All Traded Industries                 -0.002 *                                                                -0.002
                                                (0.001)                                                                 (0.001)
Exports of Agriculture                                            -0.0003                            -0.001                              -0.001                            -0.001
                                                                 (0.0018)                           (0.002)                             (0.001)                           (0.001)
Exports of Mining/Manufacture                                                       -0.002 **        -0.002 **                                          -0.002 *           -0.001 *
                                                                                   (0.001)          (0.001)                                            (0.001)            (0.001)
FDI opened industries                            -0.215 ***        -0.230 ***       -0.247 ***       -0.251 ***          -0.164 ***      -0.169 ***     -0.187 ***         -0.188 ***
                                                (0.060)           (0.061)          (0.055)          (0.057)             (0.056)         (0.054)        (0.051)            (0.048)
License industries                                0.048             0.064            0.056            0.055               0.020           0.034          0.031              0.029
                                                (0.070)           (0.076)          (0.072)          (0.072)             (0.065)         (0.071)        (0.070)            (0.069)
Bank branches per capita                            872               863              963              957                 861            1059            941                981
                                                  (685)             (727)            (710)            (697)              (1013)          (1099)         (1115)             (1101)
Logmean                                           0.504 ***         0.500 ***        0.503 ***        0.502 ***
                                                (0.035)           (0.033)          (0.033)          (0.033)
Lagged 43                                                                                                                -0.511 ***      -0.468 ***     -0.508 ***         -0.495 ***
                                                                                                                        (0.128)         (0.142)        (0.137)            (0.142)

Obs                                                 725               725             725               725                 725            725             725                725

Note: All regressions include year, district dummies, state labor laws-year dummies and pre-reform literacy, share of SC/ST population and industrial structure interacted with a
post dummy. Regressions are weighted by the square root of the number of people in a district/region. The data are from the 43rd and 55th rounds of the NSS. Standard errors (in
parentheses) are corrected for clustering at the state year level. Significance at the 10 percent level of confidence is represented by a *, at the 5 percent level by **, and at the 1
percent level by ***. In columns (1)-(4), the district initial per capita expenditure interacted with a post dummy is included. In columns (5)-(8), the level of the lagged dependent
variable, instrumented with the value of the dependent variables in 1983, and interacted with a post dummy is included.
