                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     SMART CITIES: QUALITY OF LIFE, PRODUCTIVITY,
                     AND THE GROWTH EFFECTS OF HUMAN CAPITAL

                                            Jesse M. Shapiro

                                         Working Paper 11615
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11615


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2005




I am grateful to Edward Glaeser, Claudia Goldin, Matthew Kahn, Kevin M. Murphy, Chris Rohlfs, and
Philipp Schnabl for helpful comments. Daron Acemoglu and Joshua Angrist generously provided their data
on compulsory schooling laws. Raven Saks provided data from the Wharton Land Use Control Survey. I
thank the Institute for Humane Studies, the Center for Basic Research in the Social Sciences, the Chiles
Foundation, and the National Science Foundation for financial support. e-mail: jmshapir@uchicago.edu.
telephone: 773-834-2688. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Jesse M. Shapiro. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Smart Cities: Quality of Life, Productivity, and the Growth Effects of Human Capital
Jesse M. Shapiro
NBER Working Paper No. 11615
September 2005
JEL No. R11, N920, J24

                                           ABSTRACT



From 1940 to 1990, a 10 percent increase in a metropolitan area's concentration of college-educated
residents was associated with a .8 percent increase in subsequent employment growth. Instrumental
variables estimates support a causal relationship between college graduates and employment growth,
but show no evidence of an effect of high school graduates. Using data on growth in wages, rents
and house values, I calibrate a neoclassical city growth model and find that roughly 60 percent of the
employment growth effect of college graduates is due to enhanced productivity growth, the rest being
caused by growth in the quality of life. This finding contrasts with the common argument that human
capital generates employment growth in urban areas solely through changes in productivity.


Jesse M. Shapiro
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jmshapir@uchicago.edu
       From 1940 to 1990, a 10 percent increase in a metropolitan area’s concentration
of human capital was associated with a .8 percent increase in the area’s employment
growth. A substantial body of literature confirms this correlation between human
capital and local area employment (or population) growth.1 Little is known, however,
about the underlying causes of this relationship.
       As I show more formally in the next section, there are essentially three possi-
ble explanations for the relationship between human capital and city employment
growth. The first is omitted variable bias: some feature or features of an area that
are correlated with both human capital and employment growth have been left out of
the regression. Although past research has tended to find that including broad sets
of controls does not eliminate the positive correlation between population or employ-
ment growth and human capital (Glaeser, Scheinkman and Shleifer, 1995; Glaeser and
Shapiro, 2003), concerns remain about the causal interpretation of this association.2
       The next hypothesis is that a highly educated population generates greater local
productivity growth, perhaps through knowledge spillovers (Lucas, 1988) or pecuniary
externalities arising from job search (Acemoglu, 1996).3 A number of researchers
have adopted this explanation (see, for example, Simon and Nardinelli, 2002), and it
has received some support from the work of Rauch (1993) and Moretti (2003), who
show that, conditional on observable worker characteristics, wages are higher in high
human capital cities. In contrast, however, Acemoglu and Angrist (2000) find, using
an instrumental variables approach, that the external eﬀects of human capital at the
state level are relatively small.4
       The final explanation is that areas with more educated populations experience
more rapid growth in the quality of life. This might occur because more educated
individuals spur the growth of consumption amenities in cities in which they reside,
   1
      See, for example, Glaeser, Scheinkman and Shleifer (1995); Simon (1998); Simon and Nardinelli
(2002); Simon (2002); and Glaeser and Shapiro (2003).
    2
      For example, residents with high human capital may seek out areas in which quality of life is
rising, leading to a simultaneity bias. See, e.g., Kahn (2000) and Cullen and Levitt (1999).
    3
      Black and Henderson (1999) develop a model of endogenous urban growth that embeds local
eﬀects of human capital accumulation.
    4
      Lange and Topel (forthcoming) review the existing literature on the social returns to human
capital.



                                                2
or because their influence on the political process leads to desirable outcomes such as
reductions in crime and pollution.
   In this paper, I attempt to distinguish among these three explanations of the
positive relationship between human capital and local area employment growth. To
address the omitted variables issue, I instrument for an area’s human capital concen-
tration using the presence of land-grant institutions (Moretti, 2004) and compulsory
schooling laws (Acemoglu and Angrist, 2000). To separate the remaining explana-
tions, I develop and calibrate a simple neoclassical growth model using data on growth
in wages and rents to determine what share of the overall employment growth eﬀect of
human capital is due to productivity growth, and what share is due to improvements
in the quality of life.
   Instrumental variables estimates support the presence of a causal eﬀect of con-
centrations of college graduates on employment growth, but show no evidence of a
similar eﬀect for high school graduates. Though not conclusive, these results serve to
lessen concerns about omitted variables and especially reverse causality. To separate
the influences of productivity and quality of life, I use Census data from 1940 through
1990 to show that metropolitan areas richer in skilled residents tend to experience
faster growth in (hedonically adjusted) wages, rental prices, and house values, with
the eﬀect on rents and house values much larger than the eﬀect on wages. A calibra-
tion of a simple city growth model based on this evidence suggests that roughly 60
percent of the eﬀect of college graduates on employment growth is due to productiv-
ity; the rest comes from the relationship between concentrations of skill and growth in
the quality of life. This conclusion is robust to a number of alternative specifications,
including direct controls for important determinants of area growth, and allowance
for key model parameters to vary with the human capital distribution.
   I also test for a connection between human capital and several direct measures of
quality of life. Though preliminary, this exercise suggests the eﬀect may be operating
through the expansion of consumer amenities such as bars and restaurants (Glaeser,
Kolko and Saiz, 2001) rather than through the political process.
   The organization of the paper is as follows. Section 1 presents a simple model


                                           3
of city growth and illustrates the three possible explanations for the relationship
between human capital and metropolitan area employment growth. Section 2 de-
scribes the Census data I use to conduct the estimation, as well as the land-grant and
compulsory-schooling instruments. Section 3 presents ordinary least squares and in-
strumental variables estimates of the relationship between human capital and growth
in employment, wages, and housing costs, and provides a calibration of the model in
section 1. Section 4 relates human capital to more direct measures of the change in
quality of life, and section 5 concludes.



1         Estimating framework
In this section I develop a simple neoclassical model of city growth, and use it to
illustrate three hypotheses about the correlation between growth and human capital.
The model is based on Roback’s (1982) formulation, which has been used extensively
to generate city-level rankings of quality of life and to infer the value to consumers
and firms of various local public goods or city characteristics.5 Most studies have
exploited the cross-sectional implications of the Roback model; here I will place the
model in a more dynamic context.6
        Before presenting the formal model, it will be helpful to discuss the intuition be-
hind it. Consider a world of identical firms and households choosing among a set
of locations. Each location is endowed with a productive amenity (which enters the
production function) and a consumption amenity (which enters the utility function).
Suppose that households consume only land and a traded good and that firms use
only labor as an input. Let us first consider equilibrium in production, which requires
that all firms be indiﬀerent between locations. In equilibrium, wages must be higher
in more productive locations, because otherwise firms would move into those loca-
tions and bid up the price of labor. In order for households to be indiﬀerent between
    5
     See, for example, Blomquist, Berger and Hoehn (1988); Gyourko and Tracy (1991); Cragg and
Kahn (1997); and Black (1999).
   6
     Roback’s model’s implications for growth have been addressed before. For example, Glaeser,
Scheinkman and Shleifer (1995) use a parametric example of the more general model to make infer-
ences about the causes of city growth.


                                               4
more and less productive locations, land prices must be higher in more productive
places because wages will be higher in those locations. Land prices must also capi-
talize consumption amenities; that is, land will be more expensive in more pleasant
locations.
    These equilibrium conditions hold equally well in a dynamic context. If a city
experiences relative growth in its productivity, then it should experience growth in
both wages and land prices; if it experiences growth in quality of life, this will tend
to be reflected in land price growth. In a more general model in which firms use land
as an input to production, these equilibrium conditions must be modified somewhat,
but it remains possible to identify changes in productive and consumption amenities
using data on wages and land prices in a set of locations.
    To see these results formally, consider an economy with a set of locations i ∈
{1, 2, ..., I}, each endowed with location specific productivity and quality of life, de-
noted Ai and Qi , respectively. Firms produce a homogeneous good sold on a world
market at the numeraire price of 1 using a constant returns to scale production func-
             ¡    ¢
tion Y = AF L, Rf , where L denotes the quantity of labor and Rf the quantity of
land used in production. Input markets are competitive, and firms face a constant
                                                C(Wi ,Pi )
per-unit marginal cost given by the function      Ai
                                                           ,   where Wi and Pi are the prices
of labor and land in location i. Spatial equilibrium requires that this marginal cost
be equal to unity at all locations, so that our first equilibrium condition is given by

                                     C (Wi , Pi ) = Ai                                    (1)

for all i.
    Consumers have preferences given by U = U (Q, X, Rc ), where X is the quantity of
goods consumed and Rc is the quantity of land consumed. This utility function implies
an indirect utility function V (Qi , Wi , Pi ) which, in equilibrium, must be constant
across locations. Our second condition is therefore

                                   V (Qi , Wi , Pi ) = U                                  (2)

for all i and some constant Ū . To close the model, I will suppose that Pi = f (Li ),
with f 0 (·) > 0, i.e., that there is an increasing supply price of housing.

                                            5
   Allow Ai and Qi to change exogenously over time. We can totally diﬀerentiate
equilibrium conditions (1) and (2) as follows:
                                    dWi      dPi   dAi
                                        + CP
                                       CW        =                                (3)
                                     dt       dt    dt
                           dQi      dWi      dPi   dU
                        VQ     + VW     + VP     =     .
                            dt       dt       dt   dt
Let kR and kL be the shares of land and labor in the firm’s cost function, let sR be
the share of land in the household’s budget, and let lowercase letters denote natural
                                            dU
logarithms of variables. I will normalize   dt
                                                 = 0. Then we can rearrange the above
conditions to yield expressions for the changes in wages and land rents:
                                       µ                    ¶
                     dpi          1       VQ Q dqi    1 dai
                          = kR                     +                              (4)
                     dt       k
                                 + sR VW W dt        kL dt
                               L
                                                       kR
                    dwi    1          sR dai           kL   VQ Q dqi
                        =          kR
                                              −   kR
                                                                     .
                     dt   kL       kL
                                      + sR dt     kL
                                                       + sR VW W dt
Additionally, given the assumed supply curve of land, letting σ be the elasticity of
land rents with respect to local employment, employment growth can be written as
                                       µ                   ¶
                       dli   1    1      VQ Q dqi    1 dai
                           = kR                   +          .                (5)
                       dt    σ k + sR VW W dt       kL dt
                                   L

These conditions must hold for all cities i.
   Changes in land rents will capitalize growth in productivity and in the quality of
life, scaled by the importance of land in the firm and household budgets. Changes
in wages will reflect productivity growth, less a correction to compensate firms for
changes in land prices. In the limiting case in which firms use no land in the pro-
duction process, wage growth will directly capitalize productivity growth. The above
equations therefore suggest a framework for evaluating the extent to which quality
of life and productivity growth are associated with a given correlate of employment
growth.
   To see this formally, let Hi,t denote the concentration of human capital in city i
at time t, and let Xi,t be a vector of other city characteristics. Suppose that
                      VQ Q                                     q
                           ∆qi,t+1 = Hi,t β q + Xi,t γ q +     i,t+1              (6)
                      VW W
                           ∆ai,t+1 = Hi,t β a + Xi,t γ a +     a
                                                               i,t+1


                                            6
where ∆ denotes changes.7 Suppose further that the shocks                                 q
                                                                                              and   a
                                                                                                        are drawn
independently of X and H.8 Then, by equation (5) above, we have
                          µ    µ          ¶       µ           ¶¶
                 1    1          q    1 a            q    1 a
       ∆li,t+1 = kR        Hi,t β + β + Xi,t γ + γ               + εli,t+1                                    (7)
                 σ k + sR            kL                  kL
                    L


where                                                  µ                          ¶
                                       1        1          q          1
                           εli,t+1   =     kR              i,t+1   +      a
                                                                          i,t+1       .                       (8)
                                       σ   kL
                                                + sR                 kL
       Suppose that a positive correlation is observed between human capital Hi,t and
subsequent employment growth ∆li,t+1 . Equation (7) illustrates the three possible
explanations for such a correlation:

   1. Omitted variables bias. A positive relationship between Hi,t and ∆li,t+1 could
         arise if Hi,t is correlated with some omitted component of Xi,t , and that omitted
         city characteristic is itself a cause of rapid employment growth. For example,
         if highly-educated individuals tend to concentrate in cities with better weather,
         and city growth is aﬀected by the weather, a correlation between human capital
         and employment growth could arise.

   2. Productivity growth. If high human capital is associated with more rapid pro-
         ductivity growth, that is, if β a > 0, then human capital Hi,t will be positively
         correlated with subsequent employment growth ∆li,t+1 .

   3. Growth in the quality of life. Suppose that cities with higher concentrations of
         human capital experience faster growth in the quality of life; that is, suppose
         that β q > 0. Then human capital and employment growth will covary positively.

       To address hypothesis (1), I employ an instrumental variables approach using both
the presence of land-grant colleges and universities (Moretti, 2004) and compulsory
   7
     This specification assumes, of course, that the eﬀects of human capital are linear, which need
not be the case. In unreported regressions I find no evidence of nonlinearities in the eﬀect of human
capital on employment growth, but I do find evidence of convex eﬀects of human capital on the
growth of wages and land rents.
   8
     The shocks are not assumed to be identically distributed, however, nor are they assumed to
be drawn independently over time or independently of one another. That is, I will allow for the
possibility that εq and εa are heteroskedastic, serially correlated, and correlated with one another.


                                                       7
schooling laws (Acemoglu and Angrist, 2000) To evaluate the relative importance of
hypotheses (2) and (3), I directly estimate β a and β q , the parameters relating human
capital to growth in productivity and quality of life, respectively. Given data (possibly
noisy) on changes in land prices and wages for a panel of cities, by (4) we can write


                                       µ                         ¶
                                1          VQ Q           1
             ∆pi,t+1 =     kR
                                                ∆qi,t+1 + ∆ai,t+1 + μpi,t+1                        (9)
                           kL
                                + sR       VW W          kL
                                                          kR
                            1      sR                     kL   VQ Q
             ∆wi,t+1 =          kR
                                         ∆ai,t+1 −   kR
                                                                    ∆qi,t+1 + μw
                                                                               i,t+1
                           kL   kL
                                   +  sR             kL
                                                              V
                                                          + sR W W

where μp and μw are measurement error in price and wage growth, respectively, and
are assumed to be independent of ∆a and ∆q.9 Rearranging (9) we have:

         kL ∆wi,t+1 + kR ∆pi,t+1 = Hi,t β a + Xi,t γ a +       a
                                                               i,t+1   + kL μpi,t+1 + kR μw
                                                                                          i,t+1   (10)
                                                               q
           sR ∆pi,t+1 − ∆wi,t+1 = Hi,t β q + Xi,t γ q +        i,t+1   + sR μpi,t+1 − μw
                                                                                       i,t+1 .


Given values of kL , kR , sR , it is thus possible to use data on growth in wages and
land prices to estimate β a and β q , and thus to determine the relative importance of
productivity and quality of life in explaining the relationship between human capital
and city employment growth.
      The advantage of a reduced-form approach such as the one presented above is
that it makes possible the use of price measures to estimate the underlying rela-
tionship between human capital and growth in productivity and the quality of life.
The disadvantage of this approach, however, is that it necessarily suppresses the
mechanism underlying the connection between human capital and growth in produc-
tivity and quality of life. For example, the model as formulated does not distinguish
meaningfully between technological (Lucas, 1988) and pecuniary (Acemoglu, 1996)
externalities from human capital, nor does it identify the channel through which hu-
man capital might create consumer amenities. In section 4, I provide evidence on
these channels using several direct measures of quality of life.
  9
    As with εq and εa , it will not be necessary to assume that μp and μw are homoskedastic,
independent over time, or drawn independently of one another.



                                                 8
   The model also has several more specific limitations. First, in reality households
consume locally produced services as well as traded goods, and the prices of these
services are determined in part by local labor market conditions. In a simple rep-
resentative household formulation, each household is neither a net seller nor a net
buyer of services, so incorporating services into the framework above would make
little diﬀerence to my conclusions about the importance of productivity and quality-
of-life growth. In a more realistic model with heterogeneity in how much time each
household buys and sells in the service market, an increase in productivity could
penalize net buyers of services by raising the local wage. The presence of such a
force would lead me to overstate the role of productivity in determining the growth
eﬀects of human capital, since it would mean that an increase in wages partially rep-
resents an increase in the cost of living, and would therefore capitalize quality of life
improvements more than is reflected in equations (10).
   The model also ignores heterogeneity in labor and housing markets that may be
important in determining equilibrium factor prices. For example, if workers come in
multiple imperfectly substitutable varieties (e.g., skilled and unskilled), then there
will be additional equilibrium conditions that determine the spatial distribution of
wages for the two groups, and the estimates from (10) would be interpretable as a
weighted average of productivity growth aﬀecting each group. Diﬀerent groups may
also choose diﬀerent consumption bundles, leading to heterogeneity in the values of
the share parameters discussed above. If shares are correlated with human capital,
this could introduce bias in estimates that assume homogeneous shares. In section
3.3, I discuss the sensitivity of the results to relaxing the assumption that firm and
household budget shares are identical across locations.




                                           9
2        Data description

2.1       Measuring wages, rents, and human capital

To form the basic panel of metropolitan areas, I extract from the IPUMS database
(Ruggles and Sobeck, 1997) all prime-age (25 to 55) white males living in Census-
defined metropolitan areas in the years 1940, 1970, 1980, and 1990.10 My measure
of total employment in a given metropolitan area in a given year is a count of the
total number of prime-age white males in the sample.11 I construct an area-level
employment growth measure for each time period as the log change in employment.
I standardize this to be a ten-year growth rate in the 1940-1970 period.
       I construct the wage series as follows. I restrict attention to white prime-age males
living in metropolitan areas.12 To construct a wage estimate, I divide total wage and
salary income for each individual by total annual hours worked, imputed from the
categorical variables on weeks and hours worked available in the microdata.13 I then
regress the log of the wage for each individual on dummies for each metropolitan
area, age and its square, and dummies for veteran status, marital status, educational
attainment, industry category and occupational category.14 All regressions include
dummies for missing values of marital and veteran status; observations with missing
values of other variables were dropped. I estimate separate regressions for each Census
year so as to avoid unnecessary restrictions on the coeﬃcients.
       For each year I extract the coeﬃcients on the metropolitan area dummies to
be used as estimates of local diﬀerences in wages.15 Naturally, these estimates are
  10
     In many cases, the set of counties that make up an area grows larger over time. Since the
public-use sample of the Census does not directly identify counties, it is not possible to directly
construct county groupings that are consistent over time. In section 3.3, I show that my results are
robust to examining only those areas whose definitions did not change over the relevant period.
  11
     I have used person-level sample weights wherever appropriate in constructing my measures of
employment, human capital, and other metropolitan area characteristics.
  12
     Since nearly all prime-age white males are in the labor force, restricting attention to this group
helps to limit concerns arising from diﬀerences across metropolitan areas in which types of workers
choose to participate in the labor market, which could otherwise create a composition bias (Solon,
Barsky, and Parker, 1994).
  13
     In all cases I used the midpoint of the categorical range as the point estimate.
  14
     Further details on the controls used are available in subsection A.1 of the Appendix.
  15
     The use of metropolitan area dummies to measure local wage and price diﬀerences is related to
the approach taken in Gabriel and Rosenthal (2004).


                                                  10
only as good as the controls–sorting on omitted characteristics will introduce bias.
However, as Table 1 illustrates, the estimates generally seem sensible. Moreover,
for the purposes of studying growth the changes in these price coeﬃcients are more
important than their levels–and growth rates in wage residuals will at least be purged
of time-invariant diﬀerences in the characteristics of local workers.
       The Census contains data on the value of owner-occupied housing units as well
as on the rental price of renter-occupied units. As it is not clear a priori which
market is preferable as a means of measuring diﬀerences in the implicit price of land,
I use both types of data. In contrast to the labor market sample, I do not restrict to
units occupied by prime-age white males, on the view that housing prices for diﬀerent
demographic groups will be tied together by market forces. To construct the rental
price series, I regress the log of reported monthly contract rents on dummies for
metropolitan areas as well as a set of controls for dwelling characteristics.16 (Data
on these characteristics are not available for 1940, but results on rents are robust
to excluding the 1940-1970 time period.) I run these regressions separately for each
year. The controls for housing characteristics I employ are dummies for commercial
use status, acreage of property, availability of kitchen or cooking facilities, number
of rooms, type of plumbing, year built, number of units in structure, water source,
type of sewage disposal, and number of bedrooms.17 To construct the house value
series, I perform an identical procedure using the log of reported house values for all
owner-occupied dwellings.
       While the rankings of rental prices shown in Table 1 seem sensible, changes in un-
measured characteristics of the housing stock may cause diﬃculties in determining the
eﬀects of human capital on land prices. As a check on the potential magnitude of such
a problem, I obtained the Oﬃce of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight’s (OFHEO)
House Price Index (HPI) for metropolitan areas for the years 1980-1990 (Calhoun,
1996). This index is based on a repeat sales methodology (Case and Shiller, 1989),
  16
     Monthly contract rent includes utilities only if they are a specified part of the rental contract.
  17
     Subsection A.2 of the Appendix contains additional details about the controls used. These
controls were available for all years (except 1940) and therefore permit me to construct a consistent
series. See also the Supplemental Appendix available on my web page.



                                                  11
and thus takes advantage of the fact that the correlation between the growth in house
prices and changes in unobservable dwelling characteristics will tend to be smaller
when examining multiple transactions at the same address. For the 119 metropolitan
areas for which both the growth rate of the HPI and the change in estimated rental
price residuals are available, the correlation between these two measures is .83. The
correlation between the 1980-1990 growth rate of the HPI and the 1980-1990 change
in the estimated house value residual is .92.18 Such strong correlations across alterna-
tive measures reinforce the view that unmeasured housing characteristics do not play
a major role in determining the growth rates in my measures of the implicit price of
land.
       As a measure of the concentration of human capital in a metropolitan area, I
calculate the sample share of prime-age white males who have a high school degree
only, some college, and a college degree or higher.


2.2       Land-grant colleges and universities

The federal Morrill Act of 1862 granted large parcels of land to each state in the
Union (with the size of the parcel proportional to the state’s number of Congressional
representatives) in order to fund the creation of colleges instructing in agriculture,
engineering, and other subjects.19 Another act in 1890 extended the so-called “land-
grant” provision to 16 southern states (Christy, Williamson, and Williamson, 1992).
I follow Moretti (2004) in using Nevins’ (1962) appendix to code a binary variable
indicating whether a metropolitan area contains a land-grant institution.
       Consistent with the intention to spread these universities evenly across the states,
the geographic distribution of land-grant universities is quite even. For example,
among the 251 metropolitan areas in my 1980 sample, 12 percent of Northeast-
ern metropolitan areas, 16 percent of Midwestern metropolitan areas, 15 percent of
  18
     Both correlation coeﬃcients are statistically significant at the .01 percent level. The correlation
between the change in the rent residual and the change in the house value residual during the
1980-1990 period is .82.
  19
     James (1910) argues that, while the bill was introduced by Senator Justin Morrill of Vermont,
credit for its passage belongs to Illinois College professor Jonathan B. Turner.



                                                  12
Southern metropolitan areas, and 15 percent of Western metropolitan areas contain
a land-grant college or university. (A Pearson’s chi-squared test of independence fails
to reject the null hypothesis that land-grant colleges and universities are distributed
independently of Census region.)
       Moretti (2004) reports that the demographic characteristics of metropolitan areas
with and without land-grant colleges or universities are similar in most respects. He
also reports that the presence of a land-grant institution is associated with higher
shares of college graduates, but lower shares of individuals with high school degrees
and some college. These facts seem consistent with the view that the presence of a
land-grant school causes higher rates of college attainment, and not vice versa.
       In 1980, 35 percent of prime-age white males in metropolitan areas with a land-
grant school were college graduates, versus 25 percent in areas without a land-grant
school.20 A more direct check on the validity of the presence of land-grant schools
as an instrument for the current distribution of human capital is to ask whether this
correlation existed before land-grant institutions were of significant size. The Census,
however, did not begin asking directly about educational attainment until 1940, by
which time the land-grant schools were already of significant size (Bowman, 1962).
       To circumvent this problem, I have constructed a human capital index based on
the distribution of occupations within a metropolitan area. Using Census public-use
samples of prime-age white males from 1850 through 1980, I follow Simon and Nar-
dinelli (2002) in assigning to each individual in the sample the percent of individuals
in the same occupation in 1950 with a college degree or higher. By averaging this
variable by metropolitan area I obtain an occupational human capital measure for
each metropolitan area in each year.
       Table 2 shows the diﬀerence in this human capital index between land-grant and
non-land-grant metropolitan areas by year from 1850 through 1980. During the 1850-
  20
     This eﬀect is too large to be accounted for solely by the presence of graduates of land-grant
institutions themselves. But these schools may well have eﬀects that exceed their size. For example,
Bowman (1962) notes that “The comparatively high rate of college attendance in the rural areas of
the western states contrasts dramatically with the lag of rural regions in most parts of the world.
This lends support to other evidence that the land-grant institutions sold higher education to a
public much larger than that represented in their own enrollments.” Consistent with this view, I
find that the eﬀect of land-grant schools on college graduation rates is largest in the Midwest.


                                                13
1880 period, when many land-grant institutions had not yet been established, there is
essentially no diﬀerence in the human capital distributions between the two categories
of metropolitan areas. From 1900-1920, when these institutions had been established
but rates of college graduation were still relatively low, the diﬀerences are moderate.
The diﬀerences are largest in the sample period of 1940-1980, when rates of college
attendance were highest and thus the scope for the impact of land-grant schools
greatest. The fact that the correlation between occupational distribution and the
presence of a land-grant college or university arose only after these institutions could
have played a significant causal role supports the exogeneity of land-grant status with
respect to pre-existing diﬀerences among metropolitan areas.


2.3       Compulsory schooling laws (CSLs)

Coincident with the rise of high school completion in the first half of the twentieth
century was a significant tightening of regulations concerning compulsory school at-
tendance and child labor. Acemoglu and Angrist (2000) have shown that changes in
these laws at the state level had a significant impact on the educational attainment
of those born in aﬀected states.21 Since changes in these laws are plausibly exoge-
nous with respect to subsequent labor and housing market conditions, they provide
a candidate instrument for concentrations of high school graduates in metropolitan
areas from 1940 through 1990.
       I have obtained Acemoglu and Angrist’s (2000) coding of both compulsory at-
tendance and child labor laws for the 1914-1965 period. Since these laws vary along
many dimensions, I follow Acemoglu and Angrist (2000) in adopting two summary
measures: the minimum years of schooling required before leaving school (CL), and
the minimum years in school required before work is permitted (CA).22 I then create
dummies for four categories of each of these variables: 6 years and under, 7 years, 8
  21
     See also Goldin and Katz (2003), who argue that roughly five percent of the increase in high
school enrollment from 1910 to 1939 is attributable to CSLs.
  22
     CL is defined as “the larger of schooling required before dropping out and the diﬀerence between
the minimum dropout age and the maximum enrollment age.” CA is defined as “the larger of
schooling required before receiving a work permit and the diﬀerence between the minimum work age
and the maximum enrollment age” (Acemoglu and Angrist, 2000).


                                                 14
years, and 9 and over years for CL; 8 years and under, 9 years, 10 years, and 11 and
over years for CA. Acemoglu and Angrist (2000) argue that these categorizations
eﬃciently capture the most relevant variation in state laws during this time period.
    Given these definitions, I assign each prime-age white male in the 1940-1990 Cen-
sus public use samples to a CL category and CA category according to the laws
prevailing in his state of birth when he was of age 14. I then calculate for each
metropolitan area-year the share of prime-age white males in each category. This
results in eight variables, two of which are linearly dependent, which measure the
variation in the exposure of prime-age white males in each area and year to diﬀerent
CSLs. When metropolitan area fixed eﬀects are included in a specification, these
variables capture changes over time in the share of prime-age white males exposed to
each type of CSL regime, and thus provide variation useful in identifying the eﬀects
of high school graduates on local area growth.



3     Results

3.1    Baseline specification

Table 3 reports coeﬃcients from ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions of employ-
ment, wage, rental price, and house value growth on the log of the percent college
graduates for the 1940-1990 panel. Data on wages, rents, and house values come from
metropolitan area fixed eﬀects in hedonic regressions of prices on worker or housing
unit characteristics as described in the previous section, and are therefore not cor-
related with observable diﬀerences in worker or housing unit quality. Dummies for
time period are included in all specifications, and standard errors are adjusted for
correlation of the errors within metropolitan areas.
    These regressions reveal a number of important facts. First, they confirm the
usual finding that cities with greater concentrations of human capital experience more
rapid growth in employment. A 10 percent increase in the share of college-educated
residents is associated with an increase in the employment growth rate of roughly .8



                                         15
percent.
       A second important pattern is that growth in wages, rents, and house values tends
to be higher in cities with greater concentrations of college-educated residents. A 10
percent increase in the share of college-educated residents corresponds to a .2 percent
increase in wage growth and a .7 percent increase in the growth of rental prices and
house values, all statistically significant. Note also that the eﬀect of human capital
on the land price measures is more than three times as large as the eﬀect on growth
in wages.


3.2       Calibration of growth model

These reduced-form facts suggest that growth in quality of life may be playing an
important role in the relationship between human capital and employment growth,
since growth in land prices seems generally to be more sensitive to the share of
college-educated residents than growth in wages. For a more quantitative evaluation
of the relative importance of quality of life and productivity in explaining the human
capital-employment growth relationship, we will need to estimate equations (10). For
this we require values for labor’s share of output (kL ), land’s share of output (kR ),
and the share of land in the household budget (sR ).
       Existing evidence on factor shares suggests values of kL = .75 and kR = .10.23
More controversial is the share of land in the household budget (sR ), for which prior
studies have traditionally used a value of about .05 (Roback, 1982). This is a good
approximation to the literal share of land in the budget, but is likely to be far too
small to approximate the concept required by theory. The reason is that the model
in section 1 assumes that all goods other than land are traded on a national market
and therefore display no local price variation. In a more realistic framework, sR is not
merely the household budget share of land per se but rather the share in the household
  23
     Krueger (1999) estimates that labor’s total share of output (including the return to human
capital) is roughly .75; Poterba (1998) also places it at between 70 and 80 percent of national
income. I will therefore use kL = .75. Poterba (1998) reports a corporate capital income share of
around 10 percent that, combined with a labor share of about three-fourths, places an upper bound
of around .15 on kR . I will set kR = .10, which is close to the upper bound and, if anything, seems
likely to cause me to overstate the productivity eﬀects of human capital.


                                                16
budget of all goods that are produced using local land as an input. In other words,
sR should capture the importance of all “cost of living” diﬀerences between locations,
because all of these costs matter in equilibrating utility levels across cities.
    In subsection A.3 of the Appendix, I estimate the eﬀect of a one-percent increase in
the implicit price of land on the price of a market basket of goods and services, using
both cross-sectional data and evidence on price changes over time. These estimates
suggest a preferred value of sR of about .32, with a lower bound of about .22 . I will
report results for both values to address the sensitivity of my findings to alternative
values of sR .24
    As I showed in section 1, regressions of (kL ∆wi,t+1 + kR ∆pi,t+1 ) and (sR ∆pi,t+1 − ∆wi,t+1 )
on the log of the share of college graduates will yield estimates of the parameters β a
                                           a           q
and β q . These estimates, denoted β̂ and β̂ , capture the eﬀect of human capital on
growth in productivity and the quality of life, respectively. Since the total eﬀect of
human capital on employment growth is equal to β q +                 1 a
                                                                    kL
                                                                       β   (see equation (7)), the
fraction of the employment growth eﬀect that is due to productivity growth can be
                     1    a
                    kL
                       β̂
estimated as      q
                β̂ + k1 β̂
                            a   .
                       L
    Table 4 shows the results of this exercise. When sR is .32, the estimates indicate
that roughly 60 percent of the overall employment growth eﬀect of human capital
is attributed to productivity growth. This finding is not sensitive to the choice of
measure for land price. These findings suggest that while technological or pecuniary
externalities may play an important role in the employment growth eﬀects of human
capital, consumption amenities are a significant component as well. Even for sR =
0.22, around one-quarter of the total employment growth eﬀect is attributed to growth
in local quality of life.25
   24
      To address concerns about systematic heterogeneity in the sR parameter, I have re-estimated
the models in Appendix A.3 allowing the share of land in the budget to diﬀer depending on whether
a metropolitan area has an above-median share of college graduates. The diﬀerence in estimated
land shares between high- and low-human capital locations is not statistically significant, and the
productivity share estimated from specifications (not shown) allowing for heterogeneous land shares
is roughly .69. Evidence from 1977 data on manufacturing from the USA Counties 1998 database
also shows no systematic relationship between human capital concentrations and proxies for kL and
kR .
   25
      Since I measure wages rather than total compensation, it is possible for my results to understate
the productivity eﬀect if growth in nonwage compensation is much more correlated with human cap-


                                                  17
    Overall, then, my findings indicate an important role of quality of life in driving
the relationship between the share of college-educated residents in a metropolitan
area and the area’s subsequent employment growth. While prior work has tended to
emphasize productive externalities from human capital, this evidence suggests there
may be important consumption externalities as well.


3.3     Robustness

In this section, I examine the robustness of my results to a number of alternative
specifications. Row (2) of Table 5 repeats the baseline OLS specification controlling
for mean January temperature, mean July temperature, and average annual inches
of precipitation.26 Most studies of local area growth in the post-World War II period
have found these to be strong and robust predictors of population growth (Rappaport,
2004). Examining the sensitivity of the results to these controls therefore helps iden-
tify whether the employment growth-human capital relationship might be arise simply
because highly educated residents select growing locations, rather than directly im-
pacting growth. Overall, the results from this specification line up extremely closely
with those in the baseline, and the implied productivity share rises only slightly, to
.67.
    The third row of the table shows results using data from 1970-1990, in which lagged
employment growth rates are included as controls. The point estimate of the eﬀect
of human capital on employment growth is similar to the baseline, but is much less
precisely estimated. This is unsurprising, since employment growth is highly serially
correlated, so that including lagged growth rates removes much of the variation in the
dependent variable. For wage and rent growth, which display much lower degrees of
serial correlation, inclusion of lagged growth rates increases somewhat the estimated
ital levels than growth in wages. Assuming conservatively that nonwage compensation represented
10 percent of total compensation during my sample period (Long and Scott, 1982), I calculate that
the growth in nonwage compensation would have to be more than four times as responsive to initial
levels of human capital as the growth in wages in order to attribute all of the eﬀect of human capital
to productivity growth.
   26
      Weather data are from the County and City Data Book 1994. Central cities were matched to
metropolitan areas as in Glaeser and Shapiro (2003).



                                                 18
eﬀects of human capital. Because the estimated eﬀect on wage growth increases more
than the eﬀect on rent growth, the calculated productivity share rises to about .8.
Even this estimate, however, implies an important role for growth in quality of life.
    To address the issue of changes in the composition of metropolitan areas over time,
in the fourth row I present results for the sub-sample of metropolitan area-year pairs in
which the definition of the metropolitan area does not change during the time period.
While the smaller sample size leads to larger standard errors (and a smaller point
estimate) for the employment growth eﬀect, the wage and rent growth coeﬃcients are
similar to the baseline specification, and lead to an implied productivity share only
slightly higher than in the baseline. Controlling directly for the growth in the number
of counties composing the metropolitan area also yields results similar to those of the
baseline (regression not shown).27


3.4     Instrumental variables estimates

The previous subsections present correlational evidence on the connection between
human capital and local area growth. The evidence confirms the finding of prior
studies that human capital is positively related to employment growth, and provides
further indication that much of this eﬀect operates through increases in the quality
of life, rather than productivity. Although these facts seem robust to a number of
controls and alternative specifications, concerns may still remain about the causal
interpretation of my estimates. Of primary concern is the possibility that skilled
residents seek out growing or soon-to-be growing areas, which would lead to a reverse-
causality confound in my estimates. In this section I examine instrumental variables
(IV) estimates of the growth eﬀects of human capital, instrumenting with the presence
of land-grant institutions as in Moretti (2004) and compulsory schooling laws as in
Acemoglu and Angrist (2000).
   27
      In additional specifications reported in the Supplemental Appendix (available on my web page),
I show that the implied productivity share is similar for metropolitan areas with and without sig-
nificant supply restrictions on housing. I also show that both the employment growth eﬀect and the
productivity share are higher for manufacturing-intensive areas, possibly due to pecuniary external-
ities of the sort discussed in Acemoglu (1996).



                                                19
       Row (5) of Table 5 presents results from a 2SLS estimation in which land-grant
status is used to instrument for the log of the share college-educated. As I argue in
section 2.2 above, land-grant institutions seem to be distributed evenly over diﬀerent
regions of the United States and do not appear to have been placed in relation to pre-
existing diﬀerences in human capital levels across metropolitan areas.28 Relative to
the baseline OLS results, the 2SLS results tend to show larger (although less precisely
estimated) growth eﬀects of human capital. For example, a 10 percent increase in the
share of residents who are college-educated is now estimated to increase employment
growth by about 1.7 percent, as against .8 percent in the baseline OLS specification.
The estimated eﬀects of human capital on wage and rent growth are larger in similar
proportion, so that the implied productivity share of the growth eﬀect remains similar
to the baseline estimate.
       Although I have argued that land-grant institutions have a causal impact on the
skill distribution in an area, it is of course possible that their eﬀects on local labor
and housing markets occur through other, more direct channels, and not exclusively
through their eﬀect on the concentration of human capital. For example, universities
purchase land and labor, therefore making them direct (and sometimes large) par-
ticipants in these markets. The fact that I examine growth rates, rather than levels,
of employment, wages, and rents, should help to reduce the impact of these other
channels, as long as they are relatively fixed over time. Additionally, since land-grant
institutions were placed well in advance of the time period under study, the 2SLS
strategy should at least serve to alleviate concerns about simultaneity bias arising
from skilled residents’ desire to live in places that will grow in the future. On the
whole, then, it seems reassuring that the 2SLS estimates suggest a productivity share
very similar to that obtained using the OLS specifications discussed above.
       In Table 6 I estimate the growth impact of those with a high school degree or more,
  28
     The first-stage estimates from this specification show a large and statistically strong eﬀect of
land-grant institutions on the share of residents who are college-educated. In a regression of log(share
college-educated) on the land grant status dummy, the land-grant coeﬃcient is 0.3105 with a standard
error of 0.0522. An F-test of the null hypothesis that land-grant status has no eﬀect on log(share
college-educated) rejects with p < 0.001, and an F-statistic of 34.61. This F-statistic is suﬃcient to
rule out any significant weak-instruments bias (Stock and Yogo, 2002).



                                                  20
instrumenting with compulsory schooling laws as coded by Acemoglu and Angrist
(2000). These specifications include metropolitan area fixed eﬀects, so identification
comes from changes over time in the exposure of prime-age white males to CSLs. As
column (1) shows, the first stage estimates generally confirm that these laws aﬀect the
human capital distribution, although the coeﬃcients are less monotonic and precise
than those reported in Acemoglu and Angrist (2000). This non-monotonicity, coupled
with a small F-statistic, suggests caution is needed in the interpretation of these
estimates.29
       The 2SLS estimates show no statistically significant eﬀect of high school graduates
on growth in employment, wages, or rents, consistent with the prior literature’s em-
phasis on college graduates as a determinant of urban growth in the post-World War
II period.30 Though the confidence intervals on the growth eﬀects of human capital
are large, the point estimates are largely negative, and thus provide no evidence for
significant productivity (or quality of life) externalities from high school graduates,
consistent with the findings of Acemoglu and Angrist (2000).



4        Direct indicators of the quality of life
The results presented in the previous section provide preliminary support for a causal
interpretation of the relationship between the concentration of college graduates in
a metropolitan area and subsequent growth in quality of life in the area. In this
section, I conduct a preliminary investigation of two candidate explanations for this
relationship.
       First, concentrations of skilled residents may encourage the growth of consumer
services, such as the restaurants and bars, which then make an area more attractive
to potential migrants. In line with this hypothesis, Glaeser, Kolko and Saiz (2001)
show evidence that cities with superior markets for goods and services experience
  29
     Given the small F-statistic, it is not possible to reject the presence of a weak-instruments bias
(Stock and Yogo, 2002).
  30
     Although the human capital measure includes those with a college degree, existing evidence and
unreported specifications indicate that the eﬀect of CSLs is predominantly to move individuals from
the “no high school” category to the “high school” category.


                                                 21
more rapid population growth.31
       Second, highly-educated households may act, through the political system or pri-
vately, to improve local quality of life. Moreover, better educated households are
more likely to be homeowners, and some evidence exists to suggest that homeowners
make greater investments in their local communities (Glaeser and Shapiro, 2003).
       To distinguish between these hypotheses, I have collected data on direct measures
of quality of life from several sources. First, from the USA Counties 1998 database,
I have obtained data for 222 of the metropolitan areas in my 1980 sample on the
number of restaurants per capita in 1977 and 1992, and the number of FBI-defined
serious crimes per capita in 1980 and 1990.32 Second, using the public-use sample
of the Census, I have computed the share of individuals ages 16 to 19 in 1980 and
1990 who are neither high school graduates nor currently in school. I will treat this
variable as a proxy for the share of high school dropouts in an area and hence as a
loose measure of the quality of public schools. Finally, I have obtained for 74 of the
metropolitan areas in my sample a count of the number of days in 1980 and 1990 that
the Environmental Protection Agency’s Air Quality Index exceeded 100, indicating
poor air quality.33
       In Table 7, I compare mean 1980-1990 growth rates in these variables between
land-grant and non-land-grant metropolitan areas. As row (1) shows, land-grant
metropolitan areas experienced more rapid growth in the number of restaurants per
capita than non-land-grant areas. This diﬀerence is both statistically and economi-
cally large, suggesting that consumer amenities may play a role in the eﬀects of human
capital on quality of life.
       As rows (2) through (4) indicate, the evidence on more policy-dependent measures
of quality of life–namely crime rates, air quality, and school quality–is much less
impressive. In no case is there a statistically significant diﬀerence between land-grant
and non-land-grant metropolitan areas. Only in the case of crime does the point
  31
     See also George and Waldfogel (2003), who show evidence of economies of scale in catering to
consumers’ varying tastes.
  32
     Counties were matched to metropolitan areas as in Glaeser and Shapiro (2003).
  33
     Data are from http://www.epa.gov/airtrends/factbook.html.



                                               22
estimate suggest an economically large benefit from human capital, but this eﬀect is
too imprecisely estimated to be statistically distinguishable from zero.
    Clearly a more structured investigation would be required to fully separate alter-
native theories of the relationship between human capital and growth in quality of
life. Nevertheless, the findings reported in this section seem more consistent with a
consumer amenities mechanism than with a mechanism in which improvements are
made via the political system.



5     Conclusions
Several key findings emerge from the analysis in this paper. First, instrumental
variables estimates are consistent with a causal eﬀect of concentrations of college
graduates on local area employment growth. Second, there is no evidence to indicate
a growth eﬀect of high school graduates. Third, evidence from wages and rents
implies that, while the majority of the employment growth eﬀect of college graduates
operates through changes in productivity, roughly one-third of the eﬀect seems to
come from more rapid improvement in the quality of life. Finally, a preliminary
investigation of several direct measures of quality of life indicates that the eﬀect of
college graduates may operate through “consumer city” amenities such as bars and
restaurants, rather than from more politically mediated area attributes such as crime,
schools, and pollution.




                                          23
References
 [1] Daron Acemoglu. A microfoundation for social increasing returns in human
     capital accumulation. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(3):779—804, August
     1996.

 [2] Daron Acemoglu and Joshua Angrist. How large are human capital externalities?
     Evidence from compulsory schooling laws. NBER Macroeconomics Annual, pages
     9—59, 2000.

 [3] Duncan Black and Vernon Henderson. A theory of urban growth. Journal of
     Political Economy, 107(2):252—284, April 1999.

 [4] Sandra E. Black. Do better schools matter? Parental valuation of elementary
     education. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(2):577—599, May 1999.

 [5] Glenn C. Blomquist, Mark C. Berger, and John P. Hoehn. New estimates of
     quality of life in urban areas. American Economic Review, 78(1):89—107, March
     1988.

 [6] Mary Jean Bowman. The land-grant colleges and universities in human-resource
     development. Journal of Economic History, 22(4):523—546, December 1962.

 [7] Charles A. Calhoun. OFHEO house price indexes: HPI technical description.
     Oﬃce of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight Mimeograph, March 1996.

 [8] Karl E. Case and Robert J. Shiller. The eﬃciency of the market for single-family
     homes. American Economic Review, 79(1):125—137, March 1989.

 [9] Ralph D. Christy, Lionel Williamson, and Handy Williamson Jr. Introduction:
     A century of service: The past, present, and future roles of 1890 land-grant
     colleges and institutions. In Ralph D. Christy and Lionel Williamson, editors, A
     century of service: Land-grant colleges and universities, 1890-1990, pages xiii—
     xxv. Transaction Publishers, New Brunswick, 1992.

[10] Michael Cragg and Matthew E. Kahn. New estimates of climate demand: Evi-
     dence from location choice. Journal of Urban Economics, 42:261—284, 1997.

[11] Julie Berry Cullen and Steven D. Levitt. Crime, urban flight, and the con-
     sequences for cities. Review of Economics and Statistics, 81(2):159—169, May
     1999.

[12] Stuart A. Gabriel and Stuart F. Rosenthal. Quality of the business environment
     versus quality of life: Do firms and households like the same cities? Review of
     Economics and Statistics, 86(1):438—444, February 2004.

[13] Lisa George and Joel Waldfogel. Who aﬀects whom in daily newspaper markets?
     Journal of Political Economy, 111(4):765—784, 2003.


                                         24
[14] Edward L. Glaeser, Jed Kolko, and Albert Saiz. Consumer city. Journal of
     Economic Geography, 1(1):27—50, January 2001.
[15] Edward L. Glaeser, Jose A. Scheinkman, and Andrei Shleifer. Economic growth
     in a cross-section of cities. Journal of Monetary Economics, 36:117—143, 1995.
[16] Edward L. Glaeser and Jesse M. Shapiro. The benefits of the home mortgage
     interest deduction. Tax Policy and the Economy, 17:37—82, September 2003.
[17] Edward L. Glaeser and Jesse M. Shapiro. Urban growth in the 1990s: Is city
     living back? Journal of Regional Science, 43(1):139—165, February 2003.
[18] Claudia Goldin and Lawrence F. Katz. Mass secondary schooling and the state:
     The role of state compulsion in the high school movement. NBER Working
     Paper, 10075, November 2003.
[19] Joseph Gyourko and Joseph Tracy. The structure of local public finance and the
     quality of life. Journal of Political Economy, 99(4):774—806, August 1991.
[20] Edmund J. James. The origin of the land grant act of 1862 (the so-called Morrill
     Act) and some account of its author Jonathan B. Turner. The University Studies
     / University of Illinois Bulletin, 8(10):7—32, November 1910.
[21] Matthew E. Kahn. Smog reduction’s impact on california county growth. Journal
     of Regional Science, 40(3):565—582, August 2000.
[22] Alan B. Krueger. Measuring labor’s share. American Economic Review, 89(2):45—
     51, May 1999.
[23] Fabian Lange and Robert Topel. The social value of education and human
     capital. In E. Hanushek and F. Welch, editors, Handbook of the Economics
     of Education, volume 1 of Handbooks in Economics, chapter 8. Elsevier, 2006.
     forthcoming.
[24] James E. Long and Frank A. Scott. The income tax and nonwage compensation.
     Review of Economics and Statistics, 64(2):211—219, May 1982.
[25] Robert E. Lucas. On the mechanics of economic development. Journal of Mon-
     etary Economics, 22:3—42, 1988.
[26] Enrico Moretti. Human capital externalities in cities. In J. Vernon Henderson and
     Jacques-François Thisse, editors, Handbook of Urban and Regional Economics,
     chapter 8. North Holland-Elsevier, April 2003.
[27] Enrico Moretti. Estimating the social return to higher education: Evidence
     from longitudinal and repeated cross-sectional data. Journal of Econometrics,
     121(1-2):175—212, July-August 2004.
[28] Allan Nevins. The state universities and democracy. Univerisity of Illinois Press,
     Urbana, 1962.

                                          25
[29] James Poterba. The rate of return to corporate capital and factor shares: New es-
     timates using revised national income accounts and capital stock data. Carnegie-
     Rochester Series on Public Policy, 48:211—246, June 1998.

[30] Jordan M. Rappaport. Moving to nice weather. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
     City Research Working Paper, 03-07, March 2004.

[31] James E. Rauch. Productivity gains from geographic concentration of human
     capital: Evidence from the cities. Journal of Urban Economics, 34:380—400,
     1993.

[32] Jennifer Roback. Wages, rents, and the quality of life. Journal of Political
     Economy, 90(6):1257—1278, December 1982.

[33] Stephen Ruggles and Matthew Sobeck. Integrated public use microdata series:
     Version 2.0. Historical Census Projects, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
     1997.

[34] Curtis J. Simon. Human capital and metropolitan employment growth. Journal
     of Urban Economics, 43:223—243, March 1998.

[35] Curtis J. Simon. Industrial reallocation across U.S. cities, 1977-97. Journal of
     Urban Economics, 56(1):119—143, July 2004.

[36] Curtis J. Simon and Clark Nardinelli. Human capital and the rise of American
     cities, 1900-1990. Regional Science and Urban Economics, 32:59—96, January
     2002.

[37] Gary Solon, Robert Barsky, and Jonathan A. Parker. Measuring the cyclical-
     ity of real wages: How important is composition bias? Quarterly Journal of
     Economics, 109(1):1—25, February 1994.

[38] James H. Stock and Motohiro Yogo. Testing for weak instruments in linear IV
     regression. NBER Technical Working Paper, 284, October 2002.

[39] U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. County and City Data
     Book. U.S. Bureau of the Census, Washington, D.C., 1994.

[40] U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. USA Counties. U.S.
     Department of Commerce, Washington, D.C., 1998.




                                         26
Table 1 Highest and lowest wage and rental price fixed eﬀects, 1990

 A. Wage fixed eﬀects
 Highest Stamford, CT                                    0.60
           Norwalk, CT                                   0.55
           Danbury, CT                                   0.41
           New York-Northeastern NJ                      0.39
           Bridgeport, CT                                0.38

 Lowest    Alexandria, LA                                -0.11
           Laredo, TX                                    -0.12
           Bryan-College Station, TX                     -0.13
           McAllen-Edinburg-Pharr-Mission, TX            -0.18
           Brownsville - Harlingen-San Benito, TX -0.22

 B. Rental price fixed eﬀects
 Highest San Jose, CA                                    0.77
           Stamford, CT                                  0.73
           Santa Cruz, CA                                0.69
           Ventura-Oxnard-Simi Valley, CA                0.66
           Norwalk, CT                                   0.66

 Lowest    Dothan, AL                                    -0.58
           Florence, SC                                  -0.60
           Danville, VA                                  -0.64
           Anniston, AL                                  -0.66
           Johnstown, PA                                 -0.66

Notes: Wage fixed eﬀects reflect coeﬃcients from metropolitan area dummies in a regression
of log(wage) on these dummies and controls for observable worker characteristics. Rental
price fixed eﬀects reflect coeﬃcients from metropolitan area dummies in a regression of
log(monthly contract rent) on these dummies and controls for observable housing charac-
teristics. See section 2 of text for details.




                                           27
Table 2 Land-grant institutions and metropolitan area human capital

      Occupational human capital index Wilcoxon
 Year No land- Land-      Diﬀerence    rank-sum
       grant    grant                   p-value
 1850    0.0579     0.0612        0.0034         0.7697
 (N )      (7)        (2)
 1860    0.0599     0.0600        0.0001         0.9025
          (10)        (5)
 1870    0.0630     0.0633        0.0003         0.8763
          (15)        (6)
 1880    0.0687     0.0713        0.0026         0.9559
          (20)        (7)
 1900    0.0712     0.0821        0.0109         0.5730
          (48)       (13)
 1910    0.0749     0.0844        0.0096         0.1173
          (70)       (13)
 1920    0.0740     0.0783        0.0043         0.3414
          (89)       (17)
 1940    0.0844     0.1010        0.0166         0.0006
         (112)       (20)
 1950    0.0942     0.1176        0.0234         0.0000
         (122)       (22)
 1970    0.1355     0.1616        0.0261         0.0000
          (96)       (21)
 1980    0.1455     0.1862        0.0432         0.0000
         (235)       (37)
Notes: Number of observations in cell in parentheses. Land-grant classification based on
Nevins (1962). Occupational human capital index is constructed by matching each prime-
age white male in the Census public-use file with the share of prime-age white males in
1950 in the individual’s occupation with a college degree or higher, and then averaging by
metropolitan area and year.




                                           28
Table 3 Human capital and growth

                            Dependent variable is growth in...
                     Employment   Wage     Rental price House value

 log(share college      0.0786        0.0160       0.0664         0.0714
 educated)             (0.0247)      (0.0081)     (0.0126)       (0.0176)
 Initial level of:
  Employment            -0.0345
                       (0.0097)
  Wage                                -0.2347
                                     (0.0274)
  Rental price                                     -0.0382
                                                  (0.0242)
  House value                                                     0.0244
                                                                 (0.0401)
 R2                     0.0581        0.2333       0.2306         0.0888
 N                        495          495          495            495
Notes: Table shows coeﬃcient in regression of dependent variable on the log of the percent
of prime-age white males with a college degree in the metropolitan area. Wage, rent, and
house value growth are measured as the growth in metropolitan area fixed eﬀects from
hedonic regressions as described in section 2 of the text. Regressions include time period
dummies. Standard errors have been adjusted for serial correlation within metropolitan
areas.




                                           29
Table 4 Human capital and growth in productivity and the quality of life

 Share of land Measure of Eﬀect of human capital on growth in Productivity share
 in budget     land prices Productivity    Quality of life     of growth eﬀect
                                                                                       1    a
                                           a                     q                    kL
                                                                                         β̂
 sR                                   β̂                    β̂                      q
                                                                                  β̂ + k1 β̂
                                                                                              a
                                                                                          L


 .32                 Rents          0.0209               0.0172                     0.62
                                   (0.0069)             (0.0061)
 .22                 Rents          0.0209               0.0070                     0.80
                                   (0.0069)             (0.0065)
 .32                 House          0.0229               0.0214                     0.59
                     values        (0.0072)             (0.0061)
 .22                 House          0.0229               0.0116                     0.72
                     values        (0.0072)             (0.0060)

Notes: Table shows coeﬃcients in regression of (kL ∆wi,t+1 + kR ∆pi,t+1 ) and (sR ∆pi,t+1 − ∆wi,t+1 )
on the log of the share of prime-age white males in the metropolitan area with a college
degree. All calculations use kL = .75 and kR = .10. I measure ∆wi,t+1 as the change in a
metropolitan area i’s log(wage) fixed eﬀect from time t to t + 1, as described in section 2;
∆pi,t+1 is measured similarly using data on rents and house values. All regressions include
time period dummies. All standard errors have been adjusted for serial correlation within
metropolitan areas.




                                               30
Table 5 Alternative specifications

Independent variable: log(share college-educated)
 Specification         Productivity     Dependent variable is growth in...          N
                           share      Employment     Wage      Rental price

 (1) Baseline                0.62           0.0786        0.0160       0.0664       495
                                           (0.0247)      (0.0081)     (0.0126)
 (2) Weather                 0.67           0.0500        0.0163       0.0561       495
     controls                              (0.0226)      (0.0084)     (0.0120)
 (3) Lag growth              0.83           0.0639        0.0329       0.1270       247
     controls                              (0.0606)      (0.0155)     (0.0293)
 (4) No change in            0.69           0.0307        0.0260       0.0748       297
     area definition                       (0.0274)      (0.0128)     (0.0196)
 (5) IV with land            0.55           0.1708        0.0237       0.1184       495
     grant status                          (0.0964)      (0.0219)     (0.0501)
Notes: Table shows coeﬃcient in regression of dependent variable on the log of the percent-
age of prime-age white males with a college degree in the metropolitan area. Wage, rent,
and house value growth are measured as the growth in metropolitan area fixed eﬀects from
hedonic regressions as described in section 2 of the text. Regressions include time period
dummies. Standard errors have been adjusted for serial correlation within metropolitan
areas. All calculations use kL = .75, kR = .10, and sR = .32. Data on weather taken from
the County and City Data Book 1994. Land-grant classification based on Nevins (1962).




                                            31
Table 6 Instrumental variables estimates

                   log(share with Employment           Wage      Rental price House value
                    HS or more)     growth            growth       growth       growth

 log(share with                         -0.3939       -0.1317       -0.1950         -0.2404
 HS or more)                           (0.4341)      (0.0687)      (0.1347)        (0.2237)
 Minimum years of schooling required before leaving school (CL):
      9                -0.2366
                      (0.1311)
      10               0.4642
                      (0.2143)
      11               0.2149
                      (0.1621)
 Minimum years in school required before work is permitted (CA):
     7              -0.0524
                   (0.1367)
      8                0.1204
                      (0.1692)
      9                -0.0384
                      (0.1949)
 F − statistic          3.87               –             –            –               –
 N                      495               495           495          495             495
Notes: Wage, rent, and house value growth are measured as the growth in metropolitan
area fixed eﬀects from hedonic regressions as described in section 2 of the text. Compulsory
schooling laws coded as in Acemoglu and Angrist (2000). F-statistic is test statistic from
a test of the null hypothesis that the coeﬃcients on the CL and CA dummies are jointly
significant. Regressions include time period dummies and metropolitan area dummies.
Growth regressions include initial levels of employment, wages, rents, and house values,
respectively, as controls. Standard errors have been adjusted for serial correlation within
metropolitan areas.




                                            32
Table 7 Sources of the eﬀect of human capital on quality of life

      1980-1990                No land-     Land-     Diﬀerence     N
      change in:                grant       grant
 (1) log(restaurants            0.2682      0.3275      0.0594     222
     per capita)               (0.0085)    (0.0187)    (0.0212)
 (2) log(serious crimes         -0.0363     -0.0913     0.0549     222
     per capita)               (0.0150)    (0.0335)    (0.0377)
 (3) High school dropout        -0.0404     -0.0396     -0.0008    252
     rate                      (0.0032)    (0.0077)    (0.0029)
 (4) log(no. days air           -0.3616     -0.1929     0.1687      74
     quality index > 100)      (0.1755)    (0.2973)    (0.3795)
Notes: Change in log(restaurants per capita) is from 1977 to 1992. Data on restaurants
per capita and the number of FBI-defined serious crimes per capita are from the USA
Counties 1998 database, with counties matched to metropolitan areas as in Glaeser and
Shapiro (2003). High-school dropout rate is the share of individuals ages 16 to 19 in 1980
and 1990 who are neither high school graduates nor in school, calculated from Census
public-use samples. Data on air quality is a count of the number of days in 1980 and 1990
that the Environmental Protection Agency’s Air Quality Index exceeded 100, taken from
http://www.epa.gov/airtrends/factbook.html.




                                           33
A      Appendix
A.1     Measuring Local Area Wages
In order to measure relative wage levels in metropolitan areas at time t, I regress the
log wage of all prime-age males in the sample at time t on dummies for metropolitan
areas and a set of controls. These controls are age in years, the square of age in years,
and dummies for categories of the following worker characteristics (additional details
in Supplemental Appendix available on author’s web page):

    • Veteran status: not applicable; no service; yes; not ascertained.

    • Marital status: married, spouse present; married, spouse absent; separated;
      divorced; widowed; never married, single, or not applicable.

    • Educational attainment: none or preschool; grade 1, 2, 3, or 4; grade 5, 6, 7, or
      8; grade 9; grade 10; grade 11; grade 12; 1, 2, or 3 years of college; 4+ years of
      college.

    • Occupation category (1950 classification): professional and technical; farmers;
      managers, oﬃcials, and proprietors; clerical and kindred; sales workers; crafts-
      men; operatives; service; farm laborers; laborers.

    • Industry category (1950 industrial classification): agriculture, forestry, and fish-
      ing; mining; construction; durable goods manufacturing; nondurable goods
      manufacturing; transportation; telecommunications; utilities and sanitary ser-
      vices; wholesale trade; retail trade; finance, insurance, and real estate; business
      and repair services; personal services; entertainment and recreation services;
      professional and related services; and public administration.

Observations with missing data on education attainment, occupation, or industry
were dropped from the regression.

A.2     Measuring Local Area Rents and House Values
My housing dataset consists of all households not residing in group quarters. In order
to measure relative rental prices in metropolitan areas in 1970, 1980, and 1990, I
regress the log of the reported monthly contract rent of all renter-occupied dwellings
in the sample in each year on dummies for metropolitan areas and a set of controls. For
1940, the controls are not available, so the regression includes only the metropolitan
area dummies. To measure relative house values, I repeated the above procedure
using the log of the reported value of all owner-occupied dwellings in the sample.
The controls used in the 1970, 1980, and 1990 samples are dummies for the following
housing characteristics (additional details in Supplemental Appendix available on
author’s web page): commercial use status; acreage of property; availability of kitchen
or cooking facilities; number of rooms; type of plumbing; year built; number of units
in structure; water source; type of sewage disposal; number of bedrooms.

                                           34
A.3     Calibrating the Household Share of Land (sR )
The share of land in the budget, sR , ought to capture the share of household expen-
ditures that go to non-traded goods. Put diﬀerently, it should reflect the elasticity of
the household’s expenditure function with respect to the price of land. It is this elas-
ticity that determines the utility consequences of a one-percent increase in the price
of land. In this subsection, I attempt to infer this elasticity by estimating the eﬀect
of an increase in the price of land on the price of a representative basket of goods.
(Additional details and regression tables are in a Supplemental Appendix available
on the author’s web page.)
    My first set of estimates comes from ACCRA’s cost of living index for U.S. cities
for the first quarter of 2000. This index is constructed by obtaining prices for a
basket of goods, and aggregating these to form a composite score for each city. I
am able to match 64 metropolitan areas in my 1990 sample to ACCRA cities, and
will use these 64 areas to study the relationship between land prices and the price of
a representative basket of goods and services. Using this dataset, I find that a one
percent increase in the price of land increases the overall price of goods and services
by .32 percent after adjusting for measurement error in the independent variable,
with an unadjusted elasticity of about .28.
    My second set of estimates of sR comes from the Consumer Price Index (CPI). The
CPI is calculated at the metropolitan area level for 24 of the areas in my sample, and
for some of these is measured repeatedly throughout the sample period. Regressions
of the growth in the CPI on the growth in measured land prices yield an elasticity
of .32 after accounting for measurement error, and an estimate of .22 if measurement
error is not taken into account. (It is necessary to use growth rates rather than levels
because the CPI is only comparable within an area over time, not across diﬀerent
areas within a given time period.) Overall, then, the evidence from several diﬀerent
approaches seems consistent with a value of sR of about .32, and probably not lower
than .22. In section 3, I report results for both of these values.




                                          35
       Supplemental Appendix to “Smart Cities:
      Quality of Life, Productivity, and the Growth
               Eﬀects of Human Capital”
                                     Jesse M. Shapiro∗
                                   University of Chicago
                                        June 15, 2005



A        Appendix
A.1        Measuring Local Area Wages
In order to measure relative wage levels in metropolitan areas at time t, I regress the
log wage of all prime-age males in the sample at time t on dummies for metropolitan
areas and a set of controls. These controls are age in years, the square of age in
years, and dummies for the following worker characteristics (IPUMS variable name
in parentheses):

      • Veteran status (VETSTAT): The veteran status categories are not applicable
        (code 1); no service (code 2); yes (code 3); and not ascertained (code 4).

      • Marital status (MARST): The marital status categories used are based on cur-
        rent marital status. The categories are married, spouse present (code 1); mar-
        ried, spouse absent (code 2); separated (code 3); divorced (code 4); widowed
        (code 5); never married, single, or not applicable (code 6).

      • Educational attainment (EDUCREC): The education categories used are based
        on the educational attainment recode. The categories, which correspond to
        completed years of schooling, are none or preschool (code 1); grade 1, 2, 3, or 4
        (code 2); grade 5, 6, 7, or 8 (code 3); grade 9 (code 4); grade 10 (code 5); grade
        11 (code 6); grade 12 (code 7); 1, 2, or 3 years of college (code 8); 4+ years
        of college (code 9). Observations with missing data on educational attainment
        were dropped from the wage regression.
  ∗
      e-mail: jmshapir@uchicago.edu. telephone: 773-834-2688.




                                                 1
   • Occupation category (OCC1950): Occupational categories are based on the
     1950 classification. The categories are professional and technical (codes 000-
     099); farmers (100-199); managers, oﬃcials, and proprietors (200-299); clerical
     and kindred (300-399); sales workers (400-499); craftsmen (500-599); opera-
     tives (600-699); service (700-799); farm laborers (800-899); laborers (900-970).
     Observations with missing data on occupation were dropped from the wage
     regression.

   • Industry category (IND1950): The industry categories I use are based on the
     1950 industrial classification. They are agriculture, forestry, and fishing (codes
     105-126); mining (206-236); construction (246); durable goods manufacturing
     (300-399); nondurable goods manufacturing (400-499); transportation (506-
     568); telecommunications (578-579); utilities and sanitary services (586-598);
     wholesale trade (606-627); retail trade (636-699); finance, insurance, and real
     estate (716-756); business and repair services (806-817); personal services (826-
     849); entertainment and recreation services (856-859); professional and related
     services (868-899); and public administration (900-936). Observations with
     missing data on industry were dropped from the regression.

A.2     Measuring Local Area Rents and House Values
My housing dataset consists of all households not residing in group quarters. In order
to measure relative rental prices in metropolitan areas in 1970, 1980, and 1990, I
regress the log of the reported monthly contract rent of all renter-occupied dwellings
in the sample in each year on dummies for metropolitan areas and a set of controls. For
1940, the controls are not available so the regression includes only the metropolitan
area dummies. To measure relative house values, I repeated the above procedure
using the log of the reported value of all owner-occupied dwellings in the sample.
The controls used in the 1970, 1980, and 1990 samples are dummies for the following
housing characteristics (IPUMS variable name in parentheses):

   • Commercial use status (COMMUSE): The commercial use status categories al-
     low identification of dwellings attached to businesses or medical/dental oﬃces.
     The categories are not applicable (code 0); no commercial use (code 1); com-
     mercial use (code 2); and unknown, unit on 10+ acres (code 3, 1970 only).

   • Acreage of property (ACREPROP): This variable indicates whether a non-city,
     non-suburban unit is on 10 or more acres. The categories are city or suburban
     lot (code 1, 1970 only); city or suburban lot or rural lot less than 1 acre (code 2,
     1980 and 1990); non-city, non-suburban lot under 10 acres including less than
     1 acre (code 3, 1970 only); non-city, non-suburban lot 1-9 acres (code 4, 1980
     and 1990); non-city, non-suburban lot 10+ acres (code 5, 1980 and 1990).

   • Availability of kitchen or cooking facilities (KITCHEN): This variable indicates
     whether a housing unit has a kitchen, defined as a sink with piped water, a
     nonportable cooking device, and an electronic refrigerator. The categories are

                                           2
      not applicable (code 0); no kitchen (code 1); shared use kitchen (code 3, 1970
      only); shared or exclusive use kitchen (code 4, 1980 and 1990); exclusive use
      kitchen (code 5, 1970 only).

   • Number of rooms (ROOMS): This variable indicates the number of whole rooms
     in the housing unit. The categories are not applicable (code 0), one room (code
     1), two rooms (code 2), etc., with a top-code at 9 rooms (code 9).

   • Type of plumbing (PLUMBING): This variable indicates whether the housing
     unit has complete plumbing facilities and, in some years, the nature of any
     partial facilities. The categories are not applicable (code 0), lacking complete
     plumbing (code 10, 1990 only), lacking hot water (code 11, 1970 only), lacking
     other or all plumbing facilities (code 12, 1970 only), has some facilities (code 13,
     1980 only), has no facilities (code 14, 1980 only), complete plumbing (code 20,
     1970 and 1990), exclusive use complete plumbing (code 21, 1980 only), shared
     complete plumbing (code 22, 1980 only).

   • Year built (BUILTYR): This variable codes the age of the structure in years.
     The categories are not applicable (code 0), 0-1 year old (code 1), 2-5 years (code
     2), 6-10 years (code 3), 11-20 years (code 4), 21-30 years (code 5), 31-40 years
     (code 6, 31+ in 1970), 41-50 years (code 7, 1980 and 1990, 41+ in 1980), 51+
     years (code 8, 1990 only).

   • Number of units in structure (UNITSSTR): Codes the number of occupied or
     vacant units in the structure. Categories are not applicable (code 0); mobile
     home or trailer (code 1); boat, tent, van, other (code 2); single-family detached
     (code 3); single-family attached (code 4); two-family building (code 5); 3-4
     family building (code 6); 5-9 family building (code 7); 10-19 family building
     (code 8); 20-49 family building (code 9); 50+ family building (code 10).

   • Water source (WATERSRC): Categories are not applicable (code 0); public
     system or private company (code 1); individual well (code 2); individual well,
     drilled (code 3); individual well, dug (code 4); other source (code 5).

   • Type of sewage disposal (SEWAGE): Categories are not applicable (code 0);
     public sewer (code 1); septic tank or cesspool (code 2); other means (code 3).

   • Number of bedrooms (BEDROOMS): Categories are not applicable (code 0),
     no bedrooms (code 1), 1 bedroom (code 2), 2 bedrooms (code 3), 3 bedrooms
     (code 4),4 bedrooms (code 5), 5+ bedrooms (code 6).

A.3     Calibrating the Household Share of Land (sR )
The share of land in the budget, sR , ought to capture the share of household expen-
ditures that go to non-traded goods. Put diﬀerently, it should reflect the elasticity
of the household’s expenditure function with respect to the price of land. It is this
elasticity that determines the utility consequences of a one-percent increase in the

                                           3
price of land. In this section, I attempt to infer this elasticity by estimating the eﬀect
of an increase in the price of land on the price of a representative basket of goods.
    My first set of estimates comes from ACCRA’s cost of living index for U.S. cities
for the first quarter of 2000. This index is constructed by obtaining prices for a
basket of goods, and aggregating these to form a composite score for each city. I am
able to match 64 metropolitan areas in my 1990 sample to ACCRA cities, and will
use these 64 areas to study the relationship between land prices and the price of a
representative basket of goods and services.
    In Appendix Table 1, I present regression estimates of the elasticity of the overall
composite price index with respect to the rent-based measure of the implicit price
of land. The first column shows an elasticity of about .28, so that a one percent
increase in the price of land increases the overall price of goods and services by about
.28 percent. Because the measure of rental prices is a regression estimate, it may be
subject to measurement error, which could lead to attenuation of this estimate. To
correct this problem, in the second column I instrument for the rent-based land price
measure with the house value-based land price measure, an independent measure of
the same underlying quantity. Consistent with the presence of measurement error in
the first column, the estimate increases to .32.
    My second set of estimates of sR comes from the Consumer Price Index (CPI).
The CPI is calculated at the metropolitan area level for 24 of the areas in my sample,
and for some of these is measured repeatedly throughout the sample period. In the
third column of the table, I regress the growth in the CPI on the growth in measured
land prices, to obtain an elasticity of about .22. (It is necessary to use growth rates
rather than levels because the CPI is only comparable within an area over time, not
across areas within a given time period.) In the fourth and final column, I repeat
this specification but instrument for the change in the rent-based price measure with
the change in the house value-based price measure. As before, the corrected estimate
increases to about .32.
    Overall, then, the evidence from several diﬀerent approaches seems consistent with
a value of sR on the order of .32, and probably not lower than .22. In section 3.1 of
the paper, I report results for both of these values.

A.4     Heterogeneity in the Eﬀects of Human Capital
In this subsection I examine the heterogeneity in the estimated growth eﬀects of hu-
man capital with respect to a number of important dimensions. First is the possibility
that the share of land in the household budget, sR , varies with the human capital
composition of the population. To check the robustness of my findings to this issue,
I have re-estimated the models in Appendix Table 1 allowing the share of land in
the budget to vary with whether a metropolitan area has an above-median share of
college graduates. Though the diﬀerence in estimated land shares between high- and
low-human capital locations is not statistically significant, the point estimates of the
diﬀerence in shares is non-trivial: the more flexible model suggests that sR is roughly
.24 for low-human capital areas and .35 for high-human capital areas. Row (1) of
Appendix Table 2 reports that the implied productivity share is roughly .69 when

                                            4
sR is allowed to take on these diﬀerent values for diﬀerent levels of human capital,
providing reassurance that cross-area heterogeneity in sR is not a major source of bias
in calculating the productivity share.1
    In addition to diﬀerences in budget shares, the eﬀects of human capital on growth
in wages and rents might diﬀer across cities because of diﬀerences in housing supply
constraints. In the model, these would be captured by heterogeneity in the para-
meter σ, which measures the supply elasticity of land rents. For a limited subset of
metropolitan areas in my panel it is possible to measure supply constraints directly
by taking advantage of the Wharton Land Use Control Survey (Saks, 2004a and
2004b), which collected information on several aspects of housing supply regulation
and collated them into a single index of regulatory strength.
    Rows (2a) and (2b) of Appendix Table 2 present results for those metropolitan
areas in my sample that can be identified as having below- and above-average levels
of land-use regulation, respectively. As one would expect (since it is harder for the
population of highly regulated areas to expand), the eﬀect of human capital operates
much more through employment in low-regulation areas, and much more through
wages and rents in high-regulation areas. While the wage and rent growth eﬀects of
human capital are much larger in the highly regulated areas, they remain in similar
proportion, so that the estimated productivity share of the growth eﬀect stays in the
vicinity of sixty percent in both sub-samples.
    Finally, to test whether the productivity growth eﬀects of human capital vary with
industrial composition, in rows (3a) and (3b) of Appendix Table 2 I compare results
for metropolitan areas with above- and below-median manufacturing shares (among
prime-age white males). These specifications should be interpreted with caution, be-
cause manufacturing share is itself endogenously related to human capital. With this
caveat in mind, however, the broad implication of these results is that the growth
eﬀects of human capital are larger in more manufacturing-intensive areas, as is the
share of the growth eﬀect attributable to productivity. This latter finding seems con-
sistent with Acemoglu’s (1996) search-based explanation for social increasing returns
to human capital, because manufacturing may be more intensive in physical capi-
tal than non-manufacturing sectors. However, due to the endogeneity of industrial
composition, this finding must be viewed as preliminary.
   1
     Heterogeneity in the firms’ budget shares kR and kL could also cause bias if these shares vary
with human capital levels. Using 1977 data on the manufacturing industry from the USA Counties
1998 database, I find that there is no statistically or economically significant relationship between
payroll’s share of total value added and the share of college graduates across metropolitan areas in
my 1980 sample. The ratio of new capital expenditures to total value added is also unrelated to
the share of college graduates. This evidence suggests that heterogeneity in these parameters is not
likely to systematically bias my findings.




                                                 5
References
[1] ACCRA. ACCRA cost of living index, volume 33:1. ACCRA, Louisville, KY,
    First quarter 2000.

[2] Daron Acemoglu. A microfoundation for social increasing returns in human capital
    accumulation. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(3):779—804, August 1996.

[3] Raven E. Saks. Housing supply restrictions across the United States. Wharton
    Real Estate Review, Fall 2004.

[4] Raven E. Saks. Job creation and housing construction: Constraints on employ-
    ment growth in metropolitan areas. Harvard University Mimeograph, November
    2004.

[5] U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. County and City Data
    Book. U.S. Bureau of the Census, Washington, D.C., 1994.

[6] U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. USA Counties. U.S.
    Department of Commerce, Washington, D.C., 1998.




                                         6
Appendix Table 1 The eﬀect of land prices on the cost of living

                 log(ACCRA cost        Growth in Consumer
                  of living index)      Price Index (CPI)
 Years                  1990                 1940-1990
                  OLS          2SLS      OLS         2SLS
 Level of       0.2775   0.3220
 rental prices (0.0362) (0.0493)
 Growth in                              0.2174      0.3204
 rental prices                         (0.0542)    (0.0798)
 R2              0.5605         –       0.9678        –
 N                 64           64        64          64
Notes: Instrument for rent level is house value level; instrument for growth in rents is
growth in house values. Data on levels and growth in rents and house values come from
metropolitan area fixed eﬀects in regressions described in section 2 of the paper. Data on
CPI from www.bls.gov. Data on ACCRA cost of living index is from ACCRA (2000).




                                            7
Appendix Table 2 Additional robustness checks

Independent variable: log(share college educated)
 Specification          Productivity      Dependent variable is growth in...           N
                            share       Employment     Wage      Rental price

 (1)    Heterogeneity          0.68           0.0786        0.0160       0.0664       495
        in sR                                (0.0247)      (0.0081)     (0.0126)
 (2a)    Low land-use          0.63           0.1500        0.0129       0.0881        86
          regulation                         (0.0562)      (0.0115)     (0.0295)
 (2b)   High land-use          0.58           0.0564        0.0288       0.1896        80
         regulation                          (0.1117)      (0.0207)     (0.0542)
 (3a)   High                   0.90           0.0526        0.0466       0.0879       248
        manufacturing                        (0.0410)      (0.0156)     (0.0245)
 (3b) Low                      0.46           0.0267        0.0049       0.0251       247
      manufacturing                          (0.0356)      (0.0095)     (0.0151)
Notes: Table shows coeﬃcient in regression of dependent variable on the log of the percent
of prime-age white males with a college degree in the metropolitan area. Wage, rent, and
house value growth are measured as the growth in metropolitan area fixed eﬀects from
hedonic regressions as described in section 2 of the paper. Regressions include time period
dummies. Standard errors have been adjusted for serial correlation within metropolitan
areas. All calculations use kL = .75, kR = .10. All calculations except row (1) use
sR = .32. In row (1), sR = .24 for areas whose share of college graduates is below-median
for a given year and sR = .35 for areas whose share of college graduates is above-median for
a given year. Data on weather taken from the County and City Data Book 1994. Land use
regulation is measured using the Wharton Land Use Control Survey as described in Saks
(2004a, 2004b).




                                             8
