NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CAN A RAPIDLY-GROWING EXPORT-ORIENTED
ECONOMY SMOOTHLY EXIT AN EXCHANGE
RATE PEG? LESSONS FOR CHINA FROM JAPAN’S
HIGH-GROWTH ERA
Barry Eichengreen
Mariko Hatase
Working Paper 11625
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11625
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2005

The views expressed here are not those of the Bank of Japan or any other organization with which the authors
are affiliated. We are grateful to Miguel Fuentes and Yoichi Matsubayashi for their help with some technical
aspects of the paper. For helpful comments on an earlier draft we thank Mitsuhiro Fukao, Yutaka Kosai,
Akira Otani, Shigenori Shiratsuka, Miyako Suda, Wataru Takahashi, Yosuke Tsuyuguchi, participants of the
seminar at the Bank of Japan and the staff of the Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies of the Bank
of Japan.The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Barry Eichengreen and Mariko Hatase. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Can a Rapidly-Growing Export-Oriented Economy Smoothly Exit an Exchange Rate Peg?
Lessons for China from Japan’s High-Growth Era
Barry Eichengreen and Mariko Hatase
NBER Working Paper No. 11625
September 2005
JEL No. F31, F33, N15, N65
ABSTRACT

We explore the parallels between Japanese currency policy after World War II and Chinese currency
policy today. After two decades of pegging at 360 yen, Japan decoupled from the dollar on August
1971 and then repegged at a revalued rate of 308 yen. After stabilizing the exchange rate at this new
level for about a year, greater flexibility was introduced. This phased adjustment - revaluation
followed after a time by an increase in flexibility - bears more than a passing resemblance to recent
Chinese policy initiatives.
We analyze the impact of Japan's exit from its peg on exports and investment. The results point to
sizeable effects of the yen's revaluation on both variables, especially investment. While our analysis
suggests that a rapidly-growing, export-oriented economy can operate a heavily managed float
despite the presence of capital controls and the absence of sophisticated foreign currency forward
markets, it underscores the importance of managing the exchange rate with domestic conditions in
mind and avoiding the kind of large real appreciation that would sharply compress profits and
damage investment.
For China this suggests starting with a modest band widening and a limited increase in flexibility,
and not with a large step revaluation which could have a sharp negative impact on investment and
growth. Our results thus provide support for the kind of measures taken at the end of July.
Barry Eichengreen
University of California, Berkeley
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
eichengr@econ.berkeley.edu
Mariko Hatase
Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies
Bank Of Japan
PO Box 203
Tokyo 100-8630
JAPAN
mariko.hatase@boj.or.jp

1. Introduction
China’s exchange rate arrangement is a continuing topic of controversy,
notwithstanding the decision announced on July 21st, when the country revalued by two
per cent and indicated that henceforth the rate would be allowed to depend more heavily
on market conditions. Is the initial revaluation too small, or would a larger adjustment
have had a devastating impact on Chinese investment and exports? Is the two per cent
revaluation properly seen as part of a larger process, as a first step in the transition to
greater flexibility? And, if so, is this gradual approach in which both the adjustment of
the exchange rate’s level and the move to greater flexibility are phased in an appropriate
strategy by the Chinese authorities?
There are few historical precedents for these questions. It is hard to think of many
large, export-oriented, fast-growing economies in the early stages of catch-up that exited
voluntarily from a peg. One analogy is Japan in the 1970s. After two decades of pegging
at 360 yen to the dollar, Japan decoupled from the dollar on August 28th, 1971, repegging
on December 18th at 308 yen in conjunction with the Smithsonian Agreement. The new
peg lasted 14 months, after which greater flexibility was introduced.
In this paper we use this historical precedent to shed light on current Chinese
prospects. We argue that there are extensive parallels between the two cases, extending
even to the gradual nature of the adjustment – a one-time step revaluation followed after
a period by the shift to freer floating. At the same time, the analogy must be developed
carefully. Japan then was more advanced than China now. Its per capita incomes were
higher, and technological sophistication was greater relative to the United States. While
government involvement in the economy was extensive, such involvement was not as

pervasive as in China. Japan also had more sophisticated financial markets and a betterdeveloped monetary transmission mechanism. Moreover, its initial devaluation was
larger. Still, and notwithstanding these differences, Japan’s experience from the 1950s
through the 1970s can provide useful insight into China’s current options.
Our analysis of the country’s experience from the 1950s through the 1970s
suggests that a rapidly-growing, export-oriented industrializing economy can exit a
currency peg without significantly disrupting its growth, its export growth in particular.
It can operate a more flexible exchange rate despite the maintenance of capital controls
and not having well-developed foreign currency forward markets. But it is important for
the country to manage its exchange rate with domestic economic conditions in mind and
to avoid the kind of large real appreciation that could have a sharply negative impact on
profitability and investment. For China, this suggests starting with a modest revaluation
and a progressive widening of the band – the policies actually adopted – is preferable to
the kind of large revaluation sometimes advocated by foreign observers.1

2. Background to the Study
Japan in the 1950s and 1960s, like China in the 1980s and 1990s, grew at rates
well in excess of those witnessed anytime in its previous history.2 GNP growth in Japan
between 1955 and 1971 averaged 9.3 per cent per annum. This was a dramatic
acceleration from 1913-1950, when growth had averaged 2.0 per cent, and from 1885-

1

See inter alia Goldstein and Lardy (2003).
The detail provided here may be more than is required by some Japanese readers already familiar with the
structure of the economy. However, it may be important to provide this information for readers interested
in the comparison with China, especially when it comes to topics like the organization of the foreign
exchange market, the monetary transmission mechanism, and the operation of capital controls.
2

1

1913, when it had proceeded at 2.6 per cent.3 China’s economy has expanded at nearly
10 per cent per annum since economic reform commenced in 1978, which is similarly a
revolution in growth performance. (See Table 1.)
In Japan after World War II as in China today, growth was fueled by exports,
facilitated by the transfer of advanced technology, sustained by investment, and
supported by elastic supplies of cheap labor. Japan’s exports grew at an annual average
rate of 16.9 per cent between 1955 and 1971, more than half again as fast as output.4
Exports quadrupled in volume between 1959 and 1969 and increased by a further onethird in the next two years, impressive performance even by modern Chinese standards.
The other side of this coin was a doubling of Japan’s share of the imports of the rest of
the world in the course of the 1960s and especially rapid growth in the share of U.S.
merchandise imports accounted for by Japanese suppliers. (See Table 2.) Japan’s
surplus with the U.S. was more than $1 billion in 1970, reflecting the buoyant U.S.
market for the country’s exports of consumer goods in conjunction with Japan’s need to
finance imports of energy and raw materials from other suppliers. Strong surpluses
allowed Japan to more than double its foreign reserves between 1967 and 1970.5
By the end of the 1960s, Japanese gross national savings rates had risen to 40 per
cent and the investment/GNP ratio had reached 35 per cent, levels broadly comparable to
those in China today.6 (See Table 3.) Employment in agriculture declined by 3 per cent

3

The 1913-1950 figure is depressed by the exceptional events of the post-World War II period. Over the
shorter period 1913-1940, growth averaged 4.0 per cent.
4
This nearly matches rates of export growth in China, which have been running on the order of 20 per cent
per annum in recent years.
5
Though outstanding reserves had been constant during the high growth era, they started increasing in
1968. Reserves of the end of 1970 were $4.4 billion, up from $2.0 billion at the end of 1967.
6
The former showed about 50 per cent increase, while the latter achieved almost 90 per cent increase
compared with two decades earlier. Between 1956 and 1973 real fixed nonresidential capital investment
grew at an annual average rate of 16 per cent.

2

per annum both in the second half of the 1950s and first half of the 1960s and was offset
by the rapid growth of employment in the modern sector, led by manufacturing,
facilitating industries, construction, and to a lesser extent services.7 According to
Ohkawa and Rosovsky (1973), more than 70 per cent of Japan’s full-time farm
households were in a condition of underemployment after World War II. Elastic supplies
of labor could thus be made available to industry without driving down agricultural
output.8 Contemporaries referred to a dual wage structure in which the wages of
employees of enterprises in the modern sector were at least twice the levels of those in
the agricultural sector – indicative of a strong incentive for labor reallocation.9 In all
these respects, the parallels with contemporary China are clear.
But there are also important differences. Japan at the beginning of its highgrowth period was a relatively advanced industrial economy, reflecting the development
of a modern textile industry in the 19th century and then steel and shipbuilding in the first
half of the 20th.10 China, in contrast, had a dearth of modern industry when embarking on

7

Ohkawa and Rosovsky (1973), Table 5.2.
Ohkawa and Rosovsky (1973), p.133. That widespread underemployment was more than a transitory
post-World War II phenomenon is evident in the rationale for the famous National Income Doubling Plan
of 1960, which was precisely to reduce the extent of disguised unemployment. Prime Minister Hayato
Ikeda announced the Income Doubling Plan immediately after he took office in 1960. The plan was
crystallized as a cabinet decision in December 1960 (Yasuba and Inoki 1989, p.18). Its primary goals were
a sharp improvement in living standards and the achievement of full employment. The plan intended to
achieve an annual averaged growth of 7.2 per cent between fiscal year of 1961 and 1966. To reach that
target, the following areas were given priority; improvement of social infrastructure and industrial structure,
enhancement of trade and international economic cooperation, and stimulating technology and human
resources (Kosai 1989, pp.210-2).
9
More precisely, Ohkawa and Rosovsky (1973) suggest that wages in large industrial enterprises were as
much as twice wages in small and medium-size firms, while wages in the modern sector broadly defined
(small and large firms alike) were twice the levels prevailing in agriculture.
10
Nakamura (1993) categorizes Japanese cotton spinning as “modern industry” from the late 1880s
(Nakamura 1993, p.84). Takamura (1971) concludes that the modern cotton spinning industry was
established by the late 1890s (Takamura 1971, p.209). Okazaki (1993, p.227) argues that the Japanese steel
industry was able to stand on its own feet, with the help of limited protection from import competition,
from the late 1920s. The shipbuilding industry reached international standards by the early 20th century
(Ishii 1991, p.228). Shipbuilding recovered relatively quickly after World War II; by 1955 more than 85 per
cent of its products were exported (Mitsubishi Heavy Industry, Ltd. 1967, pp.7, 22, 49-51). We exclude
8

3

reform in 1978. Japanese per capita GDP in 1950 expressed in 1990 international GearyKhamis dollars was $1,926, whereas Chinese per capita GDP in 1978 was $979. Five
years later the comparable figures were $2,772 and $1,265.11
The Japanese system of technology transfer was also different. Whereas China
today relies on foreign direct investment for technology transfer, Japan relied on
licensing and reverse engineering. The Japanese government limited inward FDI for
three decades after 1950. Mason (1982) and others argue that restrictions on market
access for foreign multinationals facilitated the country’s efforts to license foreign
technologies.12 They conclude that the relatively advanced state of the Japanese
economy, together with the lower tacit component of advanced technology compared to
today, enhanced the effectiveness of this approach to technology transfer.
The structure of labor markets was different as well. In Japan in the 1950s, labor
was free to move from the countryside to the cities; the freedom to select one’s
occupation and place of residence were individual liberties guaranteed since the early
Meiji period, the late 19th century.13 In China, in contrast, the authorities attempt to
regulate the movement of the rural population to the cities in order to avoid threats to the

motor vehicles and electrical machinery from this list of industries that developed significantly before
World War II; although Toyota produced trucks for military use in the 1940s, the production of passenger
cars only started after the war. The Ministry of Trade and Industry imposed significant restrictions on
imports in order to protect the passenger car industry in the 1950s (Toyota Motor Corporation 1987, pp.834, 259-60). Although there was prewar production of lighting equipment, radios and electric wires, the
leading companies producing electrical equipment and electronics, such as Sony and Sanyo Electric, were
only established after World War II.
11
According to estimates in Maddison (2001), Table C3-c.
12
Kosai (1989) points out that one of the reasons for restricting inward FDI was the fear that this would
hamper domestic research and development.
13
In the very early stage of Meiji period, a series of reforms which enabled people to select one’s
occupation and to move freely conducted; the class system separating warriors, farmers, craftsmen and
merchants abolished in 1869 and the trades of agricultural field were allowed in 1872. For details, see
Nakamura (1993), pp.62-63.

4

public order, using a system of official work permits or visa.14 The effectiveness of these
measures is difficult to evaluate, since illegal internal migration is rife. So too are the
implications for the China-Japan comparison. On the one hand, China today has even
larger reserves of underemployed rural labor anxious to find work in the high-wage
modern sector. On the other hand, that labor’s freedom to move is significantly less.15
In addition, the banking and financial system was stronger in Japan. Banks were
not burdened by the overhang of nonperforming loans plaguing the Big Four banks in
China. Their lending decisions were guided by commercial motives, although subject to
window guidance (quantitative limits on the growth of lending by individual banks,
described in more detail below). The lending charges of Japanese banks could be
adjusted freely (even if published lending rates were relatively stable, the banks still
adjusted the compulsory depositions required of their customers).16 In China, banks have

14

In addition, already in the 1950s employment in large Japanese manufacturing firms was characterized
by long tenures and low involuntary separation rates. See Abegglen (1958) and Odaka (1999). Labor
relations in the high growth era were well known for enterprise unionism. The unions of major firms
played important roles in determining wages through negotiations with management. The emphasis of
these unions on job security over wage growth is often cited as one of the reasons for low levels of wage
rigidity in Japan compared to other developed countries. Shimada, Hosokawa and Seike (1982) point out
that rates of wage increase were sensitive to factors affecting corporate profits in Japan while U.S. wages
were less flexible. Odaka (1999) points out that the co-operative attitudes of unions worked as protection
against cost inflation. For example, unions took “an extremely co-operative stance towards firms’ policies
of streamlining and wage restraint” after the first oil shock (p.146). China today does not possess equally
well-organized union movement or comparably stable employment relations.
15
To put it another way, one rationale for maintaining an undervalued exchange rate is to offset another
distortion (rural underemployment) that makes the social returns to employment in the modern exportoriented sector much higher than the returns to employment in the rural sector. See Dooley, FolkertsLandau and Garber (2003). Since China today has more rural underemployment, it can be argued that it
should avoid further revaluation. On the other hand, this argument for sticking to an undervalued rate in
order to accelerate the movement of rural labor to the modern sector makes no sense when the authorities
are at the same time attempting to limit internal migration for fear of social dislocations.
16
For the details of lending rate adjustments using compulsory deposits, see Ministry of Finance (1991a,
pp.267-273).

5

less freedom to adjust lending rates, and in any case such rates matter less for lenders and
borrowers with soft budget constraints.17
Monetary control exhibited similarities as well as differences. In the 1950s the
BOJ used the discount rate, discount-rate surcharges for excess borrowing, and window
guidance to influence the growth of money and credit.18 It used changes in required
reserves, which altered the banks’ capacity to lend, starting in 1959.19 From the mid1950s it also sold short term government securities. It purchased and sold long term
bonds, especially after the government resumed issuing these in 1966. It purchased
private bills (prime bills or promissory notes issued by banks with prime bills attached as
collateral, which were introduced in 1972).
At the same time, open market operations of the normal sort did not really exist,
since there was little in the way of a liquid bond market.20 The central bank rationed its

17

Although it can be argued that the bribes paid to loan officers in order to obtain bank credit serves a
similar function to compulsory deposits.
18
Discount rates applied to BOJ lending to private banks (discounts and loans on bills). From 1946 to
1963, the BOJ applied discount rates to pre-determined amounts of BOJ lending and amounts over the
ceiling were subject to higher interest rates. By changing the level of the ceiling, the BOJ could affect the
lending behavior of banks.
19
According to Suzuki (1987, pp.322-3), “The reserve deposit requirement system is a system under which
commercial financial institutions are required to deposit in non-interest bearing accounts at the Bank of
Japan amounts in certain proportions to their deposits and other liabilities (these proportions are called
‘reserve ratios’). … During periods of financial tightening, and subsequent loosening or relaxation until
around 1980, reserve requirements were changed relatively frequently and thus were a powerful policy
instrument for the adjustment of the liquidity position of financial institutions, together with lending policy
and securities and bills operations.”
20
A study that emphasizes these features of Japanese financial markets and monetary policy is Tachi and
Komiya (1960, p.288). They write:
“One of the peculiar features of the Japanese monetary system and monetary policy in recent years
as compared with those of other advanced countries is the prevalence of direct control measures
such as credit rationing at the discount window of the Bank of Japan, the fixing of almost all rates
of interest by, or under the direction of, the monetary authorities, or the regulation of new issues of
bonds virtually on a quota system. In Japan, because of the absence of an open market in such
short-term securities as Treasury bills and acceptance, the Bank of Japan depends on loans as the
principal means of extending central bank credit to the banking system.”
Another example of this view of the financial system can be found in Bank of Japan (1976). There one
finds the passage (pp.123-125, authors’ translation):
“There are three kinds of conventional tools for monetary policy: control of discount rate, open
market operations, and control of required reserve ratios. Among these three, control of the

6

discounts and loans against bills. It imposed window guidance on the large city banks in
the 1950s and then on the long-term credit banks, large regional banks and trust banks in
the 1960s. It also used informal tools for controlling corporate bond issuance.21 When
selling long term government bonds in the late 1960s, the BOJ informally allocated them
to banks in specific amounts.22 This reliance on moral suasion resembles current practice
in China, where the authorities similarly attempt to influence bank lending and thereby
money and credit conditions by instructing the banks to limit and adjust their lending to
accommodate the objectives of monetary policy.23

discount rate has been used as the most important policy tool…Open market operations cannot be
conducted with flexibility due to underdevelopment of bond market. The major method of
monetary control was BOJ lending with discount rate control. So called window guidance was
used as a supplementary tool. … The conventional tools make it possible to control private banks’
activities through the effect of interest rate and liquidity on their cash position. However, it has
not been easy to obtain immediate effects of such policies, especially for tightening occasions, as
the function of interest rate and market has not been sufficient. Therefore, the BOJ used window
guidance as a supplementary tool for conventional methods.”
In his assessment of monetary policy from the late 1960s through the early 1970s, Kosai (1989, p.228)
concludes that “there was a sign that monetary policy tools transformed from BOJ lending, call rate and
window guidance into open market operations and interest rates.”
21
From 1949 to 1956, the BOJ influenced corporate bond issuance by determining the eligibility of bonds
for use as collateral. Financial intermediaries, mainly banks, purchased about 90 per cent of corporate
bonds, and those bonds were immediately passed to the BOJ as collateral for BOJ lending. When monetary
conditions eased in the mid 1950s, the banks’ dependence on BOJ lending declined and the BOJ’s de facto
power through this mechanism disappeared. After the pre-issue examination of eligibility was eliminated,
eight major banks, including Industrial Bank of Japan and the major city banks, developed informal
arrangements whereby they determined detailed conditions for corporate bond issuance in conjunction with
the BOJ. Thus, the central bank continued to exercise considerable influence over the volume of issuance
(Ministry of Finance 1991b, pp.570-2, Association of Public and Corporate Bond Underwriters 1980,
pp.232-3, 239).
22
When the BOJ broadened the practice of purchasing bonds in 1962, it allocated those transactions 75 per
cent to city banks, 18 per cent to regional banks, and 3.5 per cent to trust banks and long-term credit banks.
Within those categories it assigned amounts to each institution according to the size of its balance sheet
(Ministry of Finance, 1991a, pp.189-190). When the BOJ began purchasing long-term government bonds in
1967, a formal ceiling on the size of the operation was not set. But the BOJ set informal guidelines that
worked as a de facto ceiling. According to Ministry of Finance (1991a, p.310, authors’ translation), the
BOJ considered that “about 70 per cent of the outstanding [government bonds] held by financial institutions,
excluding Norin Chukin Bank and securities companies, are the appropriate ceiling for the operation.”
Following this guideline, each entity taking part in such operations was allocated an amount equal to 70 per
cent of its holdings of eligible bonds.
23
Typically, the People’s Bank of China convenes a meeting to explain its monetary policy intentions and
uses moral suasion to guide the commercial banks to adjust their lending policies accordingly. For example,
“in the first quarter of 2004, considering overinvestment in some regions and industries, the PBC held
monthly meetings to review economic and financial development and strengthened warnings for the

7

To be sure, the extent of this reliance differed across markets and over time. As
for short-term money markets, the call market tended to be subject to controls though the
degree of restrictions changed over time. “The experts including the authorities
considered that the level of call rates were abnormally high” in the early stage of the high
growth era and, thus, moral suasions by the BOJ or self-imposed restrictions by financial
institutions for call rates were believed to be necessary.24 However, the coverage of these
restrictions was limited and there were loopholes allowing effective rates to fluctuate to
some extent. Thus, “call loan rates worked as indicators for the condition of financial
market as a whole though the function was imperfect.” 25As for bond markets, yields of
government-guaranteed bonds, bank debentures and corporate bonds in secondary
markets could fluctuate relatively freely, while those in primary markets were kept in
artificially low levels. By contrast, yields of JGBs in both primary and secondary
markets were strictly controlled.26 But despite these variations, and notwithstanding the

commercial banks to guard against potential risks. Commercial banks are urged to maintain sound
operations and sustained business development with intensified capital constraints and reasonable loan
growth. ” In addition to monthly meetings, it announced a notice on 18 January, requiring commercial
banks to take positive measures to control loans to such overheated industries as steel, aluminum and
cement. Furthermore, it “summoned all commercial banks to carry out a specific analysis on current
economic and financial situations, requiring a mechanism to be introduced to control loan expansion in line
with their own risk-control capacities and capital adequacy status.” (People’s Bank of China, 2004a, p.51.)
That said, there has been movement in the conduct of these policy in recent years, with the People’s Bank
beginning to make growing use of interest rates to shape the growth of bank credit.
24
Ministry of Finance (1991a), p. 87. From 1948 to 1957, the BOJ “guided” the market participants to
trade at a particular overnight interest rate in the call market. This de facto regulation on call loan interest
rates was abolished in 1957 but then self-imposed controls by financial institutions started two years later.
The effectiveness of the self-imposed controls was not satisfactory and the actual interest rates applied to
transactions were higher than published rates. Thus, the BOJ again started to “guide” call loan brokers in
1962 and in the mid-1960s this control gradually moved towards quotation system under which call loan
brokers decided quoted prices with the consultation to the BOJ (Ministry of Finance 1991a, pp.89, 111,
155-6,157-8).
25
Ministry of Finance (1991a), p.313.
26
Ministry of Finance (1991a), pp.313-4, Kure and Shima (1987), pp.56-7. In the case of the JGB, the
amount of circulation in the secondary market was limited as most part of the JGBs were held by financial
institutions and it was said that the MOF restricted the sales of them. The MOF “guided” the securities
companies to buy JGBs from individuals with prices close to those in primary markets (Bank of Japan 1986,
p.529, Kure and Shima 1987, pp.56-7).

8

fact that Japan had a sounder banking and financial system after World War II than China
today, the mechanisms of monetary control were not entirely dissimilar.
Finally, compared to China today, government involvement in the economy was
less. To be sure, volumes have been written about the industrial policies of the Ministry
of Trade and Industry and the credit-allocation policies of the Ministry of Finance. The
Japanese government sought to channel resources into industrial development,
establishing the Reconstruction Finance Bank (eventually taken over by the Japan
Development Bank) and the Export Bank of Japan (renamed the Export-Import Bank of
Japan). These public financial institutions influenced Japanese development through the
Fiscal Investment and Loan Programme, or FILP.27 The FILP was overseen by the
Ministry of Finance, which collected public deposits at the Postal Savings system (and
the resources of the public pension system) and passed them through to the JDB, the
ExIm Bank, and other public financial institutions such as the Housing Loan
Corporation.28
The commercial banks, in contrast, retained basic autonomy over their loans and
investments within ceilings set by window guidance.29 Although they were subject to
window guidance, there was no counterpart in 1950s and 1960s Japan of the
nonperforming loan problem in contemporary China, where estimates of the extent of
27

For a more detailed description of the FILP, see Suzuki (1987), pp.273-276.
According to Suzuki (1987), the share of public banks, including the JDB and ExIm Bank, in the FILP
fluctuated between 8 and 20 per cent from 1965 to 1980. Public finance corporations, such as Housing
Loan Corporation usually accounted for the largest share. Outstanding of the FILP funds were 16.2 billion
yen in the end of FY 1965, while all outstanding bank assets were 36.5 billion yen. While public financial
institutions such as the JDB and ExIm Bank had assets comparable in size to those of Japan’s largest
private banks, there were in a goodly number of private banks; postal saving deposits comprised no more
than 20 per cent of personal savings. Roughly speaking, then, some four-fifths of financial intermediation
in Japan was based on commercial motives.
29
There is some controversy over this. Authors like Mikuni and Murphy (2002) suggest that the banks
came under strong moral suasion to plow their loans into capital formation in export industries in particular.
28

9

nonperforming loans are on the order of 40-50 per cent of GDP. This suggests that the
extension of credit for non-economic reasons was less than in China today. While it is
hard to put precise figures on the share of policy loans in the portfolios of Chinese state
banks, it is fair to say that the banking system, which is heavily dominated by state banks,
has devoted significantly more of its resources to development lending, not always with
positive results for their own balance sheets and for the development of the Chinese
economy.

3. Currency Policy
For nearly a quarter of a century after World War II Japanese currency policy was
predicated on an exchange rate pegged to the dollar and stringent capital controls. The
yen was pegged at 360 on April 25, 1949 in conjunction with the Dodge Line.30 It
remained there until the collapse of the Bretton Woods System in 1971.
Exchange rate stability has been portrayed as integral to the Japanese economy’s
rapid growth and to the rapid growth of its exports in particular.31 To be sure, in strong
upswings, the demand for imports grew more rapidly than the supply of exports, and
export supply was partially crowded out by domestic absorption. It was not possible to
finance the resulting current account moved out of foreign reserves, since the government
followed a strategy of limiting reserve accumulation in order to plow all available
resources into fixed investment. This meant that the Bank of Japan had to tighten in
Others like Horiuchi (1984) are more skeptical that the authorities were in fact able to influence the
allocation of bank lending in this way.
30
The Dodge Line was the set of economic reforms advanced by Joseph M. Dodge in the late 1940s.
Dodge was the President of Detroit Bank and appointed as an advisor to the General Headquarters of the
occupying forces (GHQ). For details of the Dodge Line, see Nakamura (2003) and Miwa (2003).

10

order to restrain the growth of demand, limit the deterioration of the external accounts,
and defend the currency peg. This constraint on the rate of growth was referred to as the
“balance of payments ceiling.”32 Fortunately, this constraint only bound at high rates of
growth, at least after the beginning of the postwar period.
This observation has led observers to ask whether the yen was significantly
undervalued. The consensus appears to be that the currency was overvalued at the
beginning of the postwar period but that this gave way to undervaluation in the course of
the high-growth years.33 Before the currency was pegged in April 1949, there had been
debate over its appropriate level between Japanese officials and the Economic and
Scientific Section of the Supreme Commander for the Allied Powers (SCAP). SCAP
proposed a rate of 330 to the dollar, but Japanese officials preferred a lower rate in part
because they anticipated that sterling and other currencies might soon be devalued against
the dollar.34 The Bank of Japan (1985, p.258) observes that, at the eventual rate of 360 to
the dollar, “the exchange rate was considerably overvalued given the effective price level
considering black market prices. It was a challenge to adapt the Japanese economy to the
newly set exchange rate.”35
Initially, tight foreign exchange controls were needed to support the currency. As
Komiya (1988) puts it, “the exchange rate of 360 yen per dollar set in 1949 was
significantly overvalued compared with the equilibrium rate at which the external
accounts are balanced without restrictions on imports and without export enhancement
31

Odaka (1989, pp.175-6, authors’ translation) writes in a representative passage that “it should not be
neglected that the fixed exchange rate of 360 yen against dollar was firmly kept until 1972 and that this was
behind the export expansion.”
32
For references see Nakamura (1993), p.137 et seq. An analysis of this phenomenon is Ackley and Ishi
(1976).
33
Note the similarity to recent discussions of China.
34
Ministry of Finance (1976), pp.430-1; Bank of Japan (1985), pp.255-6.

11

policies.”36 37 Kosai (1989) agrees with the proviso that overvaluation emerged only after
sterling was devalued and inflation accelerated with the outbreak of the Korean War.38
These observations suggest at least some qualification of the conventional wisdom that an
undervalued exchange rate was central to Japan’s postwar growth from the start.
But with the recovery of the economy following the imposition of the Dodge Line
and the rapid growth of productivity in the traded goods sector in particular, what had
once been seen an overvaluation became increasingly undervaluation.39 Government-led
rationalization of the metals, machinery and chemicals sectors led to reductions in
production costs in industries in which Japan already had some presence in export
markets. In addition, at the end of the 1950s and increasingly in the 1960s, Japan’s
export competitiveness was enhanced by technological progress and structural change
leading to the emergence of new export products that had not been produced before in
significant quantities or even at all, plastics, business machines and automobiles for
example.40
Already at the end of the 1950s Shinohara (1959) used comparisons with the
1930s to argue in favor of undervaluation.41 While there is some debate over precisely
when this undervaluation emerged, by the late 1960s there was a considerable amount of
evidence in favor of the hypothesis.42 By this time Japan had learned how to produce
many of the capital goods needed for its industrial expansion rather than importing them

35

Authors’ translation.
Komiya (1988), p.160 (authors’ translation).
37
Some previous studies, such as Shinohara (1959) and Fujino(1988) discuss the evaluation of the yen
from the viewpoint of purchasing power parity.
38
Kosai (1989), p.265.
39
See inter alia Fujino (1988) and Kosai (1989).
40
On this see Kojima (1972).
41
Shinohara (1959), p.24.
42
For questions about the timing of this shift, see for example Fujino (1988).
36

12

from abroad. After 1965 the current account moved into surplus, and then from 1968
foreign reserves rose strongly.43 The balance of payments ceiling of which observers had
warned no longer seemed to constrain growth even in strong expansions.44
To analyze these questions further, we have constructed nominal and real
effective exchange rates for the 1950s and 1960s.45 Our series are trade-weighted
averages of bilateral nominal rates for 17 leading trading partners accounting for 40 to 50
per cent of total Japanese exports.46 Figure 1 for the nominal exchange rate shows that
focusing exclusively on the yen-dollar exchange rate, as is typically done in discussions
of the post-World War II years, understates currency variability. It also shows a tendency
for the nominal effective rate to appreciate over the high-growth period as a result of
devaluations against the dollar and thus the yen by other countries.47
Figure 2 plots the real effective exchange rate, constructed as wholesale prices in
Japan relative to wholesale prices in other countries converted into yen. We see there
how the real rate rose around the time of the Korean War, consistent with the emphasis of
Kosai (1989). It then fell by 2.8 per cent from the mid-1950s through the late 1960s,
although the bilateral real rate against the U.S. dollar fell by about twice this amount.48
This is consistent with the hypothesis of emerging undervaluation, although the change in
the real effective rate is small. Note also that while the real bilateral rate against the
43

As noted in Section 2 above.
Ackley and Ishi (1976, p.187) note that the 1963-64 and 1966-70 cyclical expansions were the first ones
that were not marked by sharp and steady declines in net exports that ultimately resulted in their moving
into negative territory. As Nakamura (1993, p.167) explains this, “the current account of the balance of
payments stopped being a constraint on economic growth under the exchange rate of 360 yen per dollar
because international competitiveness had improved enough” (authors’ translation).
45
See the appendix for details on the construction of these series.
46
Depending on the year in question. For purposes of the chain-weighted index, we updated the trade
weights every five years.
47
Such as Greece and Thailand in 1953, Iran in 1957, the Philippines in 1962 and India in 1966.
44

13

United States continued to depreciate in the second half of the 1960s, the real effective
rate did not. Figure 2 thus suggests that back-of-the-envelope calculations based on
conveniently available U.S. and Japanese inflation rates, together with the constant
bilateral exchange rate, tend to exaggerate these trends.
It can be argued that relative wholesale price indices adjusted for exchange rate
changes understate the change in competitiveness, since wholesale prices are dominated
by homogenous goods whose cost tends to be driven to equality by arbitrage. A better
comparison for Japan would be the unit prices of exports relative to other industrial
countries, since most Japanese exports were differentiated manufactures and the
developed countries were Japan’s main competitors in markets for these products. Figure
3 confirms that export prices rose less rapidly than wholesale prices over the high growth
period, especially in the early 1950s.
Figure 4 shows the unit value of exports since 1951 relative to the advanced
economies.49 It indicates a substantial one-time improvement in Japan’s international
competitiveness in the first half of the 1950s, as emphasized by Shinohara (1959). There
is then a further improvement as the high-growth period proceeds. Japanese export prices
fell by 7 per cent between 1960 and 1962, led by declines at twice this rate in metals,
machinery and chemicals, three industries that had been the target of government-led

48

Again, the difference is explicable by the tendency for other countries to devalue against the dollar and
therefore the yen, which lowered foreign prices when converted into yen.
49
The figures here are abstracted from “Comparative Statistics” compiled by the Bank of Japan, following
the classification in the Monthly Bulletin of Statistics of the United Nations. The UN’s “Economic Class I”
includes the U.S., Canada, Belgium, Luxembourg, France, West Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Austria,
Denmark, Norway, Portugal, Sweden, Switzerland, the U.K., Finland, Iceland, Ireland, Greece, Spain,
Turkey, Yugoslavia, Japan, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa. The figures for each country reflect
changes in export prices on each national currency basis. The data series for “developed countries” is
aggregated after adjusting each country’s export price index for nominal exchange rates fluctuations against
the dollar.

14

rationalization and modernization investment.50 After that, the unit value of Japanese
exports held steady or rose slightly in periods when raw material prices were rising, but
competitiveness continued to improve as a result of inflationary developments abroad and
relatively rapid Japanese productivity growth and technical change. Overall, Japanese
export prices fell by 29 per cent relative to those of its industrial-country competitors
between 1951 and 1967. All this suggests growing undervaluation.

4. Exiting the Peg
Whether overvalued or undervalued, the government took the peg at 360 yen to
the dollar as an “immutable condition.”51 Until Germany floated the deutschemark in
May 1971 the issue of yen realignment received little attention; it was the subject of little
systematic planning.52 Even then, Finance Minister Mizuta continued to insist that “the
best policy choice is to achieve economic stabilization under the fixed exchange rate
regime.”53 Those few economists and officials who did consider the possibility of
revaluation tended to dismiss it as damaging to exports, investment and confidence.54

50

Krause and Sekiguchi (1976), p.420.
Kosai (1989), p.287 (authors’ translation). Thus, when German Economy Minister Ludwig Erhard visited
Japan in 1958 and argued that the government should allow the currency to appreciate as part of a strategy
of reducing government intervention in the economy, his remarks elicited a very strong negative reaction.
The day following Erhard’s remark on the evaluation of the yen, Finance Minister Eisaku Sato commented
at the press conference, “though Economy Minister Erhard said that one of the causes for extremely cheap
prices of Japanese goods is the level of exchange rate, the current exchange rate of 360 yen per dollar is not
undervalued. If Japan would revalue its exchange rate, Japanese trade industries could not cope with it.”
(Nikkei Newspaper, 29 October 1958, authors’ translation). In the press, Erhard’s comments were
interpreted as implying that a) Japan should abolish its capital controls, b) the country’s wage level is too
low and should be raised, c) the exchange rate of 360 yen per dollar is undervalued and it should be
revalued and d) Japan should expand domestic demand (see for example Hoshino 1958).
52
Bank of Japan (1986), p.303. Angel (1991, p.272) puts it more strongly, writing that “Expressions of
doubt were banned absolutely within the MOF, and serious efforts were even made to prevent public
discussion of the issue within the business community.”
53
Cited in Ministry of Finance (1992), p.374 (authors’ translation).
54
The prominent exceptions were the members of the Forum for Foreign Exchange Rate Policy, who
recommended revaluation and shifting to a crawling peg in their report issued on 10 July 1971. However,
51

15

Fears that changing the exchange rate would have negative implications for employment
growth and security in the manufacturing sector led some observers to warn that
tampering with the exchange rate could even provoke political unrest.55
Of course, those advocating maintenance of the dollar peg had to offer
alternatives for countering the chronic current account surplus, which caused tension with
foreigners, and how to handle the inflationary pressures associated with capital inflows.56
The dominant recommendation was to relax exchange controls and trade barriers in order
to encourage imports. For example, Takahashi (1971) stressed the need for import
liberalization. The government in fact pursued this option by selectively removing
foreign exchange controls and import quotas and relaxing regulations limiting outward
FDI.57 Others like Shimomura (1971) plumped instead for fiscal stimulus to encourage
imports and rebalance the current account. Still others worried that this option would
only intensify inflationary pressure.58
Symptomatic of the deeply ingrained nature of inherited policy, Japan continued
to peg the yen to the dollar, intervening in the foreign exchange market, for two weeks
after President Nixon closed the gold window.59 Foreign reserves rose by nearly 50 per

the members of the forum recommended limiting the yen’s appreciation to 2 to 4 per cent a year, reflecting
widespread worries about the negative repercussions of a large step revaluation.
55
Bank of Japan (1986), p.305. See also Takahashi (1971) and Hayami (1982).
56
The rise of trade tension with, inter alia, the United States, is of course another suggestive parallel
between Japan in the 1970s and China today.
57
In June 1971. The relaxation of regulations included the liberalization of outward FDI in principle. The
enhancement of liberalization of inward FDI was also in the list reflecting the criticism from abroad on the
slow pace of liberalization (Ministry of Finance 1992, pp.368-370).
58
See for example Forum for Foreign Exchange Rate Policy (1971).
59
Note that this observation is consistent with the premise of this paper that Japan can be thought of as
choosing to exit from the peg rather than being forced off it by events in the United States. Another not
incompatible explanation for why the monetary authorities continued to place a ceiling on the dollar
exchange rate for some weeks is wanted to allow banks to hedge their open positions. Japanese banks had
accumulated dollar positions at the time of President Nixon’s announcement through the BOJ’s yendenominated lending to banks to finance discounting foreign-currency denominated export bills. For the
details of this scheme, see Bank of Japan (1986, pp.328-330).

16

cent between August 16th, the day following Nixon’s decision to close the gold window,
and August 27th.60 After August 27th, the BOJ stopped purchasing dollars at the old price
of 360 yen. The yen was allowed to appreciate, although the BOJ still intervened to slow
its movement, accumulating more reserves. Once the yen reached 308 to the dollar, a
16.9 per cent bilateral appreciation, it was re-pegged.
Expectations were that revaluation would have deflationary effects on the
economy, leading companies to postpone investment and run down their inventories. In
addition, it was argued that abandoning the dollar parity that had been the anchor for
policy since the late 1940s had negative effects on confidence.61
In response, the BOJ cut its discount rate by 50 basis points in December 1971
and by another 50 basis points in June 1972. A supplementary budget was passed for
April 1971-March 1972, and a more expansionary stance was adopted for fiscal year
1972 with expenditure on general account up by 22 per cent and expenditure on public
investment and lending through the FILP up by 32 per cent over the previous year.
The short-run impact of revaluation was relatively mild, reflecting the effects of
all this monetary and fiscal stimulus. While exports fell by 0.1 per cent in the first
quarter of 1972 (on a seasonally adjusted basis), they recovered strongly. In the fourth
quarter of 1972, exports rose by 15.7 per cent from the same quarter of the previous year
(in nominal yen-denominated terms). Exports of capital goods, such as general
machinery, electrical machinery and transport equipment, rose by 28 per cent.62 The
economy bottomed out in December 1971 according to the business cycle dates of the
60

This refers to the combined reserves of the Bank of Japan and the Ministry of Finance.
In the Bank of Japan’s retrospective analysis, the Japanese economy, which had begun to recover from
the post-1969 recession in the summer of 1971, started to weaken again from the second half of August due
to the effects of the so-called “Nixon shock.” Bank of Japan (1986), pp.357-358.
61

17

Economic Planning Agency. Real GNP grew by more than 10 per cent on an annualized
basis in the first quarter of 1972, and the inflation rate bottomed on a CPI basis in
September 1972, with a 4.7 per cent year-on-year increase.63 As early as March of that
year there was discussion of whether the revaluation had been sufficient to prevent the
current account from remaining in strong surplus, large amounts of foreign reserves from
being accumulated, and inflationary pressures from intensifying.
With benefit of hindsight, Komiya and Suda (1983b) argue that Japan waited too
long to exit from the peg and to move to a managed float. They write that “the
government should have revalued the central rate of the Smithsonian Agreement or
moved to floating at least by the autumn of 1972. [But] at that time the government and
Bank of Japan considered the avoidance of revaluation as the primary policy goal and
conducted macroeconomic policies accordingly. However, these policies accentuated
imbalances among the major countries, especially between Japan and the United States.
Furthermore, they generated the great inflation from 1973 to 1974…If the second shift to
floating (in 1973) had been carried out half a year earlier and a tight monetary policy had
been adopted, the outcome of policies could have shown a significant difference.”64
When the Smithsonian Agreement collapsed in early 1973, the yen was again
allowed to float upward, this time to 265, at which point the BOJ again intervened to
limit its fluctuation.65 Consistent with the advice tendered to China today, Japan’s float

62

The figure for transport equipment here does not include vehicles for personal use.
Subsequently it accelerated to 11.3 per cent in 1973 and 22.6 per cent in 1974, reflecting a combination
of strong domestic demand, excess liquidity and the rise in oil and other commodity prices.
64
Komiya and Suda (1983b), pp.24, 31-2 (authors’ translation).
65
Komiya and Suda (1983b), p.41. It is interesting to note the parallels with Goldstein and Lardy’s (2003)
proposal for China for a two-step exit from the yuan peg, the first step being a one-time revaluation against
the dollar and the second step, after a period, being the transition to a managed float.
63

18

was heavily managed: the exchange rate was limited to a narrow range between 264 and
266 yen to the dollar through September 1973.

5. Capital Controls and the Forward Market
Throughout this period, exchange and capital controls remained in place.
Restrictions on convertibility for purposes of transactions on current account were
maintained into the 1960s.66 Each foreign currency transaction relating to imports
required a license from MITI, while all foreign currency transactions for other purposes,
such as transactions related to inward FDI, required one from the Ministry of Finance.
Transactions on capital account were essentially suppressed. Up through 1963, the
current account balance and changes in foreign reserves moved in lockstep, reflecting
these pervasive controls on capital account.
The first step in liberalization was the establishment of yen accounts for
nonresidents in 1960. The authorities then eliminated restrictions on transactions on
current account in April 1964, accepting Article VIII of the Articles of Agreement of the
International Monetary Fund. Inward investment was liberalized in 1968, but even then
it was not entirely freed: significant restrictions on inward FDI remained into the 1970s.
The 1949 Foreign Exchange and Foreign Trade Control Law, which remained in
effect until 1980, prohibited Japanese citizens from holding foreign exchange except with
the permission of the authorities. There were also restrictions on the ability of Japanese
financial institutions to maintain open positions in foreign exchange and on the ability of
foreign financial institutions to take positions in domestically-issued yen-denominated

66

See Fukao (1990) for details.

19

securities.67 From 1968, restrictions on open positions were supplemented and then
largely superceded by swap limits (yen conversion quotas under which the authorities set
a ceiling for the net short spot positions of foreign currencies plus the amount of
outstanding free yen liabilities to non-residents).68 This had the effect of limiting covered
interest arbitrage by the banks, causing the forward rate to move more freely and making
speculation more costly.69
Some of these restrictions were then tightened in the 1970s when the yen was
unpegged, with the goal of limiting capital inflows. In 1972 controls were tightened on
advances against exports, additional reserve requirements were imposed on increases in
nonresident yen deposits, and limits were placed on nonresident purchases of Japanese
securities.70 Then in 1973, when Japan’s current account swung into deficit first with the
strong expansion of the economy and then the OPEC shock, controls on capital inflows
were abolished while those on outflows were reinforced. When the yen strengthened in
1977, controls on the foreign currency deposits of residents were abolished, measures
prohibiting residents from acquiring short-term foreign securities were eliminated, and a
50 per cent reserve requirement on increases in the yen deposits of nonresidents was
instituted.71 Indicative of the extent of these capital controls, covered interest parity (the
interest differential between the U.S. and Japan adjusted for the difference between spot
and forward exchange rates) holds closely after December 1980, the moment of
deregulation, but not before.72
67

The allowance of open positions for authorized banks was reduced twice in the mid-1960s to inhibit
short-term capital outflows. Ministry of Finance (1992), pp.192-3.
68
Ministry of Finance (1992), p.212 and Fukao (1990), pp.119-121.
69
These ceilings were then transformed into limits on open positions in 1977 and abolished in 1984.
70
Fukao (1990), p.24.
71
Those reserve requirements were then doubled in 1978.
72
See Ito (1986).

20

For much of this period, authorization to participate in the foreign exchange
market and the extent of permissible positions were subject to control by the Foreign
Exchange and Foreign Trade Control Law and decrees. Only banks with approval from
the government, so-called “authorized foreign exchange banks,” were allowed to book
transactions on both the spot and forward markets. As mentioned before, the open
positions of authorized banks were capped by decree.73 These regulations influenced
forward market activities. So-called speculative transactions were prohibited, and only
exporters and importers were said to have the opportunity of speculating and then only
within the volume of their trade.74
The development of the forward foreign exchange market depended on the
relaxation of foreign exchange controls and also on the incentive to invest in forward
cover.75 The collapse of the Bretton Woods system therefore triggered the expansion of
73

In addition, residents were allowed to carry out foreign exchange transactions only when they were
involved in trade and other limited transactions requiring foreign exchange. The law heavily regulated
outward and inward portfolio investments. This restriction was called the “actual demand rule.”
74
Kawamura and Shibuichi (1961) explain this speculation as follows (p.11, authors’ translation):
“Apart from transactions based on actual demand (demand accompanied by actual trading such as
exports and imports), speculative transactions can be carried out in the foreign exchange market.
Forward transactions are sometimes used for purposes of speculation…. However, there is no
room in Japan for speculation as described above because forward exchange contracts are allowed
only on the basis of actual demand according to the Foreign Exchange Control Law. Transactions
accompanied by actual demand can be used for speculation in certain cases. For example,
exporters can expand their positions of forward foreign exchange well in advance when foreign
currencies are expected to fall in the near future.”
Komiya and Suda (1983a) point out that exports and imports were mainly settled in U.S. dollars and
exporters and importers had the chance to speculate by controlling the amount of their open positions
(pp.147-152). Of course, there were ambiguities in the application of these measures that still left some
scope for currency speculation. But precisely the same point can be made about China today, where
exchange controls are comprehensive but still far from watertight.
75
Komiya and Suda (1983b) point out that trading volume of forward transactions increased as the spot
market developed even under the fixed exchange rate system (p.23). It should be noted that even under the
fixed exchange rate system, inter-bank and customer exchange rates were allowed to fluctuate within
narrow bands after the deregulation of 1959, encouraging transactions in the forward market to a certain
extent. Prior to September 1959, the so-called MOF exchange rate, by which authorized foreign exchange
banks traded with the MOF, and customer exchange rates were fixed by decree of the Finance Minister.
Deregulation allowed these rates to fluctuate between 0.5 per cent above parity, 360 yen per dollar, and 0.5
per cent below it (the band later expanded to 0.75 per cent in 1963). At the same time, regulation of the

21

foreign exchange transactions on both the spot and forward markets (Figure 5). This
occurred only after the short-run disruption had passed, since the forward market stopped
functioning with the yen’s floating in August 1971. Initially, the banks stopped quoting
forward exchange rates for their customers, and trading volume on the inter-bank market
collapsed. Exchange controls were then tightened in reaction to the collapse of the
Bretton Woods System, resulting in a lack of opportunities for arbitrage and a drying up
of the forward market. Forward market transactions resumed only in late October.76
In sum, Japan experienced gradual liberalization of its international financial
transactions in the three decades ending around 1980. But even then there were extensive
restrictions on the ability of households and financial institutions to engage in crossborder financial transactions and interest arbitrage. Exchange controls had been partially
relaxed prior to floating of the yen, but they were still far from eliminated. And various
controls were tightened or reimposed following the shift to managed floating.77
Some skeptics of the feasibility of a more flexible renminbi exchange rate argue
that full currency convertibility, including on capital account, is a necessary prerequisite
for greater exchange rate flexibility in practice. Others suggest that floating requires a
deep and liquid forward market, and that China should not permit the renminbi to vary
more freely and be determined by market conditions until there is significant additional
progress in developing the inter-bank forward market in Shanghai.78 Japanese
forward exchange rate against the dollar was abandoned. (Forward rates against other currencies had been
already deregulated.) Ministry of Finance (1992), pp.42-4.
76

Komiya and Suda (1983b), pp.22-23.
Revealingly, Fukao (1990) entitles a section of his paper “From 1973 to 1980: A Managed Float with
Controls on Capital Movements.”
78
At the time of writing, several banks, including the Big Four banks, have started forward exchange
transactions with their customers on a “pilot basis” (People’s Bank of China 2004b, p.56), but this is still
far from a deep and liquid forward market. Among other things, the bank lack investment specialists with
experience in managing foreign exchange exposures. Other foreign-exchange-market-related initiatives,
77

22

experience in the 1970s does not suggest that it is necessary to complete the task of
liberalizing the capital account and developing the inter-bank forward market before
moving to a significantly more flexible exchange rate. It suggests that banks and firms in
China now, like those in Japan after 1973, should be able to tolerate a further increase in
exchange rate volatility so long as the central bank continues to intervene to avoid very
sudden movements in the currency’s level and sharp spikes in volatility.

6. Effects of Exiting the Peg
Efforts to identify the impact on Japan of exiting the peg are complicated by other
disturbances hitting the economy around this time. By the early 1970s the high-growth
period following World War II was coming to an end; after two decades of rapid exportand investment-led growth, much of the productivity gap vis-à-vis the United States had
been closed. While the average annual rate of GDP growth decelerated from 12.1 per
cent in 1960-69 to 7.5 per cent in 1970-73 and 3.8 per cent in 1973-85, it would be a
mistake to attribute the entire shift to the change in exchange rate regime, since with the
end of catch-up there would have been some slowdown in any case. In addition, the
world economy grew very rapidly for two years following the exit, which may have
cushioned the Japanese economy from any disruptive effects.

such as the enhancement of the Foreign Exchange Trade Centre, are largely limited to spot transactions. On
18 May 2005, inter-bank foreign currency trade was “formally introduced” in China. Previously, there was
no trading platform for transactions between foreign currencies. The recent reform enables domestic
financial institutions to trade eight pairs of foreign currencies in China; euro against U.S. dollar, Australian
dollar against U.S. dollar, pound sterling against U.S. dollar, U.S. dollar against Swiss francs, U.S. dollar
against Hong Kong dollar, U.S. dollar against Canadian dollar, U.S. dollar against Japanese yen and euro
against Japanese yen. For the details of this reform, see People’s Bank of China (2005). While there also
exists a market in nondeliverable forwards in Hong Kong, this is not accessible, by design, to domestic
entities seeking to hedge foreign exposures.

23

As emphasized earlier, the motors of Japanese growth were exports and
investment. One way of isolating the impact of the change in the exchange rate on
growth is therefore to examine its effect on these two variables. Figure 6 juxtaposes
capital investment in the manufacturing sector (as a share of GDP) with the real effective
exchange rate. Investment shoots up once the real exchange rate comes down in the
wake of the Korean War; it then declines in the early 1970s coincident with the
appreciation of the real rate. The movement of manufacturing profits (current profits of
the manufacturing sector as a share of GDP), upward after the early 1950s and then down
after 1971, is consistent with the operation of this mechanism, with causality running
from international competitiveness to manufacturing profitability and from there to
capital formation in the manufacturing sector.
The problem is that other things were happening at the same time, some of which
could have been affecting the real exchange rate, profitability and investment, with no
causality running between them. The technological progress and industrial
rationalization in the 1950s emphasized by Fujino (1988) and Kosai (1989) would have
affected Japanese economic growth precisely by stimulating profitability and investment
in manufacturing. The rapid growth of the world economy in 1971-3 could have
supported investment and profitability in the face of a negative exchange-rate shock.
A more careful analysis of the connections between the exchange rate and
investment is therefore required. A previous study along these lines is Miyagawa and
Tokui (1994), who regress gross investment in manufacturing as a share of the capital
stock on the real exchange rate and a vector of controls (a proxy for global demand, the
ratio of wages to the cost of capital, and the ratio of intermediate input prices relative to

24

the cost of capital).79 They confirm that appreciation (depreciation) of the real effective
exchange rates had a negative (positive) impact on Japanese investment in the 1980s.80
This is in line with the findings of other studies where real appreciation reduces export
prices relative to costs, squeezing profitability and discouraging investment.
Here we extend their analysis back to the 1950s and consider not just the bilateral
rate against the dollar but the real effective exchange rate. We estimate an equation of
the form:
i t / k t -1 = α + β reert -1 + γ w t -1 /c t -1 + δ d t -1 /k t -1

(1)

where
i: real capital investment in manufacturing
k: real capital stock in manufacturing
reer: real effective exchange rate
w: real wage in manufacturing
c: user cost of capital
d: world income

We lag the independent variables, assuming time to build. Consistent with a
Cobb-Douglas production function, we enter the wage and cost of capital in ratio form.
d, the GDP of major industrial countries, is our proxy for global demand for Japanese
manufacturing products. It is normalized by the capital stock following the specification
79

Miyagawa and Tokui (1994) use effective exchange rates provided by J.P. Morgan in their estimates.
Other results are that global demand has a positive effect on investment, increases in the ratio of
intermediate input prices to capital costs has a negative effect (as if capital and intermediate inputs are
complements in production), and increases in the ratio of wages to capital costs has a positive effect (as if
labor and capital are substitutes). Miyagawa and Tokui (1994) assume that trade industries are in a
80

25

in Miyagawa and Tokui (1994). All variables are on annual basis and the sample period is
1955-1973.81
A problem with estimating this relationship in levels is that many macroeconomic
time series exhibit unit roots. The augmented Dickey-Fuller test confirms that the real
exchange rate and the factor price ratio have unit roots. In contrast, the hypothesis of a
unit root can be rejected at the one per cent level for the investment ratio and world
income normalized by the capital stock.82 Estimating this relationship in first differences
consequently may introduce a problem of overdifferencing. We therefore estimated the
equation both in levels and differences.
Table 4 shows the results. When the relationship is estimated in levels, the real
effective exchange rate enters significantly, with a positive coefficient, indicating that
appreciation had a negative impact on manufacturing investment. 83 The real wage
relative to the user cost of capital is significant with a positive sign, indicating that a
change in relative factor prices induces capital/labor substitution, other things equal.84
World income is also significant with a positive sign, confirming that an increase in world
income had the expected positive effect on investment. The results using the differenced
data, in the second panel, are consistent with these findings.
The effect of exchange rate on exports during high growth period is one of the
major issues in the studies described in Section 3. Here, we estimate export function like
that specified by Nakamura (1993):
condition of monopolistic competition where appreciation of their national currency leads to worsening the
competitiveness and thus results in decline in share of national industries in the global market.
81
Each variable is transformed into index whose level of 1955 is 100. All data series are then expressed as
logarithms.
82
The results of the DF-GLS test, which is supposed to have enhanced power in small samples, show the
same results.
83
Note that real effective exchange rate here is defined as yen per unit of foreign currencies.

26

ex t = α + β reert + γ d t

(2)

where
ex: real exports
reer: real effective exchange rate
d: world income
and α, β and γ are parameters to be estimated.
The results, again estimated over the period 1955-73 with annual data series, are
in Table 5.85 Here estimates using the differenced data are more reliable given that we
fail to reject the null hypothesis of a unit root in all series.86 The real effective exchange
rate is significantly positive, confirming that the appreciation of the real exchange rate
would have negatively affected Japanese exports. Global income is significant with
positive sign, consistent with previous studies.
Simulating the impact of the exit on investment and exports requires an estimate
of by how much the real exchange rate changed given post-1970 changes in the nominal
exchange rate. Since regressing the real exchange rate on the nominal exchange rate
would be tantamount to putting the nominal rate on both sides of the equation, we instead
estimate a passthrough equation, regressing the WPI on the nominal effective exchange
rate, foreign WPIs, and relevant controls. Since the real exchange rate is the ratio of
domestic prices relative to foreign prices adjusted for the nominal exchange rate, we can
use the results to estimate the impact of nominal appreciation on the real exchange rate
(and hence on real variables like investment and export volumes).

84

As in Miyagawa and Tokui (1994).
All series are again transformed into logs prior to estimation.
86
Using both the augmented DF and DF-GLS tests.
85

27

The long-run relationship estimated here is of the form:

wpi

JP
t

=β

0

e + β wpi
t

1

For
t

+ ΩX + ε t

(3)

where wpiJP and wpiFor are the logs of the Japanese and weighted average of foreign
wholesale price indices, e is the log of the nominal effective exchange rate (yen per unit
of foreign currency) and X is a vector of controls (quarterly dummies, a linear time trend,
real GDP, and the natural logarithm of the oil price, which figured importantly in
Japanese price trends in the 1970s and 1980s). Note that this is only one of many forms
in which this relationship is estimated; others have, for example, put the exchange rate on
the left and domestic prices on the right and attempted to use it to track exchange rate
fluctuations. Since in this period the exchange rate was tightly managed, while domestic
wholesale prices were free to move, it makes more sense to treat the exchange rate as
exogenous and domestic prices are endogenous.87
The equation is estimated using quarterly data for 1957-1990. The passthrough
coefficient in Table 6 is in the range of 0.1-0.2. These estimates are relatively low: using
data for a later period, Campa and Goldberg (2002) obtain a long-run passthrough
coefficient for Japan of 0.8. But it is important to note that they consider import prices
rather than wholesale prices, and wholesale prices are likely to move less, insofar as they
include a large component of domestic prices which are less affected by exchange rate
changes. Passthrough coefficients for other large economies such as the United States
using relative wholesale prices also generate estimates on the order of 0.2.

87

And, of course, it is reasonable to assume that Japan was too small for its own inflation to significantly
affect inflation in the rest-of-the-world aggregate.

28

A potential problem for the results in Table 6 is that we cannot reject the
hypothesis of a unit root in the dependent and independent variables (see Table 7).
However, these results will be consistent if the individual series are cointegrated. We
therefore tested for the presence of unit roots in the residuals. The tests in Table 8
indicate that the null hypothesis of a unit root can be rejected.
The next step is estimating a short-run relationship that will allow for a more
accurate characterization of the dynamics of adjustment. We use the residual from the
preceding regression, denoted ut, as the error correction term in an equation designed to
capture short-term dynamics.

∆wpi

JP
t

=

3
i =1

γ ∆wpi
0

t −1

JP
t −1

+

3
i=0

γ ∆e
1

t −1

t −1

+

3
i=0

γ ∆wpi
2

For

t −1

t −1

+ ρµ
ˆ

t −1

+ Ω′∆X + ζ

t

(4)

We can solve this equation for the long-run effect of nominal appreciation on
domestic prices (long-run passthrough), obtaining:

φ=

γ

1−

3
1
i = 0 t −1
3
0
i =1 t −1

γ

(5)
The estimates of this equation are in Table 9. The point is estimate of long-run
passthrough is even smaller than before. However, this estimate is noisy due to the
inclusion of some γ0 and γ1 coefficients that are not statistically distinguishable from zero.
To correct for this we recalculated φ excluding γ coefficients that were not statistically
significant at the 10 per cent level. The passthrough coefficient derived in this manner,

29

denoted φ’, is also reported in Table 9. These results are more stable across
specifications. They suggest a long-run passthrough coefficient of 0.25.
A possible concern is that these results may be excessively influenced by the pre1971 period when the yen was pegged to the dollar. Since the change in the nominal
exchange rate was zero in this period as far as the bilateral rate against the dollar is
concerned, passthrough from the exchange rate to prices will be zero as well, by
construction.88 We took two approaches to addressing this problem. First, we restricted
the sample to the period after the peg was abandoned. The coefficient on the nominal
exchange rate turns out to be roughly the same as before, suggesting that the attenuation
problem is not serious.89 Alternatively, we created a dummy variable for the period of
floating and interacted it with the nominal exchange rate terms, adding this vector to the
explanatory variables. This provides a direct test of the hypothesis that passthrough
changed with the shift from pegging to floating. The long-run regression now becomes:

wpi

JP
t

= β 0 et + θ 0 et * D PEG + β 1 wpi

For
t

+ ΩX + ε~t

(6)

where exchange rate passthrough is now given by φ” = β0 + θ0. The results confirm that
passthrough was significantly higher in the floating period.90 But the additional effect is
small; it has no noticeable impact on the overall level of long-run passthrough as
estimated above.

88

Note that nominal effective exchange rates in the pre-1971 period fluctuated to some extent (for details,
see Section 3 and Figure 1).
89
Arguments stemming from the Lucas Critique suggest that we might expect to find a higher passthrough
coefficient in this later period insofar as floating made agents more aware of the possibility of exchange
rate fluctuations. In practice this does not appear to be the case.
90
When a constant term is also included in the equation.

30

Recall that the nominal effective rate appreciated by 11.0 per cent between
1971Q2 and 1971Q4. Assuming a passthrough coefficient of 1/4, the induced
appreciation of the real rate was three quarters of this, or 8.3 per cent. This is close to the
actual appreciation of the real effective rate between 1971 and 1972 (see Figure 2).91
Between 1971Q1 and 1973Q1 the nominal effective rate rose by 26.2 per cent. Three
quarters of this is 19.7 per cent. Again, this is rather close to the actual real appreciation
observed in this period. We therefore take a real appreciation of 8.3 per cent as the short
run impact and 19.7 per cent as the longer run impact of the exit.
We now are in a position to calculate the impact of the change in the nominal
effective exchange rate on exports and investment. Taking the coefficients estimated on
first-differenced data in Table 4 and 5, the short-run (1971-72) fall in exports is 8.6 per
cent. The longer-run (1971-73) fall is 20.4 per cent. The impact on investment is larger:
its level declines by 11.1 per cent between 1971-72 as a result of the 8.3 per cent real
appreciation. The long-run effect is four times as large. These are substantial effects.
These results for exports and investment are consistent with one another. Figure 7
suggests that Japanese firms responded to the short-run change in the exchange rate by
cutting their margins: they did not raise prices commensurately, which meant that they
absorbed the much of the impact.92 That export prices do not rise as quickly as consumer

91

The actual appreciation on an annual average basis was 9.5 per cent.
In 1971-2, Japanese wholesale export prices declined by 3.2 per cent, while wholesale prices rose by 1.6
per cent, consistent with this distinction – and with the idea that Japanese exporters absorbed the exchange
rate shock by cutting margins and thereby maintaining export market share. This response clearly varied
by sector. The Economic White Paper of 1972 discusses the effects of yen’s revaluation on the
competitiveness of exporters and price setting behavior of export sectors as follows (Economic Planning
Agency 1972, pp.70-71, authors’ translation).
92

“Looking at changes in export prices (on a foreign currency denominated basis) and export volumes
in the period from the shift to a floating exchange rate system (in August 1971) to March in this year
(1972), export volumes of electric machinery and transport equipment increased even though

31

and wholesale prices in 1971-2 is consistent with this fact. In turn the decline in margins
had a sharp negative impact on investment, which contributed to the recession that started
in 1973.
Readers may wonder why a sharp slowdown in Japanese exports, investment and
growth was not evident in 1972-3. Actual capital investment rose by almost 2 per cent
between 1971 and 1973, while export volumes rose by 12 per cent. Our results suggest
that the growth of exports and investment was mainly attributable to the rapid growth of
world income, which rose by a cumulative 12 per cent in these two years. Normalized by
the Japanese capital stock as we measure it, world demand increased by 34 per cent.93
Fortuitous conditions like these cannot be taken for granted. They caution that allowing a
large and sudden appreciation following the exit from the peg could have a substantial
negative impact on demand and economic growth.

7. Conclusion
Our analysis of Japanese currency experience in the 1970s suggests that a rapidlygrowing, export-oriented economy can operate a floating exchange rate in the presence of
capital controls and despite the absence of deep and liquid foreign currency forward

(foreign currency denominated) prices were raised enough to offset the impact of revaluation,
reflecting strong competitiveness. The export volumes of steel and textiles fell due to the increase in
export prices (on a foreign currency denominated basis) designed to partially absorb the effects of
revaluation … Some industries with weak competitiveness in the global market such as chemicals
and foods were forced to keep export prices (on a foreign currency denominated basis) to maintain
export volume.
93
In the case of investment, other independent variables also moved in supportive directions. The ratio of
wages to the cost of capital increased sharply, with both the numerator and denominator moving in
supportive directions. Real wages increased by 22 per cent, while user cost of capital declined by 76 per
cent due to the decline in the real interest rate. Real interest rates declined sharply: although the WPI
increased by 15 per cent, the nominal bank lending rate rose only one per cent point. In this sense,
monetary policy supported investment. In addition, public investment rose sharply in this period,
suggesting that fiscal policy further supported investment.

32

markets so long as the central bank manages that float. Allowing the exchange rate to
float enables the authorities to better tailor domestic money and credit conditions to local
needs as the economy moves from a monetary and financial system that relies on
administrative guidance to one in which interest rates guide the allocation of money and
credit and in which the capital account of the balance of payments becomes increasingly
open. But it is important for the country to manage its exchange rate with domestic
conditions in mind and to avoid the kind of large real appreciation that would
significantly compromise profits, damage investment, and jeopardize financial stability,
especially in the absence of deep and liquid forward exchange markets on which foreign
exposures could be hedged. If the floating rate is appropriately managed, however, it
should not be necessary to wait on the further development of forward markets before
allowing the currency to exhibit significantly greater flexibility.
For China this suggests starting with a modest band widening and limited increase
in flexibility, similar to the policies in fact introduced in July 2005, and not acceding to
foreign pressure for a large initial revaluation that might interrupt the growth of exports
and depress investment. Other aspects of the comparison with Japan in the 1970s – the
narrower profit margins of firms in the Chinese export sector, the more limited capacity
of Chinese banks to cope with the financial consequences of a change in currency values,
and the larger share of exports in Chinese GDP (which means that a smaller revaluation
is needed to eliminate a current account surplus of any absolute size) – similarly point to
the advisability of the Chinese authorities’ decision to start with a relatively small change
in prevailing exchange rate.

33

Both that history and our assessment of current circumstances suggest that the
kind of large real appreciation that might result from a premature shift to free floating
should be avoided in the next step. This kind of large appreciation is advocated in some
circles as helping to solve the problem of “global imbalances” – as China’s contribution
to reducing the U.S. current account deficit. If Japan’s experience in the 1970s is any
guide, a large real appreciation runs the risk of damaging profitability and investment and
thus of slowing growth. A Chinese “contribution” to solving the problem of global
imbalances that has this effect is in no one’s interest.

34

Table 1. Annual Growth Rates of National Income
1913-50
1913-40
1955-71
1950-78
1979-2003
1960s
1970s
1980s
1990s
2000-03

Japan (GNP)
2.0
4.0
9.3
10.1
4.7
4.0

China (GDP)

4.9
9.4
9.7
10.4
8.2

Notes: Japanese figure from 1913 to 1950 is calculated by splicing at 1931 the two series
for GNP provided by LTES. GNP in 1945 is assumed to be two-thirds of 1944, following
Maddison (2001). Post-war figures are estimated by the Economic Planning Agency.
China’s data to 1978 are based on estimates by Maddison (2001), while those after 1979
are estimated by the IMF and the National Bureau of Statistics.
Sources:
Ohkawa, Kazushi, Nobukiyo Takamatsu and Yuzo Yamamoto (1974), Estimates of
Long-Term Economic Statistics of Japan since 1868 volume 1, National Income, Toyo
Keizai Shinposha.
Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI), Cabinet Officie, Statistics Information
Site (www.esri.cao.go.jp).
IMF, International Financial Statistics.
National Bureau of Statistics, People’s Republic of China, China Monthly Economic
Indicators.

35

Table 2. Exports and the Current Account
Export
growth
(annual
average, %)

Japan

Share of total
US imports

(%)

Current
account
(billion
US$)

Export
growth
(annual
average, %)

China

Share of total
US imports

(%)

Current
account
(billion
US$)

1950s
12.4
3.9
0.1
0.2
1960s
16.6
10.8
0.3
0.0
1970s
14.6
13.3
3.1
13.5
0.2
1980s
5.3
18.5
42.0
25.0
1.4
-1.8
1990s
2.3
15.6
99.4
23.4
6.4
12.5
2000s
3.5
10.7
114.0
22.4
10.4
24.4
Notes: Export growth is based on national currency-denominated figures. Share of US
imports is calculated using US dollar-denominated figures. Share of US imports since
2000 is calculated using data for 2000-03. China’s current account figure for the 1980s is
the average for 1982-89. That since 2000 is the average for 2000-02. Japan’s current
account for the 2000s includes data through 2004.
Sources:
IMF, Balance of Payments Statistics.
IMF, Direction of Trade Statistics.
IMF, International Financial Statistics.
Bank of Japan, Balance of Payments Monthly.
National Bureau of Statistics of China, China Statistical Yearbook 2001.
Yamazawa, Ippei, and Yuzo Yamamoto (1978), Estimates of Long-Term Economic
Statistics of Japan since 1868, volume 14, Foreign Trade and Balance of Payments, Toyo
Keizai Shinposha.

36

Table 3. Savings and Investment Rates

1950
1960
1970
1982
1990
2000

1st half of 1950s
2nd half of 1950s
1st half of 1960s
2nd half of 1960s
1st half of 1980s
2nd half of 1980s
1st half of 1990s
2nd half of 1990s

Japan
Savings rate
Investment rate
29.9
16.2
34.1
30.2
40.5
35.1

27.5
29.0
35.8
37.0

20.1
24.4
32.4
32.4

China
Savings rate
Investment rate

34.0
38.0
38.7

32.1
35.2
36.2

34.5
33.2
35.9
37.5
39.9
38.5
40.7
38.5
Notes: Japan’s rates are relative to GNP, China'
s relative to GDP. China'
s savings are the
sum of gross capital formation and net current account. Figures for 1st half of the 1980s
cover 1982-84.
Sources:
Ohkawa, Kazushi, Nobukiyo Takamatsu and Yuzo Yamamoto (1974), Estimates of
Long-Term Economic Statistics of Japan since 1868 volume 1, National Income, Toyo
Keizai Shinposha (Tables 1A, 6A).
National Bureau of Statistics of China, China Statistical Yearbook 2001 (Tables 3-11).
IMF, International Financial Statistics.

37

Table 4. Determinants of Investment
Annual Data

Estimated equation :

i t / k t -1 = α + β reert -1 + γ w t -1 /c t -1 + δ d t -1 /k t -1

Figures in parentheses are t-statistics.
Levels
Constant term

Real effective
exchange rate

Real wage /
User cost of
capital

World Income

Adjusted R2

DW statistic

-28.63

6.13

0.61

0.62

0.21

1.14

(-2.20)*

(2.46)*

(1.99)*

(2.35)*

Differences

Constant term

Real effective
exchange rate

Real wage /
User cost of
capital

World Income

Adjusted R2

DW statistic

0.05

3.14

0.86

1.22

0.50

1.32

(0.60)

(1.88)*

(2.50)*

(2.04)*

Notes: 1.User cost of capital is calculated as:

r = Pc ∗ ( i - π + d) / Pw
r : user cost of capital
Pc : price index of capital goods (1952-1960), or that of investment goods (1960-1971)
Pw : wholesale price index (WPI)
i : banks’ lending rate (the averaged interest rate of banks’ new loans in December in each
year)
: percentage change in WPI
d : depreciation rate
2. ** denotes 1 per cent significance; * denotes 5 per cent significance.
3. For details on the construction of the real effective exchange rate, see data appendix.
4. Capital investment in the first quarter of 1955 is assumed as the same as averaged amount of
second to fourth quarter. Capital stock at the end of 1952 is assumed as the same level as that of
the end of March in 1953.
5. Real wage is total cash earnings per regular employee in manufacturing sector deflated by
WPI.
6. World income is aggregated real GDP of eleven countries (see data appendix).
7. World income is normalized by the capital stock, following Miyagawa and Tokui (1994).
Source: see data appendix.

38

Table 5. Determinants of Exports
Annual Data
Estimated equation :

ex t = α + β reert + γ d t

Figures in parentheses are t-statistics.
Levels
Constant term

Real effective
exchange rate

World Income

Adjusted R2

DW statistic

-13.45

0.89

3.05

0.99

1.19

(-9.65)**

(3.12)**

(72.32)**
Differences

Constant term

Real effective
exchange rate

World Income

Adjusted R2

DW statistic

0.04

1.04

2.27

0.35

2.08

(0.85)

(3.13)**

(2.23)*

Notes: 1. ** denotes 1 per cent significance; *denotes 5 per cent significance.
2. Real exports are deflated by export price index on Long-Term Economic Statistics (LTES) basis
(1953-1959) or by that of WPI basis (1960-1971).
3. For details regarding the construction of the real effective exchange rate, see data appendix.
4. World income is aggregated real GDP of eleven countries (see data appendix).
Source: See data appendix.

39

Table 6. Long Term Passthrough
Quarterly Data
Nominal Effective
Exchange Rate (ln)
Weighted Foreign
Price Level (ln)
Oil Price (ln)
GDP (ln)
Quarterly Dummies
Trend
Observations
R2

(1)
0.142
(0.030)***
0.354
(0.048)***
0.114
(0.013)***
0.067
(0.006)***
No
No
136
0.99

(2)
0.142
(0.030)***
0.354
(0.048)***
0.114
(0.014)***
0.067
(0.006)***
Yes
No
136
0.99

Standard errors in parenthesis.
*significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

40

(3)
0.136
(0.028)***
0.555
(0.064)***
0.061
(0.017)***
0.160
(0.022)***
No
Yes
136
0.99

(4)
0.137
(0.029)***
0.555
(0.064)***
0.061
(0.017)***
0.161
(0.022)***
Yes
Yes
136
0.99

Table 7. Unit Root Tests
Generalized Dickey-Fuller Test
All variables in logs
Variable
WPI Japan
Nominal Effective
Exchange Rate
Weighted Foreign
Price Level
Oil Price
GDP

No Trend
0.108
-3.744***
0.972
-5.332***
0.578
-2.616***
0.312
-5.002***
0.090
-1.019

Level
First Difference
Level
First Difference
Level
First Difference
Level
First Difference
Level
First Difference

All tests include a constant and four lags.
*, **, *** indicates unit root hypothesis can be rejected at 10%, 5%
and 1% significance levels respectively.

Table 8. Unit Root Tests
Generalized Dickey-Fuller Test

Equation 1
Equation 2
Equation 3
Equation 4

No Trend

Trend

-1.653
-1.706
-1.692
-1.741

-3.086
**
-3.115
*
-2.875
*
-2.899

**

All tests include a constant and one lag.
*, **, *** indicates unit root hypothesis can be
rejected at 10%, 5% and 1% significance levels
respectively.

41

Trend
-15.40
-4.211***
0.568
-5.209***
-1.621
-2.980***
-1.482
-4.900***
-0.522
-3.935***

Table 9. Passthrough Dynamics
(1)

pt-1
pt-2
pt-3
et
et-1
et-2
et-3
p* t
p* t-1
p* t-2
p* t-3
oilt
oilt-1
oilt-2
oilt-3
gdpt
gdpt-1
gdpt-2
gdpt-3
^

t-1

'
Quarterly Dummies
Trend
Observations
R2

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.633
(0.092)***
-0.101
(0.108)
0.025
(0.095)
0.091
(0.027)***
-0.007
(0.031)
-0.016
(0.031)
-0.038
(0.030)
0.283
(0.098)***
-0.058
(0.109)
0.219
(0.108)**
-0.101
(0.092)
0.030
(0.009)***
-0.021
(0.009)**
-0.015
(0.011)
0.000
(0.010)
0.003
(0.059)
0.090
(0.056)
-0.000
(0.059)
0.033
(0.054)

0.651
(0.093)***
-0.119
(0.111)
0.036
(0.096)
0.089
(0.027)***
-0.004
(0.031)
-0.022
(0.031)
-0.033
(0.030)
0.267
(0.099)***
-0.032
(0.111)
0.200
(0.109)*
-0.098
(0.093)
0.030
(0.009)***
-0.021
(0.010)**
-0.013
(0.011)
-0.001
(0.010)
0.001
(0.059)
0.094
(0.057)
-0.008
(0.059)
0.036
(0.054)

0.631
(0.095)***
-0.122
(0.112)
0.013
(0.098)
0.087
(0.027)***
-0.006
(0.032)
-0.01
(0.031)
-0.031
(0.030)
0.275
(0.100)***
-0.089
(0.113)
0.203
(0.111)*
-0.125
(0.094)
0.028
(0.009)***
-0.014
(0.009)
-0.011
(0.011)
0.005
(0.010)
0.023
(0.064)
0.107
(0.062)*
0.006
(0.063)
0.033
(0.058)

0.649
(0.096)***
-0.140
(0.114)
0.023
(0.099)
0.085
(0.028)***
-0.003
(0.032)
-0.016
(0.031)
-0.026
(0.031)
0.259
(0.101)***
-0.063
(0.114)
0.184
(0.112)
-0.121
(0.096)
0.027
(0.009)***
-0.015
(0.009)
-0.009
(0.011)
0.004
(0.010)
0.021
(0.065)
0.11
(0.062)*
-0.002
(0.063)
0.036
(0.059)

-0.153
(0.039)***

-0.154
(0.039)***

-0.13
(0.039)***

-0.130
(0.039)***

0.069
(0.106)
0.249
(0.102)**

0.068
(0.109)
0.256
(0.109)**

0.085
(0.100)
0.237
(0.101)**

0.084
(0.103)
0.243
(0.108)**

NO
NO
132
0.75

YES
NO
132
0.75

NO
YES
132
0.74

YES
YES
132
0.74

Quarterly data, standard errors in parenthesis.
*significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

42

Figure 1. Nominal Effective Exchange Rate (1949=100)

150

(1949=100,yen/foreign currencies)

140

Nominal exchange rate
against US dollar

130
120
110
100
90
80

Nominal effective exchange rate

70
60
50
49

51

53

55

57

59

61

63

65

67

69

71

73

75

77

79

Sources: See data appendix.

Figure 2. Real Effective Exchange Rate (1949=100)

110

(1949=100,yen/foreign currencies)

100
90

Real exchange rate against US dollar

80
70
60

Real effective exchange rate

50
49 51 53 55 57 59 61 63 65 67 69 71 73 75 77 79
Sources: See data appendix.

43

Figure 3. Prices (1949=100)

300
250

Wholesale Price Index

200
150

Export Price Index

100
Import Price Index

50

49 51 53 55 57 59 61 63 65 67 69 71 73 75
Sources: Bank of Japan, Wholesale Price Index,
Ohkawa, Kazushi, Tsutomu Noda, Nobukiyo Takamatsu, Saburo Yamada, Minoru Kumazaki,
Yuichi Shionoya and Ryoshin Minami (1967), Estimates of Long-Term Economic Statistics of
Japan since 1868 volume 8: Prices, Toyo Keizai Shinposha.

Figure 4. Unit Price of Exports (1951=100)

230
210

Developed countries

190
170
150

Japan

130
110
90
70
50
51

55

60

65

Source: Nakamura (1993), p.214, Table 61.

44

67

70

72

75

Figure 5. Foreign Exchange Transaction Volume (1965-75)

(million US$)

14,000
12,000

forward

10,000
8,000

spot

6,000
4,000
2,000

swap

0
1965 1966

1967 1968

1969 1970 1971

1972 1973

1974 1975

Note: Intraday trading volume, monthly averaged for December of each year.
Source: Nikkei Newspaper (Nihon Keizai Shinbun)

45

Figure 6. Real Effective Exchange Rate (REER) and Investment (1949=100; %)

100

(1949=100, yen/foreign currencies)

(%)

Capital investment of manufactuirng sector/GDP
(right hand axis)

95

10.0
9.0

90

8.0

85

7.0

80

6.0

75

5.0

70

4.0

65
60
55

3.0

REER
(left hand axis)

2.0
Current profits of manufactuirng sector/GDP
(right hand axis)

50

1.0
0.0

49 51 53 55 57 59 61 63 65 67 69 71 73 75 77 79

Sources: Ministry of Finance (1977), The Collected Data Series of Financial Statement Statistics of
Corporations by Industry (Hojin Kigyo Tokei Kiho Syuran).
Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI), Cabinet Officie, Statistics Information Site
(www.esri.cao.go.jp).
For REER, see data appendix.

46

Figure 7. Export Price Index/Input Price Index of Export Sectors

110

(1970=100)

105
100
95
90
85
80

1970

1971

1972

Sources: see data appendix.

47

1973

Data Appendix
a) Nominal effective exchange rates (NEER)
Nominal effective exchange rates consist of yen exchange rates against the
currencies of 17 countries: the United States, the United Kingdom, West Germany,
Greece, Italy, the Netherlands, Sweden, Switzerland, Canada, Venezuela, Australia,
India, Iran, South Korea, Thailand, the Philippines and South Africa. These are the
countries that meet the following criteria; imports from Japan in 1960 exceed 10 billion
yen, and both price data and foreign exchange rate data series are available from 1949 to
1990. (South Korea is an exception as its wholesale price index is not available in 1950.
As figures in 1949 and 1951 are identical, we assume that the WPI in 1950 was
unchanged from 1949.) The 17 bilateral rates are weighted by the value of imports from
Japan, updated every five years. Note that the series depicted in Figure 1 excludes
nominal exchange rate against South Korea as its extreme increase (its level in 1970 is
300 times larger than that of 1949) dominated the trends of other currencies.
b) Real effective exchange rates (REER)
Real effective exchange rates consist of yen exchange rates against the currencies
of the same 17 countries. Each nominal exchange rate is normalized by the wholesale or
producer price indices of Japan and the country in question, and weighted as above. For
Japan’s wholesale price indices, domestic wholesale price index is used from 1960 while
overall wholesale price index, which includes export and import prices, is used to 1959
due to data constraints. Note that the Figure 2 excludes the real exchange rate against
South Korea for the same reason as above. Among the econometric results reported in
the text, those which contain the data in the mid-1950s, namely investment and export
equations, exclude South Korea from the weighted average to avoid the effects of the
high-inflation episodes at the time.
c) World income (D)
We estimate world income by aggregating the GDPs of 11 countries: Australia,
Belgium, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Sweden, the Netherlands, the United
States and United Kingdom with import value-based weights in 1955, 1960, 1965, 1970
and 1975. Imports of these countries account for about 60 per cent of world imports.
d) Sources for Table 4
Ministry of Finance, Financial Statements Statistics of Corporations (Hojin Kigyo Tokei),
each issue; International Monetary Fund, International Financial Statistics, various
issues; Direction of Trade Statistics, various issues; Maddison (2001); Mitchell (1998a,
1998b,1998c); Ministry of Trade and Industry, Annual Report of the Foreign Trade of
Japan (Nihon Boueki Nenpyo), various issues; Bank of Japan (1986), One Hundred Year

48

History of the Bank of Japan, Volume of collection of historical materials; Bank of Japan
(1987), Hundred-Year Statistics of Wholesale Prices in Japan.
e) Sources for Table 5
International Monetary Fund, International Financial Statistics, various issues; Direction
of Trade Statistics, various issues; Maddison (2001); Mitchell (1998a, 1998b); Ministry
of Trade and Industry, Annual Report of the Foreign Trade of Japan (Nihon Boueki
Nenpyo), various issues; Bank of Japan (1987), Hundred-Year Statistics of Wholesale
Prices in Japan; Yamazawa, Ippei and YuzoYamamoto (1978), Estimates of Long-Term
Economic Statistics of Japan since 1868. Vol.14: Foreign Trade and Balance of
Payments.
f) Sources for Figure 7
Input prices for export sectors are calculated using input price indices for
industries whose export dependence in 1974-5 was more than 20 per cent: precision
instruments, transport equipment, steel, general machinery, and textiles. Input price
indices for these sectors are aggregated using their weights in the 1970 input price index.
The source is: Bank of Japan, Price Indexes Annual, various issues.

49

References
Abegglen, James (1958), The Japanese Factory, Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press.
Ackley, Gardner and Hiromitsu Ishi (1976), “Fiscal, Monetary and Related Policies,” in
Hugh Patrick and Henry Rosovsky (eds), Asia’s New Giant, Washington, D.C.: The
Brookings Institution, pp.154-247.
Angel, Robert (1991), Explaining Economic Policy Failure: Japan in the 1969-1971
International Monetary Crisis, New York: Columbia University Press.
Association of Public and Corporate Bond Underwriters (Koshasai Hikiuke Kyokai)
(1980), History of Public and Corporate Bond Market in Japan, Tokyo: Association of
Public and Corporate Bond Underwriters (in Japanese, Nihon Koshasai Shijo Shi).
Bank of Japan (1976), The Financial System of Japan, Tokyo: Bank of Japan (in
Japanese, Waga Kuni no Kinyu Seido)
Bank of Japan (1985), One Hundred Year History of the Bank of Japan, Volume 5,
Tokyo: Bank of Japan (in Japanese, Nihon Ginko Hyakunenshi).
Bank of Japan (1986), One Hundred Year History of the Bank of Japan, Volume 6,
Tokyo: Bank of Japan (in Japanese, Nihon Ginko Hyakunenshi).
Campa, Jose Manuel and Linda S. Goldberg (2002), “Exchange Rate Pass-Through into
Import Prices: A Macro or Micro Phenomenon?” NBER Working Paper no. 8934 (May).
Dooley, Michael, David Folkerts-Landau and Peter Garber (2003), “An Essay on the
Revived Bretton Woods System,” NBER Working Paper no.9971 (September).
Economic Planning Agency (1972), Economic White Paper of 1972, Tokyo: Printing
Bureau of Ministry of Finance (in Japanese, Showa 47 Nen-ban Keizai Hakusho).
Eichengreen, Barry (2004), “Chinese Currency Controversies,” Asian Economic Papers
(forthcoming).
Forum for Foreign Exchange Rate Policy (Kawase Seisaku Kenkyu-Kai) (1971), “A
Recommendation for Adjustment of the Yen Rate by a Crawling Peg,” Shukan Toyo
Keizai (special issue), 30 August (in Japanese, “En Reto no Kokizami Chosei ni tsuite no
Teigen”).
Fujino, Shozaburo (1988), “The Balance of Payments of Postwar Japan, Part One:
Overvaluation of Exchange Rate of 360 Yen,” Keizai Kenkyu 39, pp.97-108 (in Japanese,
“Sengo Nihon no Kokusai Shushi”).

50

Fukao, Mitsuhiro (1990), “Liberalization of Japan’s Foreign Exchange Controls and
Structural Changes in the Balance of Payments,” BOJ Monetary and Economic Studies 8,
pp.1-65.
Goldstein, Morris and Nicholas Lardy (2003), “Two-Stage Currency Reform for China,”
The Asian Wall Street Journal (12 September).
Hayami, Masaru (1982), Ten Years’ Experience with Floating: Voyage without a Chart,
Tokyo: Toyo Keizai Shinpo Sha (in Japanese, Hendo Soba Sei 10 Nen: Kaizu naki
Kokai).
Horiuchi, Akiyoshi (1984), “Economic Growth and Financial Allocation in Postwar
Japan,” Brookings Discussion Paper in Economics no. 18 (August).
Hoshino, Naoki (1958), “The Intention of Mr. Erhard,” Daiyamondo, 15 November, 1958
(in Japanese, Eaharuto no Shin’i).
Hutchison, Michael and Carl Walsh (1992), “Empirical Evidence on the Insulation
Properties of Fixed and Flexible Exchange Rates: The Japanese Experience,” Journal of
International Economics 32, pp.241-264.
Ishii, Kanji (1991), Japanese Economic History, Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press,
Second Edition, (in Japanese, Nihon Keizaishi).
Ito, Takatoshi (1986), “Capital Controls and Covered Interest Parity Between the Yen
and the Dollar,” Economic Studies Quarterly 37, pp.223-241.
Kawamura, Yozo and Tadashi Shibuichi (1961), The Practice of Forward Foreign
Exchange, Tokyo: Gaikoku Kawase Boeki Kenkyu Kai (in Japanese, Sakimono Kawase
no Jitsumu).
Kojima, Kiyoshi (eds) (1972), Structure and Development of Japanese Trade, Tokyo:
Shiseido.
Komiya, Ryutaro (1988), Current Japanese Economy: Macroeconomic Perspectives and
International Economic Relations, Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press (in Japanese,
Gendai Nihon Keizai).
Komiya, Ryutaro and Miyako Suda (1983a), Contemporary International Finance:
Theory, History and Policy; Theory Volume, Tokyo: Nihon Keizai Shinbun Sha (in
Japanese, Gendai Kokusai Kinyuron, Riron-hen).
Komiya, Ryutaro and Miyako Suda (1983b), Contemporary International Finance:
Theory, History and Policy, Volume for History and Policy, Tokyo: Nihon Keizai
Shinbun Sha (in Japanese, Gendai Kokusai Kinyuron, Rekishi Seisaku-hen).

51

Kosai, Yutaka (1989), “Economic Policy During the Era of High Growth,” in Yasukichi
Yasuba and Takenori Inoki (eds), Economic History of Japan, Volume 8: High Growth,
Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten, pp.209-272, (in Japanese, “Kodo Seichoki no Keizai Seisaku,”
Nihon Keizaishi).
Krause, Lawrence and Sueo Sekiguchi (1976), “Japan and the World Economy,” in Hugh
Patrick and Henry Rosovsky (eds), Asia’s New Giant, Washington, D.C.: The Brookings
Institution, pp.385-457.
Kure, Bunji and Kinzo Shima (1987), Deregulation of Interest Rates: New Edition,
Tokyo: Yuhikaku (in Japanese, Kinri Jiyuka: Shinpan).
Maddison, Angus (2001), The World Economy: A Millennial Perspective, Paris: OECD.
Mason, Mark (1982), American Multinationals and Japan, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press.
Mikuni, Akio and R. Taggart Murphy (2002), Japan’s Policy Trap: Dollars, Deflation,
and the Crisis of Japanese Finance, Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution.
Ministry of Finance (1976), The Financial History of Japan: The Allied Occupation
Period, Volume 3, Tokyo: Ministry of Finance (in Japanese, Showa Zaisei Shi).
Ministry of Finance (1991a), History of Financial and Monetary Policies in Japan, 195273: Finance: Monetary Policy and Financial System, Part I, Volume 9, Tokyo: Ministry
of Finance (in Japanese, Showa Zaisei Shi).
Ministry of Finance (1991b), History of Financial and Monetary Policies in Japan, 195273: Finance: Monetary Policy and Financial System, Part II, Volume 10, Tokyo:
Ministry of Finance (in Japanese, Showa Zaisei Shi).
Ministry of Finance (1992), History of Financial and Monetary Policies in Japan, 195273: International Finance and External Economic Affairs, Part II, Volume 12, Tokyo:
Ministry of Finance (in Japanese, Showa Zaisei Shi).
Ministry of Trade and Industry (1990), History of Trade and Industrial Policies, Volume
6, Tokyo: Tsusho Sangyo Chosa Kai (in Japanese, Tsusho Sangyo Seisaku Shi).
Mitchell, Brian (1998a), The International Historical Statistics Americas 1750-1993,
Basingstroke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Mitchell, Brian (1998b), The International Historical Statistics Europe 1750-1993,
Basingstroke: Palgrave Macmillan.

52

Mitchell, Brian (1998c), The International Historical Statistics Africa, Asia & Oceania
1750-1993, Basingstroke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Mitsubishi Heavy Industry Ltd. (1967), History of Mitsubishi Shipbuilding Ltd., Tokyo:
Mitsubishi Heavy Industry Ltd. (in Japanese, Mitsubishi Zosen Kabushikikaisha Shashi).
Miwa, Ryoichi (2003), “Postwar Democratization and Economic Reconstruction” in
Nakamura Takafusa and Konosuke Odaka (eds), Economic History of Japan, Volume 3:
A Dual Structure, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Miyagawa, Tsutomu and Joji Tokui (1994), Economics of Strong Yen, Tokyo: Toyo
Keizai Shinpo Sha (in Japanese, Endaka no Keizaigaku).
Nakamura, Takafusa (1993), The Japanese Economy: Its Growth and Structure, Tokyo:
University of Tokyo Press, Third edition (in Japanese, Nihon Keizai Shi: Sono Seicho to
Kozo).
Nakamura, Takafusa (2003), “The Age of Turbulence: 1937-54,” in Nakamura Takafusa
and Konosuke Odaka (eds), Economic History of Japan, Volume 3: A Dual Structure,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Odaka, Konosuke (1989), “The Trace of Growth (2),” in Yasukichi Yasuba and Takenori
Inoki (eds), Economic History of Japan, Volume 8: High Growth, Tokyo: Iwanami
Shoten (in Japanese, “Seicho no Kiseki(2),” Nihon Keizaishi).
Odaka, Konosuke (1999), “‘Japanese-Style’ Labour Relations,” in Tetsuji Okazaki and
Masahiro Okuno-Fujiwara (eds), The Japanese Economic System and Its Historical
Origins, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ohkawa, Kazushi and Henry Rosovsky (1973), Japanese Economic Growth, Stanford:
Stanford University Press.
Okazaki, Tetsuji (1993), Japanese Industrialization and the Steel Industry: A
Comparative Institutional Analysis of Economic Development, Tokyo: University of
Tokyo Press (in Japanese, Nihon no Kogyoka to Tekko Sangyo: Keizai Hatten no Hikaku
Seido Bunseki).
Okazaki, Tetsuji (1999), “Corporate Governance,” in Tetsuji Okazaki and Masahiro
Okuno-Fujiwara (eds), The Japanese Economic System and Its Historical Origins,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Organization for Economic Growth and Cooperation (1994), Employment Outlook, Paris:
OECD.
People’s Bank of China (2004a), China Monetary Policy Report: Quarter One, 2004,
Beijing: China Financial Publishing House.

53

People’s Bank of China (2004b), China Monetary Policy Report: Quarter Four, 2004,
Beijing: China Financial Publishing House.
People’s Bank of China (2005), “Foreign Currency Trading Formally Introduced to the
Inter-bank Foreign Exchange Market,” Press Release, www.pbc.gov.cn/english.
Shimada, Haruo, Toyoaki Hosokawa and Atsushi Seike (1982), “The Analysis of the
Adjustments of Wage and Employment,” Keizai Kenkyu, no.84 (in Japanese, Chingin
oyobi Koyo Chosei Katei no Bunseki).
Shimomura, Osamu (1971), “Keeping the Parity Should Be the Principle of Economic
Policy,” Shukan Toyo Keizai (special issue), 30 August (in Japanese, Heika Iji koso
Keizai Seisaku no Kihon dearu).
Shinohara, Miyohei (1959), “Liberalization and Exchange Rate of 360 Yen,”
Ekonomisuto, 10 November (in Japanese, “Jiyuka to 360 Yen Reto”), reprinted in Japan
and the World Economy (1989), pp.22-30, Tokyo: Chikuma Shobo (in Japanese, Sekai
Keizai to Nihon).
Suzuki, Yoshio (eds) (1987), The Japanese Financial System, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Tachi, Ryuichiro and Ryutaro Komiya (1960), Under-Liquidity and Monetary Policy in
Japan,” Economic Studies [Keizai Kenkyu], vol.11, no.3, pp.288-295.
Takahashi, Kamekichi (1971), “Yen’s Revaluation,” Asahi Newspaper, 4 May 1971 (in
Japanese, En Kiriage).
Takamura, Naosuke (1971), The Introduction for the History of Japanese Cotton
Spinning Industry, Tokyo: Hanawa Shobo, (in Japanese, Nihon Bosekigyo-shi Josetsu).
Toyota Motor Corporation (1987), Unlimited Creativity: Fifty Year History of Toyota
Motor Corporation, Toyota: Toyota Motor Corporation (in Japanese, Sozo Kagiri Naku:
Toyota Jidosha Goju-nen Shi).
Trezise, Philip and Yukio Suzuki (1976), “Politics, Government, and Economic Growth,”
in Hugh Patrick and Henry Rosovsky (eds), Asia’s New Giant, Washington, D.C.: The
Brookings Institution, pp.753-811.
Yasuba, Yasukichi and Takenori Inoki (1989), “An Overview: 1955-80,” in Yasukichi
Yasuba and Takenori Inoki (eds), Economic History of Japan, Volume 8: High Growth,
Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten, pp.1-56 (in Japanese, “Gaisetsu, 1955-80 Nen,” Nihon
Keizaishi).

54

