                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       WELFARE REFORM, RETURNS TO EXPERIENCE,
                        AND WAGES: USING RESERVATION WAGES
                        TO ACCOUNT FOR SAMPLE SELECTION BIAS

                                             Jeffrey Grogger

                                         Working Paper 11621
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11621


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2005




I thank Kerwin Charles, Costas Meghir, Bruce Meyer, Derek Neal, Jeff Zabel and seminar participants at
Brigham Young, Chicago, McMaster, the National Poverty Center, the Institute for Research on Poverty, the
National Bureau of Economic Research, and the Econometric Society World Congress for helpful comments.
Any errors are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Jeffrey Grogger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Welfare Reforms, Returns to Experience, and Wages: Using Reservation Wages to Account for
Sample Selection Bias
Jeffrey Grogger
NBER Working Paper No. 11621
September 2005
JEL No. I3, J3, C3

                                           ABSTRACT




Work was one of the central motivations for welfare reform during the 1990s. One important
rationale for work was based on human capital theory: work today should raise experience tomorrow,
which in turn should raise future wage offers and reduce dependency on aid. Despite the importance
of the this notion, few studies have estimated the effect of welfare reform on wages. Furthermore,
several recent analyses suggest that low-skill workers, such as welfare recipients, enjoy only meager
returns to experience, undermining the link between welfare reform and wages.
An important analytical obstacle is the sample selection problem. Since non-employment levels are
high and workers are unlikely to represent a random sample from the population of former recipients,
estimates that fail to account for sample selection could be seriously biased.
In this paper, I propose a method to solve the selection problem based on the use of reservation wage
data. Reservation wage data allow one to solve the problem using censored regression methods.
Furthermore, the use of reservation wage data obviates the need for the controversial exclusion
restrictions sometimes used to identify familiar two-step sample selection estimators.
Correcting for sample selection bias matters a great deal empirically. Estimates from models that
lack such corrections suggest that welfare recipients gain little from work experience. Estimates
based on the reservation wage approach suggest that they enjoy returns similar to those estimated
from other samples of workers. They also suggest that the particular reform program that I analyze
may have raised wages modestly.

Jeffrey Grogger
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1155 E. 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jgrogger@uchicago.edu
I. Introduction

        Promoting work was one of the primary rationales for welfare reform. One of the

key arguments for work came from human capital theory. The notion was that work

today would increase experience in the future, that increased experience would increase

future wage offers, and that higher wages would reduce future welfare dependency.

Many welfare agencies adopted the slogan “a job, a better job, a career” to convey this

notion to their clients.

        Despite the apparent policy interest in wage growth, little research has focused on

the link between welfare reform and wages. Whereas over two dozen studies have

estimated the effect of reform on work, with all but a few showing that reform increased

employment (Grogger and Karoly 2005), only a handful have estimated the effect of

reform on wages. Most of these studies analyze accepted wage distributions among

workers in welfare reform experiments (Bloom et al., 2002; Card, Michalopoulos, and

Robins, 2001). Since accepted wages are drawn from self-selected samples of workers,

however, these analyses may not identify the effect of reform on the offered wages.

        Complicating matters further, welfare reform has theoretically ambiguous effects

on accepted wages. Most reform policies involve some combination of work

requirements, time limits, and lower tax rates on recipients’ earnings. All of these

policies could lead recipients to accept lower wages than they would have otherwise.

Without adequate controls for such self-selection, reform could appear to reduce wages,

at least in the short term. Whether reform increases wages in the longer term depends on

the extent to which recipients’ wages rise with experience.




                                             1
       Although wages rise with experience in the standard human capital model, there

is debate over whether the standard human capital model applies to low-skill workers

such as welfare recipients. Although some recent studies suggest that wages rise with

experience similarly among low- and high-skill workers (Gladden and Taber 1999; Loeb

and Corcoran 2001), other studies suggest that low-skill workers enjoy little of the wage

growth experienced by their higher-skill counterparts (Burtless 1995, Edin and Lein

1997, Moffitt and Rangarajan 1989, Pavetti and Acs 1997; Card and Hyslop 2004;

Dustmann and Meghir 2005). Yet the extent to which wages grow with experience is a

critical determinant of whether welfare reform will increase offered wages.

       My objectives in this paper are to estimate the effects of a welfare reform program

on wages roughly four years after the program began and to estimate the return to

experience among welfare recipients. As suggested already, a major obstacle in this

analysis is sample selection bias. As in many other contexts, a simple model of labor

force participation indicates that the unobservable characteristics of consumers that

influence wages also influence labor force participation (Heckman 1974). In the case of

welfare recipients, the potential for bias would seem particularly great, since even after

welfare reform, only about two-thirds of former recipients are likely to be working at any

point in time (Isaacs and Lyon 2000). This means that wages are unobserved for one-

third of the sample, so if there is positive selection into employment, a simple linear

regression of wages on experience could result in biased estimates of the return to

experience.

       To solve the sample selection problem, I propose a novel approach based on

reservation wage data. In a simple model of labor force participation, the consumer will




                                             2
work if her offered wage exceeds her reservation wage, that is, her shadow price of

leisure. This means that with data on reservation wages, the analyst can solve the

selection problem by means of a censored bivariate regression model, where the

reservation wages provide censoring thresholds for consumers who do not work. One

advantage of this approach is that it does not require the potentially controversial

exclusion restrictions often employed to identify the more familiar two-equation sample-

selection estimators (Heckman 1979).

       The reservation wage data are fortuitously available from the evaluation of a

Florida welfare reform experiment. However, because they were collected in an effort to

value employer-provided health care, the questions used to obtain them involve

complexities that do not necessarily contribute to the elicitation of the textbook notion of

a reservation wage. Perhaps due to this complexity, the reservation wage data appear to

involve a substantial amount of measurement error.

       To deal with this problem I extend the econometric model to account for

measurement error. The resulting estimator still takes the form of a censored bivariate

regression. However, the measurement error affects which observations are treated as

limit observations and which are treated as non-limit observations.

       Accounting for selection bias has important effects on the results. Simple linear

regressions yield very small returns to experience. Standard two-step sample-selection

estimators differ little from OLS because the instrument used to identify the wage

equation is fairly weak. Using reservation wages to correct for selection bias, however,

yields returns that are comparable to those observed in other samples of young workers.




                                              3
The estimated effect of the reform program on wages is imprecise, but it suggests that the

program may have increased wages.

        In the next section I discuss the data, after which I discuss estimation in section

III. I present results in section IV. In the conclusion, I discuss the estimation method as

well as the results. Although the estimator I employ was developed to solve the selection

problem in a specific context, the approach could be used more generally if reservation

wage data were collected more widely. I discuss how the quality of such data might be

improved, particularly if recent developments in survey techniques were employed to

collect it.

II. Data

        My data come from the evaluation of Florida’s Family Transition Program (FTP),

which was a pilot welfare reform program carried out in Escambia County (Pensacola).

FTP involved a random-assignment evaluation. Between May 1994 and February 1995,

ongoing welfare recipients were randomly assigned to treatment and control groups at

their biannual recertification interviews. Applicants were randomly assigned at the time

of application. Bloom et al. (2000) provides details about the program’s evaluation as

well as its effects on employment, earnings, and income.

        FTP’s treatment group was subject to time limits and a financial incentive. Most

recipients could receive aid for only 24 months in any 60-month period, although more

disadvantaged recipients could receive aid for 36 out of 72 months. Control group

members were not subject to a time limit. Working treatment group members could keep

the first $200 they earned each month, as well as 50 percent of the amount over $200.

Working control group members faced the tax schedule from the Aid to Families with




                                              4
Dependent Children program. After the first four months of work, their marginal tax rate

on earnings was 100 percent if they earned over $90 per month. Both the time limit and

the financial incentive provided treatment group members with an incentive to work.

       In addition, the treatment group was subject to different asset limits and parental

responsibility requirements than the control group. Furthermore, both groups were

subject to work requirements that required recipients either to work or to participate in a

welfare-to-work program. The welfare-to-work programs for both groups followed a

work-first model which focused on job search rather than skills-building, but the

programs were administered somewhat differently. The link between these differences

and employment is less clear than that between time limits, financial incentives, and

employment.

       Survey data collected four years after random assignment provide information on

wages and reservation wages. Of the 2,815 recipients in the “report sample” analyzed by

Bloom, et al. (2000), 2,160 were targeted for the four-year survey. Questionnaires were

completed by 1,729 recipients, yielding a completion rate of 80 percent. The four-year

survey collected information about employment, earnings, and hours at the time of the

survey. I used these data to compute hourly wages. The survey also collected

information on reservation wages, which I discuss in detail below.

       In addition to the survey data, I use data from administrative sources. These

sources provide monthly data on welfare receipt and quarterly data on earnings covered

by the Unemployment Insurance (UI) system during a six-year observation window that

begins two years prior to random assignment and extends through the time of the four-

year survey. The UI system covers roughly 90 percent of all jobs in the U.S., although it




                                             5
excludes self employment, some government jobs, and independent contractors (Bureau

of Labor Statistics 1989). It misses casual employment paid in cash, which may be an

important source of income for welfare recipients (Edin and Lein 1997). To measure

labor force experience, I sum the number of quarters with UI-covered earnings during the

six-year observation window. Using such an actual experience measure to estimate the

return to experience raises an endogeneity issue, since actual experience is a function of

past employment decisions (Gladden and Taber 2000). I discuss my approach to this

problem in section III.

         The first two columns of Table 1 compare summary statistics from the report

sample and the survey sample. Both samples exhibit characteristics familiar from other

studies of welfare populations. They are relatively young, poorly educated, and

disproportionately non-white. Fewer than 15 percent of women in both samples received

welfare in the 48th month after entering the program.

         Average experience during the six-year observation window was 9.8 quarters in

the report sample and 10.52 quarters in the survey sample. Although there are no data on

experience prior to the observation window, it is useful to roughly estimate prior

experience in order to compare my results below to previous estimates from the literature.

Bloom et al. (2000) report that average age in the sample was 29.1 years at the time of

random assignment, or 27.1 years at the beginning of the observation window. Average

years of education were 11.1 years.1 Assuming that one completes 11th grade at the age

of 17, I infer that sample members had been out of school for 10.1 years on average at the

beginning of the observation window.


1
  Neither exact age nor exact years of education are available in the public-use data that I use in this
analysis.


                                                       6
        The average employment rate in the two years prior to random assignment was

0.26. Assuming that employment rate applies to the pre-observation period, that is, the

period prior to the beginning of the six-year observation window, implies that pre-

observation experience averaged about 2.6 years. One might be concerned that this

employment rate understates earlier experience, since many of the women in the sample,

particularly the ongoing recipients, were on aid during the two years prior to random

assignment. Applicants to the program, who spent less time on aid before random

assignment than ongoing recipients, had an average employment rate of 0.29 during the

two years before they applied for aid.2 Using this higher employment rate implies that

pre-observation experience averaged about 2.9 years.3 Adding this to mean experience

during the observation window suggests that average lifetime experience at the time of

the four-year survey was roughly 5 to 6 years.

        The next row of the Table shows that roughly half the sample was working four

years after random assignment; the survey sample is somewhat more likely than the

report sample to have positive UI earnings in the 16th quarter following random

assignment. Within the survey sample, the difference between UI-covered employment

and self-reported employment is fairly small as compared to other samples of former

welfare recipients, where casual employment often results in differences of 10 to 20

percentage points (Isaacs and Lyon, 2000).




2
  The term "applicant" applies to anyone who applied for aid during the period of random assignment.
Many had received aid during previous spells. Such cycling on and off the rolls is common among welfare
recipients
3
  One might be concerned that employment exhibits an "Ashenfelter dip," that is, a sharp decrease just
before random assignment. Such a dip could cause me to underestimate pre-observation experience.
However, no such dip occurred; sample employment rates were generally rising during the two years prior
to random assignment.


                                                   7
       Because the reservation wage data were used to value employer-provided health

coverage, the questions were posed to all members of the survey sample rather than just

to non-workers. Of the 1,729 members of the sample survey, 1,548, or 89.5 percent,

provided responses to the reservation wage question. The third column of Table 1 shows

that this reservation-wage sample is generally similar to the survey sample as a whole,

with the exception that its employment rate and labor market experience are somewhat

higher. This is the sample that will be used in estimating the censored regression models

discussed in the next section below.

       Of the 1,548 members of the reservation wage sample, 959 worked, for an

employment rate of 62 percent. This employment sample had greater levels of

observable skill than those who were not working, as seen in column (4). Whereas nearly

39 percent of the reservation wage sample lacked both a diploma and a GED, only 33

percent of the employment sample had no high school credential. The employment

sample also had considerably more work experience, having accumulated 13 quarters as

compared to 10.9 in the reservation wage sample.

       The next row of the Table shows that mean wages among workers are $7.15 per

hour. Figure 1 presents further data on wages in the form of kernel density estimates of

wage distributions estimated separately for the treatment and control groups. As

compared to the control group density, the treatment group density has less mass in the

range of about $6 to $6.50 an hour (corresponding to log wages of 1.79 to 1.87) and more

in the range of $10 an hour (corresponding to a log wage of 2.3). The figure suggests that

FTP helped some workers escape the “$6 ghetto” for somewhat better paying work.




                                            8
        Of course, Figure 1 compares wages among workers. If workers differ from non-

workers along unobservable dimensions in the same way that they differ along

observable dimensions, the result could be sample selection bias. I account for sample

selection bias using reservation wage data that were elicited by the first of the following

pair of questions:

        1.      Suppose that next month you were unemployed and had no
                medical benefits, and someone offered you a full-time job with
                employer-paid full medical benefits. What is the lowest wage per
                hour that the employer could offer and still get you to take the job?

        2.      Suppose that next month you were unemployed and had no
                medical benefits, and someone offered you a full-time job with no
                employer-paid health benefits. What is the lowest wage per hour
                that the employer could offer and still get you to take the job?


        The question is clearly quite challenging, requiring the respondent to evaluate a

scenario which may be quite at odds from her current situation. Although the non-

workers could presumably evaluate with relative ease the unemployment condition

stipulated by the question, such an evaluation would presumably be more difficult for the

62 percent of recipients who were currently working. Furthermore, the condition

regarding the lack of health benefits in the second question involved another hypothetical

scenario for the 60 percent of the sample members who currently had health coverage

(and possibly for the 85 percent of sample whose children had coverage). This additional

level of complexity was likely to pose particular difficulties for the majority that was

covered by Medicaid, which would have continued to provide coverage even in the event

of a job loss. Since the second question is substantially more complex than the first, I

restrict my attention to the first in the analysis below.




                                               9
       Given the complexities of the questionnaire items, one might reasonably be

concerned about the quality of the responses, or whether the questions seemed so

hypothetical that respondents failed to take them seriously. There are a few ways to

gauge the quality of these data. The first is to note that the value of health insurance

implied by responses to the two questions averages $1.03 per hour, or about $2000 per

year at full-time work. This value accords at least roughly with the price of health

insurance policies, which one would not have expected if respondents had treated the

questions dismissively.

       Second, since the question was posed to workers, one can compare workers’

reservation wages to their reported wages. At the aggregate level, the reservation wages

seem sensible, as shown in Table 2. They are generally low, in line with the wages

typically paid to low-skill workers. Except at the very bottom of the wage distribution,

where many wage reports fall beneath the federal minimum wage, wages exceed

reservation wages, at least weakly, as theory requires.

       However, comparing individual reports reveals a number of discrepancies, that is,

observations where workers report reservation wages in excess of their current wage.

Although nearly two-thirds of workers reported a wage that at least weakly exceeded

their reservation wage, a sizeable minority reported the contrary.

       These discrepancies could result from misreporting of either wages or reservation

wages. Roughly 25 percent of the discrepant observations involved wage reports below

the federal minimum wage. Other discrepancies involved reservation wages that

exceeded the current wage by a small even amount, such as 25 cents, or that appeared to

represent “rounding up” to such an amount, for example, from $5.15 to 5.50. One




                                             10
possibility is that, despite the prefatory language in the questionnaire, these respondents

reported the wage at which they would be willing to leave their current job. Another is

that respondents interpreted the question as asking about the wage they might expect

under the circumstances given. Dominitz (1998) has shown that survey respondents’

reports of earnings expectations are generally optimistic when compared to future

realizations.

        Whatever the reason for the discrepancies, it is clear that they need to be

accounted for in order to use the reservation wage data to deal with the sample selection

problem. To do this, I assume that both the wage and the reservation wage are measured

with error. I then derive the likelihood for the sample of error-laden data. This is akin to

the approach taken in some structural search models, where measurement error is

invoked to rationalize observations that run contrary to theory, such as job changes that

involve wage reductions or accepted wages that fall below stated reservation wages (van

den Berg 1990, Flinn 2002, Dey and Flinn 2005).

        One further cause for concern is that the reservation wage question asks for the

wage at which the respondent would be willing to work full-time. This is at odds with

the textbook notion of a reservation wage, which is the wage at which the consumer

would be willing to work one hour. Given the other complexities of the question, one

might wonder how salient the full-time condition was to the survey respondents. Since

we will never know, I present one set of estimates below based on the assumption that the

condition was salient, that is, that respondents indeed reported the wage necessary to

induce them to work full-time. However, for the analysis that follows in the next section,




                                             11
I treat the responses to the question as if the full-time language was not salient, that is, as

if they reflected respondents’ shadow price of leisure.

III. Estimation

        Before dealing with the problem of measurement error, I first briefly develop the

singly-censored bivariate regression model in its absence. This allows me to discuss

most simply how using reservation wages as censoring thresholds can solve the sample

selection problem. I also discuss the restrictive conditions under which solving the

selection problem also solves the problem of endogenous labor market experience.

        A. No measurement error

        The wage and reservation wage equations are given by

wi* = X 1i β1 + δ1Z i + u1i                                                                 (1)

ri* = X 2i β 2 + δ 2 Z i + u 2i                                                             (2)

where wi* denotes the logarithm of consumer i’s wage and ri* denotes the logarithm of

the consumer’s reservation wage, both measured without error. The vector X1i includes a

vector of characteristics known to influence wages, such as education, race, and the

number of children. In some of the regressions below, Zi represents the treatment-group

dummy, equal to one for members of the treatment sample and equal to zero for members

of the control sample. In these regressions,    1   gives the effect of FTP on wages at the

time of the four-year survey. In other regressions, Zi represents the labor market

experience measure discussed above. In these regressions,        1   gives the returns to

experience. In this case, the assumption that returns are linear in experience is justified

by the concentrated age distribution of the sample and is supported empirically. The

vector X2i includes characteristics thought to influence the consumer’s reservation wages.


                                               12
The vectors X1i and X2i may differ, although they need not, and in this application they

include the same variables. Employing the reservation wage data in the manner

described below eliminates the need for the often-controversial exclusion restrictions

typically used to identify self-selection models. The terms u1i and u2i represent

unobservable factors that influence wages and reservation wages, respectively. The term

u1i captures unobservable labor market productivity. The term u2i reflects unobservables

that affect the shadow price of time. It may also reflect respondents’ beliefs about the

non-wage characteristics of potential jobs. I assume that X1i, X2i, and Zi and are

uncorrelated with u1i and u2i. This assumption is justified in the case where Zi represents

the treatment group dummy. Below I discuss how I deal with the potential endogeneity

of past experience. I assume that u1i and u2i follow a bivariate normal distribution.

         A simple model of labor force participation says that the consumer works if her

wage (weakly) exceeds her shadow price of leisure, that is, if

wi* ≥ ri* .                                                                                           (3)

This model yields what I refer to as a singly-censored bivariate regression estimator,

where the reservation wages serve as censoring thresholds for non-workers.

         In deriving the likelihood, there are two groups to consider: workers, who

contribute non-limit observations, and non-workers, who contribute limit observations.

The bivariate density term contributed by workers, for whom wi* ≥ ri* , is given by

P( wi* ≥ ri* ) f (u1i , u 2i | wi* ≥ ri* ) = P(u1i ≥ ri* − X 1i β1 − δ1Z i ) f (u1i , u 2i | u1i ≥ ri* − X 1i β1 − δ1Z i )
                                                                                          f (u1i , u 2i )
                                           = P(u1i ≥ ri* − X 1i β1 − δ1Z i )
                                                                             P(u1i ≥ ri* − X 1i β1 − δ1Z i )
                                        = f (u1i , u 2i )




                                                      13
where f (u1i , u 2i ) is the bivariate normal pdf. The density for these non-limit

observations is given by the product of two terms: the probability that the wage (weakly)

exceeds the reservation wage and the conditional joint density of the disturbance terms,

given that the wage exceeds the reservation wage. The right-hand side of the first line

above simply uses equation (1) to re-write the left-hand side. The second line follows

from the first via standard results on the truncated bivariate normal density (Johnson and

Kotz, not dated, 112). Because the conditional joint density takes the convenient form

given in the second line, the likelihood for the ith non-limit observation takes the simple

form given in the third line.

         The contribution to the likelihood for non-workers, for whom wi* < ri* , is given

by

 ri* − X 1i β1 − δ1Z i
                            f (u1i , u 2i )du1i .
 −∞

Letting n0 represent the number of non-limit observations and n1 represent the number of

limit observations, the sample likelihood is given by

                                                     ri* − X 1i β1 − δ1Z i
ln L =           ln f (u1i , u 2i ) +           ln                           f (u1i , u 2i )du1i
                                                     −∞
         n                              n
             0                              1

         Under certain conditions, this model solves not only the sample selection

problem, but also the endogeneity problem that arises because experience represents the

summation of past employment decisions. As I show in the appendix, these conditions

are restrictive: they require reservation wages, and all determinants of the wage except

for experience, to be time-invariant. In this case, the consumer will either work in all

periods of her life or in none. Her entire career trajectory depends on whether she works



                                                                   14
in the first period of her working life. Conditional on that first decision, employment is

deterministic, so experience is conditionally exogenous. Solving the selection problem

for the first period implicitly solves the endogeneity problem, but since the consumer’s

employment decision is the same in every period, solving the selection problem in any

period (including the period four years after random assignment) is equivalent to solving

it in the first period. Although these conditions are too restrictive to be realistic, they

suggest that if the variables that determine employment (other than experience) are

dominated by time-invariant components, then solving the selection problem may help

mitigate the endogeneity problem that arises from including actual experience as a

regressor, even though it does not completely solve it.

        Under more realistic conditions, the endogeneity problem may require an explicit

solution. In the empirical work below, I use the treatment-group dummy as an instrument

for experience. The treatment dummy should provide a valid instrument, because FTP

provided an incentive to work for the treatment group and assignment to treatment was

made at random. Following Newey (1987) (see also Blundell and Smith 1986), I first

regress experience on the treatment group dummy and the other exogenous variables in

the model, then include the residuals from this first-stage regression in the singly-

censored bivariate regression model. This is analogous to Hausman’s (1978) linear IV

estimate, with the result that the coefficient on the experience residual should provide a

test of the null hypothesis of no misspecification against the alternative of endogenous

experience, accounting for self-selection.




                                              15
        B. Measurement error

        To account for measurement error, let observed (log) wages and reservation

wages be given by

wi = wi* + ε i                                                                                (4)

and

ri = ri* + vi                                                                                 (5)

where    i   ~N(0, σ ε2 ) and vi ~N(0, σ v2 ) may be correlated with each other but are assumed

to be independent of X1i, X2i, Zi, u1i, and u2i. The observable wage and reservation wage

equations are:

wi = X 1i β1 + δ1Z i + η1i                                                                    (6)


ri = X 2i β 2 + δ 2 Z i + η 2i                                                                (7)

where η1i = u1i + ε i and η 2i = u 2i + ν i . I assume that   1i   and   2i   follow a bivariate


normal distribution with zero means, variances σ 12 and σ 22 , respectively, and correlation

coefficient .

        The full-information likelihood for this model consists of three equations:

equations (6) and (7) and an employment equation derived by substituting (1) into (3) and

solving. The apparent advantage of the full-information likelihood is that it uses all the

data on observed wages and reservation wages, plus the information on employment

status, which according to (3) is a function of the true wage and reservation wage rather

than their observed counterparts. The problem with it is that it is not identified. The

three-by-three covariance matrix involves six parameters, whereas there are only four

moments available to identify them. Fortunately, one can write down a limited-


                                                 16
information likelihood function where all the regression parameters in equations (1) and

(2) are identified, as is the two-by-two covariance matrix of the η ji terms.

          In deriving the limited-information likelihood there are two groups to consider.

As in the simple case without measurement error, the groups correspond to the limit and

non-limit observations. However, in the presence of measurement error, the key is to

note that only workers who report wi ≥ ri can be treated as non-limit observations. All

other observations, that is, both non-workers and workers with discrepant wage reports,

must be treated as limit observations. Wage reports from the discrepant observations are

not utilized in this approach, which is why I refer to the result as a limited-information

likelihood.

          For workers who report wi ≥ ri , the contribution to the likelihood is given by


P( wi ≥ ri ) f (η1i ,η 2i | wi ≥ ri ) = P(η1i ≥ ri − X 1i β1 − δ1Z i ) f (η1i ,η 2i | η1i ≥ ri − X 1i β1 − δ1Z i )
                                                                                  f (η1i ,η 2i )
                                      = P(η1i ≥ ri − X 1i β1 − δ1Z i )
                                                                       P (η1i ≥ ri − X 1i β1 − δ1Z i )
                                               = f (η1i ,η 2i )
.

    For all other observations, the contribution to the likelihood is

    r − X 1i β1 − δ1Z i
     i                    f (η1i ,η 2i )dη1i                                                    (8)
    −∞


Let n0' denote the number of non-limit observations and let n1' denote the number of

limit observations. The sample likelihood is

                                       r − X 1i β1 − δ1Z i
ln L =       ln f (η1i ,η 2i ) +    ln i                   f (η1i ,η 2i )dη1i
                                       −∞
           '
          n0                     n1'




                                                           17
This is again a singly-censored bivariate regression model, albeit with a different

definition of the limit and non-limit observations.

        A natural question is why the full set of workers cannot be treated as non-limit

observations in the presence of measurement error. The reason is that to do so would

require one to account for the fact that employment decisions are based on equation (3),

whereas the observed model is given by equations (6) and (7). Thus the density

associated with workers in the presence of measurement error is given by

P( wi* ≥ ri* ) f (η1i ,η 2i | wi* ≥ ri* ) = P(u1i ≥ ri* − X 1i β1 − δ1Z i ) f (η1i ,η 2i | u1i ≥ ri* − X 1i β1 − δ1Z i )
                                       ≠ f (η1i ,η 2i )


The problem is that employment, the conditioning event, is a function of the true wage

and reservation wage, whereas the data consist of the observable, error-laden wage and

reservation wage. As a result, the conditional joint density on the right-hand side of the

first line above cannot be rewritten in the same convenient manner as could the

conditional joint density in the model without measurement error. The second line above

shows that simply treating all the workers as non-limit observations is likely to yield

inconsistent estimates, since the contribution to the likelihood that one would attribute to

such observations would be incorrect.

IV. Results

        A. The Effect of FTP on Wages

        Estimates of the effect of the FTP program on wages are presented in Table 3.

The first column reports results from an ordinary least squares regression of log wages on

the FTP treatment dummy, age dummies, education dummies, a race dummy, and the

number of children. Although there is no reason to expect these estimates to have



                                                     18
desirable properties, I present them for purposes of comparison with the singly-censored

bivariate regression model. They represent the estimates one would obtain if one were to

ignore the sample selection problem altogether.

        The coefficient on the treatment dummy is negative and insignificant. By itself,

this estimate gives little reason to think that FTP had much effect on wages at the four-

year mark. As for the other estimates in the model, most are consistent with expectations.

Although the age dummies are insignificant, the education variables have strong and

significant effects, and the non-white dummy is negative and significant. The coefficient

on the number of children is negative and significant, but small.

        The next two columns present estimates from Heckman'
                                                           s (1979) two-step

procedure to adjust for selectivity bias. Column (2) presents estimates from a probit

model estimated from the full reservation wage sample including both workers and non-

workers. The dependent variable is an employment dummy equal to one if the consumer

is employed at the four-year survey and equal to zero otherwise. Column (3) presents the

estimated wage equation, which includes the inverse Mills'ratio from the employment

probit to correct for sample selection bias. Since the same variables are included in both

the wage and employment equations, identification is via function form alone. One

would not expect such a model to perform very well, but absent a plausible exclusion

restriction or data on reservation wages, this is the type of model to which one might

resort in attempt to deal with selectivity bias.

        In the employment equation, the treatment dummy has little effect on employment

status at the four-year mark, even though the treatment group worked significantly more

than the control group during the first three years of the experiment (Bloom et al., 2000).




                                              19
Otherwise the estimates largely accord with expectations. In the wage equation, the

coefficient on the treatment dummy is positive but it is small and dwarfed by its standard

error. Indeed, the standard errors on all the coefficients are quite high. This is likely due

to collinearity with the inverse Mills'ratio, since the model is identified solely on the

basis of functional form.

         Columns (4) and (5) report results from the singly-censored bivariate regression

model described above. The coefficients in the wage equation are generally estimated

more precisely than their counterparts from the Heckman two-step estimator. The

coefficient on the treatment-group dummy in the wage equation suggests that FTP raised

wages by 3.7 percent four years after the program began. The t-statistic is 1.81, which

means that the estimate is significant at the 10 percent level but not at the five percent

level.

         The coefficient on the treatment-group dummy in the reservation wage equation is

positive, suggesting that FTP slightly but insignificantly raised recipients’ reservation

wages by the time of the four-year follow-up. Although one might have expected the

treatment and control groups to have the same shadow price of leisure on average at the

beginning of the experiment, greater employment among the treatment group during the

intervening four years may have led to greater accumulated earnings, raising the

treatment group’s reservation wages. Indeed the positive but insignificant effect of FTP

on reservation wages is consistent with the positive but insignificant effect of the

program on savings at the time of the four-year survey (Bloom et al., 2002, Appendix C).

         Furthermore, the small reservation wage effect revealed in column (5) helps

explain why the OLS estimate of the effect of FTP in column (1) is biased downward.




                                             20
Although FTP raised reservation wages, it raised wages by a greater amount. As a result,

workers in the treatment group constitute a relatively less selective sample than workers

in the control group, imparting a negative selection bias.

       Among the other coefficients in columns (4) and (5), age has no effect on either

wages or reservation wages. Schooling has strong effects on wages. The effects of

education on reservation wages, apparent in the no-diploma coefficient and the post-high

school coefficient, suggest that schooling raises home productivity by less than it raises

market productivity. The coefficients on the non-white variable indicate that non-whites

have lower wages and reservation wages, all else equal, than their white counterparts.

Children reduce wages and reservation wages, though the coefficient in the reservation

wage equation is insignificant. The estimate of shows substantial positive correlation

between the unobservable determinants of wages and reservation wages.

       B. The Return to Experience

       Linear regression estimates of the return to experience are presented in Table 4.

As above, these estimates are reported for purpose of comparison with the censored

regression estimates to follow. The OLS estimate in column (1) is significant but small.

Without controls for selection bias, one would conclude that former welfare recipients

enjoyed little return to experience.

       The next column reports a linear instrumental variables estimate. Using the

treatment group dummy as an instrument for experience may abate the problem of

endogenous experience. Since assignment to treatment was made at random, the

treatment dummy should be uncorrelated with unobservable determinants of recipients’

wages. However, even though assignment to treatment is random, linear instrumental




                                             21
variables is unlikely to solve the selection problem, since the observability of the

recipient’s current wage depends on whether she is currently employed. The estimate is

negative, with a standard error an order of magnitude greater than that of the OLS

estimate.

       Table 5 presents two sets of selectivity-corrected estimates of the return to

experience. Columns (1) and (2) report the employment and wage equations,

respectively, from Heckman'
                          s two-step estimator. The estimates of the employment

equation in column (1) are identical to those reported in column (2) of Table 3; they are

repeated here for clarity. In this model, the treatment group dummy appears only in the

employment equation, so in principle it contributes to the identification of the wage

equation. As a practical matter, however, the treatment-group dummy has only a

marginally significant effect on employment, limiting the extent to which it identifies the

wage equation.

       The estimated return to experience in column (2) is positive and significant but

small. In fact, it is almost identical to the OLS estimate in Table 4. The reason is that the

inverse Mills'ratio is completely insignificant, with a t-statistic less than one. If the

model were convincingly identified, one might infer from the insignificant Mills'ratio

that self-selection bias was essentially absent from these data. However, since the

treatment dummy is only marginally significant in the employment equation, an

alternative interpretation is that identification is weak, and as a result, the inverse Mills'

ratio provides a poor control for sample selection bias.

       Estimates from the censored bivariate regression model appear in columns (3) and

(4). Experience has positive effects on both wages and reservation wages. The small




                                              22
positive effect of experience on reservation wages reported in column (4) may stem from

the greater accumulation of earnings among the treatment group, as discussed above.

The estimated effect of experience on wages reported in column (3) is much larger than

the OLS estimate reported in Table 3. This is the direction of bias one would expect,

given the small effect of experience on reservation wages. Experience increases

reservation wages, but it increases wages by a greater amount. Thus experience

decreases the relative selectivity of the sample, negatively biasing the OLS estimate.

       The experience coefficient on wages in column (3) is significant and its

magnitude suggests that welfare recipients enjoy a return of roughly 5.6 percent per year

of experience. This is comparable to a number of other recent estimates in the literature

that are based on samples with similar levels of experience. Gladden and Taber (1999)

study respondents to the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) who received

no education beyond high school. During their first 10 years out of school, white women

in their sample accumulated five years of work experience and black women accumulated

four years, on average. This is roughly comparable to the experience level of the FTP

sample, which I estimated above at 5 to 6 years. Over the 10-year study period, the

women in Gladden and Taber'
                          s sample enjoyed returns to experience of about 4 to 5

percent per year.

       Loeb and Corcoran (2001) followed NLSY women from 1978, when they ranged

in age from 14 to 21, until 1993, when they ranged between 27 and 34 years old. By age

27, women who had ever received welfare had accumulated an average of 3.9 years of

experience. Their average return to experience was 6.8 percent. It is interesting to note

that neither Gladden and Taber nor Loeb and Corcoran find the return to experience to




                                            23
vary by other measures of skill. Gladden and Taber show that experience has similar

effects on wages for both high school graduates and high school dropouts; Loeb and

Corcoran report similar returns among women who had received welfare and women who

had not received welfare.

       Ferber and Waldfogel (1998) follow NLSY women over the same period as Loeb

and Corcoran and estimate the return to experience to be about 5 percent. Lynch (2001)

also analyzes data from the NLSY. She reports that women earn an annualized return of

about 11 percent per year of experience during the first three years after leaving school.

Light and Ureta (1995) analyze a sample of women from the young women'
                                                                     s cohort of

the National Longitudinal Surveys (NLS), which preceded the NLSY. Their sample

ranges in age between 16 and 39 with a mean of 25; average experience is 3 years. They

estimate an average return to experience of 7 percent.

       Card, Michalopoulos, and Robins (2001), Zabel, Schwartz, and Donald (2004),

and Card and Hyslop (2005) analyze wage data from the Self-Sufficiency Program (SSP),

a Canadian experiment that offered welfare recipients a substantial wage subsidy if they

were willing to leave welfare and work full-time. When the experiment began, the SSP

sample averaged 30 years of age and 7.4 years of lifetime work experience. Estimates of

the return to experience differ across these studies. Zabel, Schwartz, and Donald report

an estimate of 8.3 percent, whereas Card, Michalopoulos, and Robins report an estimate

of 2 to 3 percent, and Card and Hyslop report essentially a zero return to experience. It is

not clear why estimates from the same experiment differ so much.

       Moving beyond the experience coefficient, one interesting pattern in the estimates

warrants discussion. With the exception of an insignificant age coefficient, all of the




                                            24
coefficients in the wage equation are larger in absolute value than their counterparts in

the reservation wage equation. This is what one might expect. Presumably, the wage

represents the maximum value of the consumer'
                                            s time across different types of market

activity, that is, across different types of jobs. In contrast, the reservation wage

represents the value of the consumer'
                                    s time in a single type of non-market activity,

namely household production. If so, then the return to schooling (for example) in the

market should exceed the return to schooling in the home. Similarly, the residual

variation in market wages should exceed the residual variation in reservation wages,
                                                                           4
which is precisely what we see in the estimates of          1   and   2.


        As discussed above, experience may be endogenous in this model. Table 6

reports two sets of estimates intended to deal with both selectivity bias and potentially

endogenous experience. The first extends the Heckman two-step approach to deal with

an endogenous regressor. The second adapts the singly-censored bivariate probit model

along the lines of Newey (1987), as discussed in Section III above. Both estimators make

use of a first-stage regression of experience on the treatment dummy and the other

exogenous regressors in the model. This regression is based on the full reservation wage

sample, including workers and non-workers. Results are shown in column (1). They

show that FTP raised experience by about one quarter over the four-year follow-up

period. Education raised experience, whereas children reduced it; non-whites worked

more than whites, all else equal.




4
  Implicitly I am assuming that the difference between 1 and 2 primarily reflects differences between
var(u1i) and var(u2i), rather than differences between var( i) and var(vi).


                                                   25
         To modify the Heckman two-step estimator, I replace actual experience in the

wage equation with predicted values from the first-stage experience regression.5 There is

no reason to expect this estimation scheme to perform well, particularly given the weak

relationship between the treatment-group dummy and employment at the time of the four-

year survey. I present these estimates for comparison purposes, since this is presumably

the type of approach one might consider in order to deal with both selectivity and the

potential endogeneity of experience in the absence of the reservation wage data.

         The employment equation reported in column (2) is exactly the same as that

presented in column (2) of Table 3. As above, I report it again here for clarity. In the

wage equation, reported in column (3), the effect of experience is positive, although the

coefficient is only a fraction of its standard error. Most of the other estimates are

similarly imprecise. This is the result of effectively using the treatment dummy twice,

once in the employment equation to handle self-selection, and again as an instrument for

experience.

         To modify the singly-censored bivariate regression model, I add the residuals

from the first-stage experience regression to both the wage and reservation wage

equations. Columns (4) and (5) of Table 6 present the results. The estimated return to

experience is marginally significant and larger than its counterpart in column (3) of Table

5. At first glance this may seem surprising. One of the reasons why experience may be

endogenous in a wage regression is that past employment is positively correlated with

past wages. Persistent unobservables that cause higher wages should cause higher

employment, in which case estimates that fail to account for such observables should

5
  This is similar to the estimator proposed by Heckman (1976), except that the endogenous regressor is
observed in the full sample in my case, whereas it was observed only in the self-selected sample in his. See
also Amemiya (1985, ch. 10) and Wooldridge (2003, ch. 16).


                                                    26
yield upward biased estimates of the return to experience. However, past employment is

negatively correlated with past reservation wages, so if the unobservables that influence

past wages are sufficiently correlated with past reservation wages, it is conceivable that

estimates that fail to account for such correlation could be negatively biased. Put

differently, negative bias may arise if the current wage disturbance is more highly

correlated with past reservation wage disturbances than with past wage disturbances,

once current-period self-selection is accounted for.

       The estimate corresponds to an annualized return to experience of roughly 13

percent, which is above the range of returns reported above. At the same time, the

experience coefficient in column (4) of Table 6 is not significantly different from the

experience coefficient in column (3) of Table 5, where experience is treated as exogenous

given the control for sample selection bias. Moreover, the Hausman test computed from

the coefficients on the first-stage residuals shows there is little reason to favor the

specification in columns (4) and (5) of Table 6 over that in columns (3) and (4) of Table

5. The coefficients on the first-stage residuals are about the same magnitude as their

standard errors. The F-statistic for the joint significance of both coefficients is 1.76 (p =

0.41), failing to reject the null of no misspecification. As suggested above, this may

indicate that the unobservable characteristics that influence employment are dominated

by time-invariant components, in which case the bivariate censoring model would largely

account for the endogeneity of experience at the same time that it accounts for self-

selection into the labor force.

       A reasonable question to ask is whether the estimated return to experience squares

with the estimated effect of FTP. Since FTP increased experience by one quarter over the




                                              27
four-year follow-up period, this calculation is easy to make. Based on the estimated

return to experience in column (3) of Table 5, one would expect FTP to have increased

wages by about 1.4 percent. This is lower than the 3.7 percent estimate of the effect of

FTP reported in column (4) of Table 3, although it is within the confidence interval of

that estimate.

        C. Reservation Wages for Full-Time Work

        One might object to the estimates above on the grounds that they treat the

reported reservation wages as if they represented respondents’ shadow price of leisure,

even though the questionnaire language asked respondents for the lowest wage under

which they would accept full-time work. If the full-time language were salient to

respondents as they answered the question, the result could be a misspecified model,

since the wage at which the respondent would accept full-time work should exceed the

shadow price of leisure. Table 7 presents estimates from a model that accounts for this

possibility.

        To produce the estimates in Table 7 I have altered the censoring rule so that only

full-time workers who report wi ≥ ri are treated as non-limit observations. This seems

reasonable if we think of consumers as operating on an upward-sloping labor-supply

curve, so that a high wage offer elicits full-time work, whereas a lower wage offer elicits

at most part-time work. Treating consumers who work part-time (as well as non-

workers) as limit observations amounts to treating them as if they received offers below

the lowest wage for which they would accept full-time work, in accord with the language

of the questionnaire item.




                                            28
       Panel A of Table 7 reports estimates of the effect of FTP on wages; panel B

reports estimates of the return to experience. In both cases I report OLS (and in panel B,

linear IV) estimates based on the sample of full-time workers with wi ≥ ri for comparison

purposes (estimates from the Heckman two-step approach are omitted for brevity). The

estimates are generally similar to their counterparts in Tables 3, 4 and 5. However, they

are less precisely estimated. This is what one might expect if the language about full-

time work was not particularly salient to consumers as they formulated their responses to

the reservation wage question. In this case, one would prefer the more precise estimates

in Tables 3, 4 and 5 to those in Table 7.

V. Conclusions

       The human-capital benefits of work provided an important rationale for welfare

reform. Yet little research has focused on the question of whether welfare reform has

increased wages. Data from a Florida welfare reform evaluation suggest that former

welfare recipients enjoy returns to experience that are similar to those enjoyed by more

general samples of young workers. My best estimate is that each year of work increases

future wages by about 5.6 percent. Since FTP increased experience by about 3 months,

this implies that FTP should have raised wages by 1.4 percent, on average. Direct

estimates indicate that FTP may have increased wages by 3.7 percent, although that

estimate is imprecise enough to include 1.4 percent in its confidence interval.

       To estimate the effects of reform and experience on wages, I have employed a

novel approach based on reservation wage data to deal with the sample selection

problem. The approach exploits a simple model of labor supply. Since the model

predicts that the consumer will work if her wage exceeds her reservation wage,



                                            29
reservation wages provide censoring thresholds for non-workers which can be used to

solve the selection problem. Since the selection problem is so pervasive in labor market

research, it is useful to discuss how the approach might be made more broadly applicable.

       One useful step would be to relax the distributional assumptions that I have

maintained. An advantage of the reservation wage approach is that it eliminates the need

for the often-controversial exclusion restrictions that are typically employed to identify

self-selection models. This benefit comes with a cost, however, in that I have imposed

normality to derive my estimator. This stands in contrast to much recent econometric

work, which develops non-parametric estimators that presuppose the existence of a valid

instrument (see, e.g., Pagan and Ullah 2005). An important direction for future work on

the reservation wage approach is to determine the extent to which potentially restrictive

distributional assumptions can be relaxed.

       At a more basic level, extending the applicability of the approach would require

new data collection, since none of the ongoing surveys commonly used in labor market

research currently collect data on reservation wages. This seems to be more of an

opportunity than a limitation. One of the lessons of the analysis above is that, unless one

can collect wage and reservation wage data without error, one would have to collect

reservation wage data not just from non-workers, but from everyone in the sample. The

analysis above shows that collecting reservation wage data from non-workers alone,

though intuitive, would not allow one to estimate wage equations consistently.

       Furthermore, it seems likely that the extent of the measurement error could be

reduced. In the FTP survey, roughly one-third of the workers reported reservation wages

in excess of their wages. This is a substantial amount of error, but then, the reservation




                                             30
wage data were not collected for the purpose of solving the sample selection problem.

Put differently, even when faced with complex questions involving hypothetical

situations aimed at valuing health insurance, two-thirds of the workers provided

reservation wage data that were consistent with economic theory. Questions designed to

elicit the textbook notion of a reservation wage presumably could do better.

       Two recent advances in survey methodology seem particularly promising. The

first involves “unfolding brackets,” where respondents are queried about a decreasing

sequence of reservation prices until they indicate one to be unacceptable. This approach

has been used to elicit information about future income expectations in the Health and

Retirement Survey (Hurd 1999). Anchoring the reservation wage brackets about the

current wage may help to reduce the extent to which workers report reservation wages

that exceed their wage. Another approach would be to pose probabilistic questions

regarding the likelihood that the respondent would find a given wage (again, within a

sequence) acceptable. Such probabilistic sequences have been used to elicit consumers’

expectations about future earnings, among other things (Dominitz and Manski 1991). An

appealing feature of this approach is that the reported probabilities could be incorporated

directly into the likelihood used in estimation. In sum, it seems it should be possible to

obtain better data on reservation wages, which could provide a useful tool for labor

market researchers who confront the sample selection problem.




                                             31
Appendix: Sample selection and the endogeneity of experience

        To provide conditions under which accounting for selection bias also accounts for

the endogeneity of experience requires some additional notation. Specifically, I add time

subscripts t to the model in Section III.A. This does not imply the availability of panel

data; the time subscript is needed to make explicit the link between current experience

and past employment. The date t should be thought of as the date of the four-year survey.

The modified wage equation is given by

wit* = X 1it β1 + δ1Z it + u1it                                                               (A1)

where the variables in the model are the same as those discussed above.

        To derive the needed conditions, write labor market experience Zit explicitly as

                                          J
the sum of past employment, so Z it =         1( wit* − j ≥ rit*− j ) , where t-J represents the first
                                         j =1

period of the consumer’s working life and 1(A) is the indicator function, so 1(A) = 1 if A

is true and 1(A) = 0 otherwise.

        Now let X1it = X1i, u1it = u1i, and rit* = ri* . At the beginning of the consumer’s

career, when t-J = 1, Zi1 = 0, we have

wi*1 = X 1i β1 + u1i ,

and the consumer works if wi*1 ≥ ri* . Furthermore, if she works in period 1, then she

works in all periods. Conversely, if she does not work in period 1, she never works. This

means that experience is deterministic once the first-period employment decision is

made, so solving the first-period selection problem also solves the endogeneity problem.




                                                32
But since experience is deterministic once first-period employment is known, solving the

selection problem in any period is equivalent to solving it in the first period.




                                             33
References

Amemiya, Takeshi. Advanced Econometrics. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
     Press, 1985.

Bloom, Dan, James J. Kemple, Pamela Morris, Susan Scrivener, Nandita Verma, Richard
      Hendra, Diana Adams-Ciardullo, David Seith, and Johanna Walter. The Family
      Transition Program: Final Report on Florida’s Initial Time-Limited Welfare
      Program. New York: Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation,
      December 2000.

Bloom, Dan, Susan Scrivener, Charles Michalopoulos, Pamela Morris, Richard Hendra,
      Diana Adams-Ciardullo, Johanna Walter, and Wand Vargas. Jobs First: Final
      Report on Connecticut’s Welfare Reform Initiative. New York: Manpower
      Demonstration Research Corporation, 2002.

Bureau of Labor Statistics. Employment and Wages Annual Averages. Washington,
      DC: Government Printing Office, 1989.

Burtless, Gary. “Employment Prospects of Welfare Recipients.” In Nightingale, Demetra
       Smith and Robert H. Haveman, eds., The Work Alternative: Welfare Reform and
       the Realities of the Job Market. Washington, DC: Urban Institute Press, 1995.

Card, David, and Dean R. Hyslop. “Estimating the Effects of a Time-Limited Earnings
       Subsidy for Welfare Leavers.” NBER Working Paper 10647, July 2004.

Card, David, Charles Michalopoulos, and Philip K. Robins. "The Limits to Wage
       Growth: Measuring the Growth Rate of Wages For Recent Welfare Leavers."
       NBER Working Paper 8444, August 2001.

Dey, Matthew S., and Christopher J. Flinn. “An Equilibrium Model of Health Insurance
      Provision and Wage Determination.” Econometrica 73, March 2005, 571-628.

Dominitz, Jeffrey. “Earnings Expectations, Revisions, and Realizations.” Review of
      Economics and Statistics 80, 374-380, 1998.

Dominitz, Jeffrey, and Charles F. Manski. “Using Expectations Data to Study Subjective
      Income Expectations.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 92, 855-
      867.

Dustmann, Christian and Costas Meghir. “Wages, Experience, and Seniority.” Review
      of Economic Studies 72, 2005, 77-108.

Edin, Kathryn, and Laura Lein. Making Ends Meet. New York: Russell Sage, 1997.




                                          34
Ferber, Marianne A. and Jane Waldfogel. “The Long-Term Consequences of
        Nontraditional Employment.” Monthly Labor Review, 3-12, May 1998.

Flinn, Christopher J. “Labor Market Structure and Inequality: A Comparison of Italy and
        the U.S.” Review of Economic Studies 69, 2002, 611-645.

Gladden, Tricia, and Christopher Taber. “Wage Progression Among Less Killed
      Workers.” In David E. Card and Rebecca M. Blank, eds., Finding Jobs: Work and
      Welfare Reform. New York: Russell Sage, 2000.

Grogger, Jeffrey and Lynn A. Karoly. Welfare Reform: Effects of a Decade of Change.
      Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2005.

Hausman, Jerry. “Specification Tests in Econometrics.” Econometrica 46, November
     1978, 1251-1271.

Heckman, James J. “Shadow Prices, Market Wages, and Labor Supply.” Econometrica
     42, 679-694, July 1974.

Heckman, James J. "The Common Structure of Statistical Models of Truncation, Sample
     Selection and Limited Dependent Variables and a Simple Estimator for Such
     Models." Annals of Economic and Social Measurement 5, 475-492, 1976.

Heckman, James J. “Sample Bias as Specification Error.” Econometrica 47, 153-162,
     January 1979.

Hurd, Michael. “Anchoring and Acquiescence Bias in Measuring Assets in Household
       Surveys.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 19, 111-136, 1999.

Isaacs, Julia B. and Matthew R. Lyon. “A Cross-State Examination of Families Leaving
        Welfare: Findings from the ASPE-Funded Leavers Studies.” Paper presented at
        the national Association for Welfare Research and Statistics Annual Workshop,
        August 2000.

Johnson, Norman L. and Samuel Kotz. Distributions in Statistics: Continuous
      Multivariate Distributions. New York: John Wiley and Sons. Not dated.

Light, Audrey and Manuelita Ureta. “Early-Career Work Experience and Gender Wage
       Differentials.” Journal of Labor Economics 13, 121-154, 1995.

Loeb, Susanna and Mary Corcoran. “Welfare, Work Experience, and Economic Self-
       Sufficiency.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 20, 1-20, 2001.

Lynch, Lisa M. “Entry-Level Jobs: First Rung on the Employment Ladder or Economic
       Dead End?” Journal of Labor Research 14, 249-263, Summer 1993.




                                          35
Moffitt, Robert A. and Anu Rangarajan. “The Effect of Transfer Programs in Work
       Effort and Human Capital Formation: Evidence from the U.S.” In Andrew Dilnot
       and Ian Walker, eds., The Economics of Social Security. Oxford: Oxford
       University Press, 1989.

Newey, Whitney K. “Efficient Estimation of Limited Dependent Variable Models with
      Endogenous Explanatory Variables.” Journal of Econometrics 36, 231-250, 1987.

Pagan, Adrian and Aman Ullah. Nonparametric Econometrics. Cambridge: Cambridge
       University Press, 2005.

Pavetti, LaDonna, and Gregory Acs. “Moving Up, Moving Out, or Going Nowhere? A
        Study of the Employment Patterns of Young Women and the Implication for
        Welfare Mothers.” Urban Institute Research Report, July 1997.

Van Den Berg, Gerard J. “Nonstationarity in Job Search Theory. Review of Economic
      Studies 57, April 1990, 255-277.

Wooldridge, Jeffrey. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data.
      Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002.

Zabel, Jeffrey, Saul Schwartz, and Stephen Donald. “An Analysis of the Impact of SSP
        on Wages and Employment Behavior.” Mimeo, September 2004.




                                         36
   2
   1.5
Density
  1.5
   0




          0            1                2                3                4
                                 Log hourly wage

                                          Control
                                          Treatment




                                  Figure 1
Kernel Density Estimates of Wage Distribution of Workers, by Treatment Status




                                     37
                                       Table 1
                        Summary Statistics for Various Samples
                                         Four-year      Reservation   Employment
Variable                Report sample survey sample wage sample         sample
Age < 20                   0.071            0.073         0.073          0.060
Age 20-24                  0.252            0.251         0.260          0.256
Age 25-34                  0.456            0.447         0.449          0.455
Age 35-44                  0.199            0.199         0.196          0.201
Age 45 or over             0.033            0.029         0.021          0.020

No diploma or GED           0.382            0.392        0.388         0.327
Diploma or GED              0.527            0.530        0.537         0.591
Post high school            0.062            0.055        0.053         0.062
Education missing           0.029            0.023        0.023         0.019

White                       0.438            0.423        0.422         0.433
Non-white                   0.562            0.577        0.578         0.567

Number of kids                                2.12         2.16          2.04
                                             (1.32)       (1.32)        (1.28)

Received welfare,           0.117            0.135        0.127         0.055
month 48

Experience (quarters)        9.80            10.52        10.91         13.09
                            (7.22)           (7.18)       (7.11)        (6.89)

Employed, qtr. 16           0.487            0.536        0.567         0.716
Employed, survey                             0.592        0.620         1.000

Reservation wage                                           6.45          6.73
                                                          (2.15)        (2.51)
Wage                                                                     7.15
                                                                        (3.16)

Sample size                 2,815            1,729        1,548          959
Note: Figures in parentheses are standard deviations.




                                           38
                                       Table 2
            Distribution of Wages and Reservation Wages Among Workers
Percentile:     Mean       5       10      25       50     75     90     95
Wage            7.15      4.38    5.15    5.50     6.27   7.90  10.70   12.50
Reservation     6.74      5.00    5.15    5.15     6.00   7.00   9.00   10.00
wage
Sample size is 959.




                                      39
                                                  Table 3
            Estimates of the Effect of FTP on Wages Four Years After Random Assignment
 Estimator:                   OLS              Heckman two-step         Singly-censored bivariate
                                                                                regression
 Sample:                 Employment      Reservation      Employment
                            sample       wage sample        sample      Reservation wage sample
                                                                                            Log
                                                                                        reservation
 Dependent variable:       Log wage      Employment        Log wage    Log wage            wage
 Variable                      (1)            (2)             (3)         (4)               (5)
 Treatment dummy             -0.013         0.111            0.016       0.037             0.016
                            (0.025)        (0.066)          (0.115)     (0.020)           (0.012)

 Age < 20                     0.050           -0.179           0.001            -0.037              -0.011
                             (0.056)         (0.137)          (0.203)          (0.047)             (0.024)

 Age 25-34                    0.014           0.031            0.022            0.010               0.022
                             (0.031)         (0.081)          (0.048)          (0.025)             (0.014)

 Age 35-44                    -0.039          0.024            -0.033           -0.024              -0.010
                             (0.037)         (0.102)          (0.051)          (0.031)             (0.018)

 Age 45 and over              0.080           -0.208           0.026            0.015               0.012
                             (0.092)         (0.234)          (0.241)          (0.072)             (0.042)

 No diploma, GED              -0.163          -0.372           -0.262           -0.191              -0.082
                             (0.027)         (0.070)          (0.390)          (0.022)             (0.012)

 Post high school             0.177           0.117            0.204            0.208               0.188
                             (0.052)         (0.157)          (0.122)          (0.045)             (0.026)

 Non-white                    -0.053          -0.017           -0.057           -0.098              -0.049
                             (0.019)         (0.068)          (0.035)          (0.021)             (0.012)

 Number of kids               -0.018          -0.083           -0.040           -0.019              -0.005
                             (0.008)         (0.027)          (0.088)          (0.008)             (0.005)

 Inverse Mills ratio                                           0.467
                                                              (1.825)
  1                                                                             0.356
                                                                               (0.009)

  2                                                                                                 0.226
                                                                                                   (0.003)

                                                                                          0.553
                                                                                         (0.028)

 R-square/ln L                0.071                                                     -527.8
 Sample size                   959             1548              959                     1,548
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. In addition to variables shown, all models include a missing-
education dummy.


                                                       40
                       Table 4
Linear Regression Estimates of the Return to Experience
Estimator:                OLS                   IV

                           Employment            Employment
Sample:                      sample                sample
Variable                       (1)                    (3)
Experience                   0.0035                -0.0143
                            (0.0018)              (0.0292)

Age < 20                      0.054                  0.028
                             (0.056)                (0.072)

Age 25-34                     0.015                  0.014
                             (0.031)                (0.032)

Age 35-44                    -0.040                  -0.033
                             (0.037)                (0.042)

Age 45 and over               0.093                  0.021
                             (0.092)                (0.153)

No diploma, GED              -0.156                  -0.192
                             (0.027)                (0.066)

Post high school              0.179                  0.173
                             (0.052)                (0.055)

Non-white                    -0.058                  -0.030
                             (0.026)                (0.054)

Number of kids               -0.018                  -0.020
                             (0.010)                (0.011)

R-square                      0.074

 Sample size                    959                   959
Notes: Dependent variable is log wage. Standard errors in
parentheses. In addition to variables shown, all models include a
missing-education dummy.




                              41
                                          Table 5
                Selectivity-Corrected Estimates of the Return to Experience
Estimator:                      Heckman two-step               Singly-censored bivariate
                                                                      regression
Sample:                   Reservation     Employment           Reservation wage sample
                         wage sample         sample
                                                                             Log reservation
Dependent variable:      Employment        Log wage          Log wage             wage
Variable                      (1)              (2)               (3)               (4)
Experience                                   0.0036           0.0139             0.0023
                                            (0.0018)         (0.0015)           (0.0008)

Treatment dummy              0.111
                            (0.066)

Age < 20                     -0.179             0.026              -0.016              -0.007
                            (0.137)            (0.073)            (0.043)             (0.024)

Age 25-34                    0.031              0.019              0.004               0.022
                            (0.081)            (0.033)            (0.024)             (0.014)

Age 35-44                    0.024              -0.037             -0.022              -0.009
                            (0.102)            (0.040)            (0.030)             (0.018)

Age 45 and over              -0.208             0.064              0.078               0.023
                            (0.234)            (0.109)            (0.071)             (0.042)

No diploma, GED              -0.372             -0.215             -0.151              -0.076
                            (0.070)            (0.095)            (0.022)             (0.013)

Post high school             0.117              0.194              0.205               0.186
                            (0.157)            (0.061)            (0.044)             (0.026)

Non-white                    -0.017             -0.060             -0.117              -0.032
                            (0.068)            (0.028)            (0.021)             (0.012)

Number of kids               -0.083             -0.031             -0.005              -0.005
                            (0.027)            (0.023)            (0.005)             (0.005)

Inverse Mills ratio                             0.276
                                               (0.424)
 1                                                                 0.346
                                                                  (0.009)
 2                                                                                     0.226
                                                                                      (0.004)
                                                                             0.555
                                                                            (0.022)

ln L                                                                        -480.6
Sample size                   1548               959                         1,548
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. In addition to variables shown, all models include a
missing-education dummy


                                               42
                                                    Table 6
                        Selectivity-Corrected IV Estimates of the Return to Experience
Estimator:              OLS (1st stage)      Heckman two-step with IV            Singly-censored bivariate
                                                                                     regression with IV
Sample:                  Reservation       Reservation      Employment
                         wage sample       wage sample          sample           Reservation wage sample
                                                                                                Log reservation
Dependent variable:      Experience        Employment         Log wage         Log wage              wage
Variable                     (1)               (2)                (3)              (4)                (5)
Experience                                                      0.0148           0.0332             0.0154
                                                               (0.1079)         (0.0185)           (0.0107)

Treatment dummy              1.069               0.111
                            (0.350)             (0.066)

Experience residual                                                                    -0.019              -0.013
                                                                                      (0.019)             (0.011)

Age < 20                     -1.339              -0.179             0.020              -0.008              0.009
                            (0.739)             (0.137)            (0.091)            (0.045)             (0.028)

Age 25-34                    -0.255              0.031              0.026              0.009               0.026
                            (0.431)             (0.081)            (0.069)            (0.025)             (0.014)

Age 35-44                    -0.419              0.024              -0.027             -0.014              -0.003
                            (0.539)             (0.102)            (0.081)            (0.031)             (0.018)

Age 45 and over              -4.435              -0.208             0.091              0.161               0.080
                            (1.262)             (0.234)            (0.296)            (0.107)             (0.062)

No diploma, GED              -2.976              -0.372             -0.219             -0.094              -0.037
                            (0.375)             (0.070)            (0.118)            (0.059)             (0.034)

Post high school             0.456               0.117              0.197              0.197               0.181
                            (0.609)             (0.157)            (0.081)            (0.044)             (0.027)

Non-white                    1.412               -0.017             -0.078             -0.144              -0.071
                            (0.362)             (0.068)            (0.257)            (0.033)             (0.019)

Number of kids               -0.381              -0.083             -0.035             -0.007              0.000
                            (0.142)             (0.027)            (0.050)            (0.011)             (0.006)

Inverse Mills ratio                                                 0.467
                                                                   (1.825)
 1                                                                                     0.345
                                                                                      (0.009)
 2                                                                                                         0.226
                                                                                                          (0.004)
                                                                                                 0.555
                                                                                                (0.022)
R-square                      0.067
Sample size                    1548               1548                959                         1548
Note to Table 6: Standard errors in parentheses. In addition to variables shown, all models include a missing-education
dummy

                                                          43
                                        Table 7
 Estimates of the Effect of FTP on Wages and of the Return to Experience, Treating
   Reservation Wage Responses as Minimum Offers Needed to Induce Full-Time
                                         Work
A: Effect of FTP
Estimator:                      OLS             Singly-
                                               censored
                                               bivariate
                                              regression
                             Non-limit and
Sample:                            35        Reservation
                              hours/wk.     wage sample
Dependent variable:             Wage             Wage
Variable                          (1)             (2)
Treatment-group dummy           0.020            0.029
                               (0.028)          (0.023)

R-square/ lnL                     0.131

Sample size                       466             1548


B. Return to Experience
Estimator:                        OLS               IV             Singly-        Singly-
                                                                  censored       censored
                                                                  bivariate      bivariate
                                                                 regression    regression-IV
Sample:                      Non-limit and Non-limit and
                                   35            35            Reservation      Reservation
                              hours/wk.     hours/wk.          wage sample      wage sample
Dependent variable:             Wage          Wage                Wage             Wage
Variable                          (1)           (2)                (3)              (4)
Experience                      0.0025        0.0154             0.0142           0.0260
                               (0.0021)      (0.0228)           (0.0015)         (0.0214)

R-square/ lnL                     0.133                           -465.2

Sample size                         466              466              1548             1548
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. In addition to variables shown, all models include
all variables shown in Table 3 plus a missing-education dummy. The model in column
(4) of panel B also includes the residual from the first stage regression. Results for
reservation wage equations in singly-censored bivariate regression models are not shown.




                                            44
