NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TRENDS IN U.S. WAGE INEQUALITY:
RE-ASSESSING THE REVISIONISTS
David H. Autor
Lawrence F. Katz
Melissa S. Kearney
Working Paper 11627
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11627

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2005

We are particularly grateful to Daron Acemoglu, Josh Angrist, George Borjas, Paul Devereux, Francis
Kramarz, Thomas Lemieux, Derek Neal, two referees, and participants at the NBER Summer Institute,
the Society of Labor Economists meetings, and Wharton Applied Microeconomics seminar for valuable
comments and to Michael Anderson, Tal Gross and Ashwini Agrawal for excellent research assistance.
Autor acknowledges generous support from the National Science Foundation (CAREER SES-0239538)
and the Sloan Foundation. Katz acknowledges financial support from the Spencer Foundation and
the Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2005 by David H. Autor, Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Trends in U.S. Wage Inequality: Re-Assessing the Revisionists
David H. Autor, Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney
NBER Working Paper No. 11627
September 2005
JEL No. J3,D3,O3
ABSTRACT
A recent "revisionist " literature characterizes the pronounced rise in U.S. wage inequality since 1980
as an "episodic " event of the first-half of the 1980s driven by non-market factors (particularly a falling
real minimum wage) and concludes that continued increases in wage inequality since the late 1980s
substantially reflect the mechanical confounding effects of changes in labor force composition. Analyzing
data from the Current Population Survey for 1963 to 2005, we find limited support for these claims.
The slowing of the growth of overall wage inequality in the 1990s hides a divergence in the paths
of upper-tail (90/50) inequality -- which has increased steadily since 1980, even adjusting for changes
in labor force composition -- and lower tail (50/10) inequality, which rose sharply in the first-half of
the 1980s and plateaued or contracted thereafter. Fluctuations in the real minimum wage are not a
plausible explanation for these trends since the bulk of inequality growth occurs above the median
of the wage distribution. Models emphasizing rapid secular growth in the relative demand for skills
-- attributable to skill-biased technical change -- and a sharp deceleration in the relative supply of college
workers in the 1980s do an excellent job of capturing the evolution of the college/high-school wage
premium over four decades. But these models also imply a puzzling deceleration in relative demand
growth for college workers in the early 1990s, also visible in a recent "polarization" of skill demands
in which employment has expanded in high-wage and low-wage work at the expense of middle-wage
jobs. These patterns are potentially reconciled by a modified version of the skill-biased technical change
hypothesis that emphasizes the role of information technology in complementing abstract (high-education)
tasks and substituting for routine (middle-education) tasks.
David H. Autor
Department of Economics
MIT, E52-371
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
dautor@mit.edu
Lawrence F. Katz
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
lkatz@harvard.edu

Melissa S. Kearney
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
3105 Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
kearney@econ.umd.edu

I.

Introduction
A large literature documents a substantial widening of the U.S. wage structure during the 1980s (Bound

and Johnson 1992; Katz and Murphy 1992; Murphy and Welch 1992; Juhn, Murphy and Pierce 1993).
Wage differentials by education, by occupation and by age and experience group all rose substantially.1
Residual wage inequality—that is, wage dispersion within demographic and skill groups—increased
simultaneously. The growth of wage inequality was reinforced by changes in non-wage compensation
leading to a large increase in total compensation inequality (Hamermesh, 1999; Pierce 2001). These wage
structure changes translated into a pronounced rise in both household income inequality and consumption
inequality, implying a marked increase in the disparities of economic well-being for U.S. families (Cutler
and Katz 1992; Karoly and Burtless 1995).
This literature reaches two broad conclusions. First, much of the rise in U.S. earnings inequality during
the 1980s appears explained by shifts in the supply of and demand for skills combined with the erosion of
labor market institutions—including labor unions and the minimum wage—that protected the earnings of
low- and middle-wage workers. 2 Second, a number of influential studies argue that the surge of inequality
evident in the 1980s reflected an ongoing, secular rise in the demand for skill that commenced decades
earlier and perhaps accelerated during the 1980s with the onset of the computer revolution. When this
secular demand shift met with an abrupt slowdown in the growth of the relative supply of college equivalent
workers during the 1980s—itself a consequence of slowing educational attainment for cohorts born after
1949 and of smaller entering labor force cohorts—wage differentials expanded rapidly (Katz and Murphy
1992; Autor, Katz and Krueger 1998; Goldin and Katz 2001; Card and Lemieux, 2001; Acemoglu 2002).
Drawing on more recent data, however, some recent studies challenge these conclusions. Most notably,
Card and DiNardo (2002) stake two dissenting claims. First, they argue that the rise of inequality during the
1980s is largely explained by non-market factors, most prominently, the declining real value of the
minimum wage, a view that was earlier articulated by Lee (1999).3 Second, Card and DiNardo conclude
that the growth of U.S. earnings inequality was primarily a one-time (“episodic”) event of the early 1980s,
which plateaued by the mid 1980s and did not recur. Building on this line of argument, Lemieux (2006b)
1

concludes that the rise of residual inequality in the 1980s was also an episodic event accounted for by the
declining value of the minimum wage and that apparent increased residual inequality since the mid 1980s
reflects the mechanical effects of the changing labor force composition (rising education and experience).
This “revisionist” literature has the potential to amend the description and interpretation of U.S.
earnings inequality trends. If the rise of U.S. earnings inequality was a brief, non-recurring episode of the
early 1980s, the probable causes are likely to be one-time precipitating events such as the 1980s decline in
the real minimum wage. Alternatively, if the growth of earnings inequality reflects a long-term movement
towards greater dispersion of earnings and higher skill differentials, then it is more likely to be explained by
fundamental, secular factors, affecting the supply of and demand for skills.4
In this paper, we reevaluate the traditional and revisionist explanations for changes in the U.S. wage
inequality over the last four decades, paying particular attention to two main claims of the revisionists: (1)
that the growth of inequality was an episodic rather than secular phenomenon; and (2) that it is explained
largely by non-market forces and the mechanical effects of labor force composition changes. We explore
these issues using wage and employment data from the March Current Population Surveys (CPS) covering
1963 to 2005, the May CPS samples for 1973 to 1978 combined with the CPS Outgoing Rotation Group
(ORG) files for 1979 to 2005, and decennial population Census samples for 1980, 1990 and 2000.
In partial support of the revisionist literature, we find that past is not prologue: overall wage inequality
continued growing from 1990 to 2005 but at a slower pace than in the 1980s, and the secular demand
increases favoring more educated workers were, by our estimates, less rapid in the 1990s and early 2000s
than from the 1960s to the 1980s—though we document a rapid ongoing rise of the relative earnings of
workers with post-college education (those with graduate and professional degrees). We concur that the
falling minimum wage was a contributor to rising lower-tail (50-10 wage gap) wage inequality in the 1980s.
By contrast, we find little support for strong forms of the major revisionist claims. The growth of wage
inequality is not accurately described as an episodic event. Inequality in the upper half of the male wage
distribution (the 90-50 wage gap) grew rapidly and nearly-continuously from 1980 to 2005 at the rate of
about 1 log point per year—a marked, secular phenomenon.5 The rapid secular growth of upper-tail wage
2

inequality is apparent even after adjusting for labor force compositional changes. By contrast, inequality in
the lower-half of the distribution expanded rapidly in first-half of the 1980s and then reversed course
thereafter. The persistent rise in upper-tail inequality belies the claim that minimum wages can provide a
coherent explanation for the bulk of the rise in earnings inequality.
We find some support for the revisionists’ conclusions concerning residual inequality trends. Consistent
with Lemieux (2006b), we confirm that changes in labor force composition exerted an upward force on
residual wage dispersion for 1989 to 2005. But this compositional effect was concentrated in the lower-tail
of the earnings distribution and, moreover, served to offset a rapid compression of lower-tail prices. We
find that ‘price’ changes, changes in earnings dispersion within narrowly defined demographic groups,
remain a key force in the evolution of both upper- and lower-tail U.S. residual wage inequality.
An organizing theme that emerges from our review of the key facts is that, following monotone a surge
of inequality during 1979 through 1987 in which upper incomes rose and lower incomes fell, changes in the
U.S. earnings distribution subsequently ‘polarized,’ with a strong, persistent rise in inequality in the upper
half of the distribution and a slowing (or reversal) of inequality trends in the lower-half of the distribution.
This polarization is seen in overall inequality, in residual inequality, and in earnings trends among workers
at different education levels. The earnings of workers with a post-college (graduate) degree relative to noncollege workers have increased rapidly and continuously since 1979. By contrast, the earnings of collegeonly workers (those with a four-year college degree but without a graduate degree) relative to high school
graduates rose rapidly from 1979 to 1987 and then plateaued.6
If these inequality trends are not primarily explained by episodic institutional shocks, can they plausibly
be explained by market-driven changes in the supply and demand for skills? In the final section, we provide
a simple summary test of this hypothesis using Census data to analyze the evolution of employment and
wage changes by skill over the 1980 to 2000 period. These data yield clear evidence that wages changes by
earnings level and employment changes by skill level track each other closely in both decades. In the 1980s,
during which wage growth was essentially monotone in skill, employment shares in the highest educated
and highest paid occupations expanded substantially while employment shares in the lowest skill
3

occupations contracted. During the subsequent decade of the 1990s—in which earnings growth polarized—
employment shares in very low and very high skill occupations increased while employment shares in
moderately skilled occupations contracted. The roughly parallel movement of earnings and employment
growth in each decade suggests that demand forces have played a key role in shaping wages structure
changes during the inequality surge of the 1980s and the polarization that followed. Following Autor, Levy
and Murnane (2003) and Goos and Manning (2007), we find that these patterns may in part be explained by
a richer version of the skill-biased technical change hypothesis in which information technology
complements highly educated workers engaged in abstract tasks, substitutes for moderately educated
workers performing routine tasks, and has less impact on low-skilled workers performing manual tasks.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II documents the evolution of the U.S. wage structure from
1963 to 2005. Section III presents time series models to assess the role of demand, supply, and institutional
factors for changes in educational wage differentials and overall wage inequality. Section IV uses the kernel
reweighting methods of DiNardo, Fortin and Lemieux (1996) and Lemieux (2006b) to analyze the role of
prices and labor force composition in changes in overall and residual inequality—focusing on the divergent
trends in the bottom and top halves of the distribution. Section VI provides summary tests of the relevance
of demand shifts to wage structure changes. Section VI concludes.
II.

U.S. wage structure changes over the past four decades: Key facts
To summarize the basic changes in the U.S. wage structure over the last four decades using, we draw on

two large and representative household data sources: the March CPS and the combined CPS May and
Outgoing Rotation Group samples. We describe these sources briefly here and provide the details on the
construction of our analysis samples in the Data Appendix. The March CPS data provide reasonably
comparable data on prior year’s annual earnings, weeks worked, and hours worked per week for four
decades. We use the March files from 1964 to 2006 (covering earnings from 1963 to 2005) to form a
sample of real weekly earnings for workers ages 16 to 64 who participate in the labor force on a full-time,
full-year (FTFY) basis, defined as working 35-plus hours per week and 40-plus weeks per year.7
We complement the March FTFY series data with data on hourly wages of all current labor force
4

participants using May CPS samples for 1973 through 1978 and CPS Outgoing Rotation Group samples for
1979 through 2003 (CPS May/ORG). From these sources, we construct hourly wage data for all wage and
salary workers employed during the CPS sample survey reference week. Unlike the retrospective annual
earnings data in the March CPS, the May/ORG data provide point-in-time measures of usual hourly or
weekly earnings. We weight May/ORG hourly earnings data by hours worked and the appropriate CPS
sampling weight to provide a measure of the entire distribution of hours paid.
As detailed in Autor, Katz and Kearney (2005) and Lemieux (2006b), both the March and May/ORG
CPS surveys have limitations that reduce their consistency over the forty year period studied. The March
CPS data are not ideal for analyzing the hourly wage distribution since they lack a point-in-time wage
measure and thereby hourly wages must be computed by dividing annual earnings by the product of weeks
worked last year and usual weekly hours last year. Estimates of hours worked last year from the March CPS
appear to be noisy and data on usual weekly hours last year are not available prior to the 1976 March CPS.
The May/ORG samples provide more accurate measures of the hourly wage distribution (particularly for
hourly workers) but cover a shorter time period than the March CPS. Both the March and May/ORG CPS
samples have undergone various changes in processing procedures over several decades, especially
involving the top-coding of high earnings, the flagging of earning imputations, and algorithms used for
allocating earnings to those individuals who do not answer earnings questions in the survey. These create
challenges in producing consistent data series over time, which we have tried to account for to the extent
possible to make the wage series time consistent. The major redesign of the earnings questions in the CPS
ORG in 1994 is likely to have created comparability problems that we are unable to fully redress.8
A. Trends in overall inequality

We begin laying out basic wage structure facts in Figure 1, which uses data on FTFY workers from the
March CPS to illustrate the widening of U.S. wage inequality for both men and women over the past four
decades. This figure plots the change in log real weekly wages by percentile for men and for women from
1963 to 2005.9 The figure displays a sizable expansion of wage inequality with the 90th percentile earners
P

P

rising by approximately 45 log points (more than 55 percent) relative to 10th percentile earners for both men
P

P

5

and women. The figure also indicates a monotone (and almost linear) spreading out of the entire wage
distribution for women and for the wage distribution above around the 30th percentile for men. Notably,
P

P

women have substantially gained on men throughout the wage distribution over last four decades.
We focus on four inequality concepts: changes in overall wage inequality, summarized by the 90-10 log
wage differential; changes in inequality in the upper and lower halves of the wage distribution, summarized
by 90-50 and 50-10 log wage gaps (which we refer to as upper- and lower-tail inequality); between-group
wage differentials, illustrated using the college-high school wage premium; and within-group (residual)
wage inequality, summarized by the 90-10, 90-50 and 50-10 residual wage gaps conditioning on measures
of education, age/experience, and gender.10
Figures 2a and 2b display the evolution of the 90-10 overall and residual wage gaps for males and the
college-high school log wage premium for our two core samples: March FTFY 1963 to 2005 and CPS
May/ORG hourly 1973 to 2005. The estimated college-high school log wage premium represents a fixed
weighted average of the college plus/high school wage gaps separately estimated for males and for females
in four different experience groups. The figure underscores a key, and oft-neglected, fact about the
evolution of U.S. wage inequality, which is that the rise of inequality is not a unitary phenomenon. While
all three inequality measures expand in tandem during the 1980s then flatten somewhat in the 1990s, the
series diverged in both the 1970s and the 1960s. Specifically, while overall and residual inequality were
either modestly rising (March) or flat (May/ORG) during the 1970s, the college wage premium declined
sharply in this decade and then rebounded even more rapidly during the 1980s. The college wage premium
expanded considerably during the 1960s, even while aggregate inequality was quiescent. These divergent
patterns suggest that the growth of inequality is unlikely to be adequately explained by any single factor.
Underlying the rapid growth of overall wage inequality during the 1980s followed by a deceleration in the
1990s is a divergence in inequality trends at the top and bottom of the wage distribution. This divergence is
shown in Figure 3, which compares the evolution of the 90-50 and 50-10 log hourly and full-time weekly
wage gaps for males and females. Upper-tail and lower-tail wage inequality expanded rapidly in the first
half of the 1980s for both men and women. But the 50-10 wage gap for the most part stopped growing after
6

1987—and the male hourly wage series from the CPS May/ORG shows an actual decline in the 50-10 since
the late 1980s. By contrast, the 90-50 wage gap continues to grow smoothly from 1979 to 2005. Thus, the
deceleration of overall inequality growth since 1987 actually reflects an abrupt halt or reversal in lower-tail
inequality expansion paired with a secular rise in upper-tail inequality.11
The divergent growth of upper- and lower-tail wage inequality in the 1980s and 1990s is corroborated
by micro data on wages and total compensation from the establishment-based Employment Cost Index
(Pierce 2001). And the steady growth of upper tier earnings inequality is seen in rising shares of wages paid
to the top 10 and top 1 percent of U.S. earners since the late 1970s in tax data (Piketty and Saez 2003).
To summarize, the sharp growth in wage dispersion in the lower-half of the wage distribution during
the early to mid 1980s seems to have been an episodic event that has not re-occurred over the past fifteen
years. By contrast, the steady growth of wage dispersion in the upper half of the wage distribution appears
to represent a secular trend that has been ongoing for 25 years.
B. Trends in wage levels and between group inequality

Table 1 summarizes between-group wage structure changes by sub-period from 1963 to 2005 for
groups defined by sex, education, and potential experience. Mean (predicted) log real weekly wages were
computed in each year for 40 sex-education-experience groups and mean wages for broader groups are
fixed-weighted averages of the relevant sub-group means, using the average share of total hours worked for
each group over 1963 to 2005 as weights to adjust for compositional changes.12
The first row indicates that composition-adjusted mean real wage increased by 22.2 log points over the
full period. Wage growth was rapid in the 1960s, stagnant or declining from 1971 to 1995, and rapid from
1995 to 2005. The next two rows show that women gained substantially on males—by 16.5 log points over
the full sample—with women's relative earnings gains concentrated in the 1979 to 1995 period.
The following six rows highlight the expansion of educational wage differentials, with particularly large
increases in the relative earnings of college graduates. The sharp differences across decades seen in Figure 2
are evident in these detailed figures, with educational wage differentials rising in the 1960s, narrowing in
the 1970s, increasing sharply in the 1980s, and growing at a slightly less torrid pace since 1995. The bottom

7

part of the table contrasts changes in real wages for younger and older males. Experience differentials
expanded for college and high school graduates with the rise for college graduates concentrated in the
1960s and 1970s and the rise for high school graduates concentrated in the 1980s.
The expansion of between-group wage differentials has been less continuous—and undergone more
reversals—than has the trend towards increasing overall wage inequality over the last four decades.
III. The sources of rising inequality: Proximate causes
We now present an analysis of the leading proximate causes of overall and between-group wage
inequality, focusing on supply and demand factors, unemployment and the minimum wage. We start with
simple time-series models of the U.S. college wage premium covering 1963 to 2005 and augment the
specification to allow for an impact of a key labor market institutional factor, the federal minimum wage.13
A. Sources of the rising college/high-school wage premium

Our illustrative conceptual framework starts with a CES production function for aggregate output Q
with two factors, college equivalents ( c ) and high school equivalents ( h ):
(1)

Qt = [α t (at N ct ) ρ + (1 − α t )(bt N ht ) ρ ]1/ ρ

where N ct and N ht are the quantities employed of college equivalents (skilled labor) and high-school
equivalents (unskilled labor) in period t , at and bt represent skilled and unskilled labor augmenting
technological change, α t is a time-varying technology parameter that can be interpreted as indexing the
share of work activities allocated to skilled labor, and ρ is a time invariant production parameter. Skillneutral technological improvements raise at and bt by the same proportion. Skill-biased technological
changes involve increases in at / bt or α t . The aggregate elasticity of substitution between college and highschool equivalents is given by σ = 1/(1 − ρ ) .
Under the assumption that college and high-school equivalents are paid their marginal products, we can
use equation (1) to solve for the ratio of marginal products of the two labor types yielding a relationship
between relative wages in year t , wct / wht , and relative supplies in year t , N ct / N ht given by

8

(2)

ln( wct / wht ) = ln[α t /(1 − α t )] + ρ ln(at / bt )] − (1/ σ ) ln( N ct / N ht ),

which can be rewritten as
(3)

ln( wct / wht ) = (1/ σ )[ Dt − ln( N ct / N ht )] ,

where Dt indexes relative demand shifts favoring college equivalents and is measured in log quantity units.
The impact of changes in relative skill supplies on relative wages depends inversely on the magnitude of
aggregate elasticity of substitution between the two skill groups. The greater is σ , the smaller the impact of
shifts in relative supplies on relative wages and the greater must be fluctuations in demand shifts ( Dt ) to
explain any given time series of relative wages for a given time series of relative quantities. Changes in Dt
can arise from (disembodied) skill-biased technological change, non-neutral changes in the relative prices
or quantities of non-labor inputs, and shifts in product demand.
Following the approach of Katz and Murphy (1992), we directly estimate a version of equation (3) to
explain the evolution from 1963 to 2005 of the overall log college/high school wage differential series for
FTFY workers from the March CPS shown in Panel A of Figure 2. We substitute for the unobserved
demand shifts Dt with simple time trends and a measure of labor market cyclical conditions, the
B

unemployment rate of males aged 25-54 years. We also include an index of the log relative supply of
college/high school equivalents.14 Our full model includes the log real minimum wage as a control variable:
(4)

ln( wct / wht ) = γ 0 + γ 1t + γ 2 ln( N ct / N ht ) + γ 3 (RealMinWaget ) + γ 4 Unempt + ε t ,

where γ2 provides an estimate of 1/ σ .
The large increase in the college wage premium over the last 40 years coincided with a substantial
secular rise in the relative supply of college workers. The college graduate share of the full-time equivalent
workforce increased from about 10.6 percent in 1960 to over 30 percent in 2005. Given this rapid growth in
college graduate supply, a market-clearing model requires (even more) rapid growth in relative demand for
college workers to reconcile increasing college supply with a rising college wage premium.
The upper panel of Figure 4 plots the college relative supply and wage premium series over 1963 to
2005 deviated from a linear time trend. This figure reveals an acceleration of the growth in the relative
9

supply of college workers in the 1970s relative to the 1960s, followed by a dramatic slowdown starting in
1982. These fluctuations in the growth rate of relative supply, paired with a constant trend growth in
relative college demand, do an effective job of explaining the evolution of the college wage premium from
1963 to 2005. The figure illustrates that deviations in relative supply growth from a linear trend roughly fit
the broad changes in the de-trended college wage premium.
Table 2 presents representative regression models for the overall college/high school log wage gap
following this approach. The first column uses the specification of Katz and Murphy (1992) for the 1963 to
1987 period (the period analyzed by Katz-Murphy) with only a linear time trend and the relative supply
measure included as explanatory variables. Although our data processing methods differ somewhat from
those of Katz and Murphy, we uncover quite similar results with an estimate of γ 2 = 0.64 (implying

σ = 1.57 ) and with estimated trend growth in the college wage premium of 2.6 percent per annum. The
lower panel of Figure 4 uses this replication of the basic Katz-Murphy model from col. (1) of Table 2 to
predict the evolution of the college wage premium for the full sample period of 1963 to 2005 and compares
the predicted and actual college wage gap measures.
The Katz-Murphy model does an excellent job of forecasting the growth of the college wage premium
through 1992 (with the exception of the late 1970s) but the continued slow growth of relative supply after
1992 leads it to over-predict the growth in the college wage premium over the last decade. This pattern
implies there has been a slowdown in relative demand growth for college workers since 1992, as illustrated
by a comparison of the models in columns (2) and (3) of Table 2 without and with allowing for a trend
break in 1992.15 The model in column (3) covering the full 1963-2005 period indicates a significant

slowdown of demand growth after 1992 but still indicates a large impact of relative supply growth with an
estimated aggregate elasticity of substitution of 1.62 (1/0.619).16 Subsequent models in columns (4) through
(6) that allow for a more flexible time trend—either a quadratic or cubic function—imply that trend demand
growth for college relative to non-college workers slowed in the early 1990s
The implied slowdown in trend demand growth in the 1990s is potentially inconsistent with a naïve

10

SBTC story looking at the growth of computer investments since these continued rapidly in the 1990s. One
potential explanation for this implied slowdown is the strong cyclical labor market of the expansion of the
1990s, leading to a low unemployment rate. The impacts of labor market institutions such as the erosion of
the real value of the minimum wage since the early 1980s might also play a role.
The roles of cyclical conditions and the minimum wage are examined in the augmented models
illustrated in columns (6) and (7) of Table 2. The real minimum wage and prime age male unemployment
rates have modest additional explanatory power in the expected directions and reduce the extent of
slowdown in trend demand growth over the last decade. But the inclusion of these variables does not much
alter the central role for relative supply growth fluctuations and trend demand growth in explaining the
evolution of the college wage premium. A model without the relative supply variable in column (7) leads to
larger impacts of the real minimum wage but it also has less explanatory power and generates a puzzling
negative impact of prime age male unemployment. These cyclical and institutional factors are insufficient to
resolve the puzzle posed by slowing trend relative demand for college workers in the 1990s.
A closer look at the data suggests why the simple CES model with two factors—college and highschool equivalents—fails to provide an adequate explanation of the evolution of between-group wage
inequality starting in the early 1990s. As shown in Figure 5, the real, composition-adjusted earnings of fulltime, full-year workers at different levels of educational attainment ‘polarized’ after 1987 in a manner
consistent with the divergent trends in 90-50 and 50-10 inequality documented in Figure 3. In particular, the
wage gap between males with a post-college education and those with a high school education rose rapidly
and monotonically from 1979 through 2005, increasing by 43.1 log points overall and 15.4, 15.7 and 12.0
points respectively between 1979–1988, 1988–1997, and 1997–2005.17 By contrast, after increasing by 13.3
log points between 1979 and 1987, the wage gap between males with exactly a college degree and those
with a high school education rose comparatively slowly thereafter, by 4.5 and 9.0 log points respectively
between 1988–1997 and 1997–2005. By implication, between 1988 and 2005, the earnings of post-college
males rose by 14.2 log points more than the earnings of college-only males. Conversely, at the bottom of
the wage distribution, the wage gap between high school graduates and high school dropouts increased
11

steadily from 1979 and 1997, then flattened or reversed.
This pattern, in which wage gaps within college-educated and non-college-educated workers groups
diverge, is inconsistent with the basic, two-factor CES model. In this model, the labor input of all collegeeducated worker subgroups is assumed to be perfectly substitutable up to a scalar multiple, and similarly for
non-college worker subgroups. Accordingly, the wage ratio of college-educated to post-college educated
worker should be roughly constant, as should the wage ratio of high school dropouts to high school
graduates. This two-factor assumption fits the data rather well from 1963 to 1987. However, the drastic rise
in earnings of post-secondary relative to college-only workers after 1987 and the slightly increasing
earnings of dropouts relative to high school graduates after 1997, represent significant departures from the
assumptions of the model. Fundamentally, the two-factor model does not accommodate a setting in which
the wages of very-high and very low-skilled workers rise relative to those of middle-educated workers—
that is, a setting where wage growth polarizes. We consider the sources of this polarization in Section V.
B. The college/high-school gap by experience group

As shown in Table 1, changes in the college/high school wage gap differed substantially by
age/experience groups over recent decades, with the rise in the college/high-school gap concentrated among
less experienced workers in the 1980s. We illustrate this pattern in Figure 6 through a comparison of the
evolution of the college premium (panel A) and college relative supply (panel B) for younger workers
(those with 0-9 years of potential experience) and older workers (those with 20-29 years of potential
experience). The return to college for younger workers has increased much more substantially since 1980
than for older workers. To the extent that workers with similar education but different ages or experience
levels are imperfect substitutes in production, one should expect age-group or cohort-specific relative skill
supplies—as well as aggregate relative skill supplies—to affect the evolution of the college-high school by
age or experience as emphasized in a careful analysis by Card and Lemieux (2001). Consistent with this
view, the lower panel of Figure 6 shows a much more rapid deceleration in relative college supply among
younger than older workers in the mid to late 1970s.
In Table 3, we take fuller account of these differing trends by estimating regression models for the

12

college wage by experience group that extend the basic specification in equation (4) to include own
experience group relative skill supplies. The first two columns of Table 3 present regressions pooled across
4 potential experience groups (those with 0-9, 10-19, 20-29, and 30-39 years of experience) allowing for
group-specific intercepts but constraining the other coefficients to be the same for all experience groups.
These models estimate:
(5)

ln( wcjt / whjt ) = β 0 + β1[ln( N cjt / N hjt ) − ln( N ct / N ht )] + β 2 ln( N ct / N ht ) + X t β 3 + δ j + η jt ,

where j indexes experience group, the δ j are experience group main effects, and X t includes measures
of time trends and other demand shifters. This specification arises from an aggregate CES production
function in college and high school equivalents of the form of equation (1) where these aggregate inputs are
themselves CES sub-aggregates of college and high school labor by experience group (Card and Lemieux
2001). Under these assumptions, −1/ β 2 provides an estimate of σ the aggregate elasticity of substitution
and −1/ β1 provides an estimate of σ E , the partial elasticity of substitution between different experience
groups within the same education group.
The estimates in the first two columns of Table 3 indicate substantial effects of both own-group and
aggregate supplies on the evolution the college wage premium by experience group. While the implied
estimates of the aggregate elasticity of substitution in the Table 3 models are very similar to the aggregate
models in Table 2, the implied value of the partial elasticity of substitution between experience groups is
around 3.55 (somewhat lower than the estimates in Card and Lemieux 2001). These estimates indicate that
differences in own-group relative college supply growth go a substantial distance towards explaining
variation across experience groups in the evolution of the college wage premium in recent decades. For
example, as seen in Figure 6, from 1980 to 2005 the college wage premium increased by 29.9 log points for
the 0-9 year experience group and by 23.0 log points for the 20-29 year experience group. Over the same
period the own group relative college supply for the 0-9 year experience group grew by 26.7 log points less
rapidly than for the 20-29 year experience group. Thus, using the implied own-group relative inverse
substitution elasticity of -0.282 in column (1) of Table 3, we find that the slower relative supply growth for

13

the younger (0-9 year) experience group explains the entirety (7.53 log points of a 6.90 log point gap) of the
larger increase in the college premium for the younger than for the older (20-29 year) experience group.
The final four columns of Table 3 present regression models of the college wage premium separately
estimated by experience group. Trend demand changes and relative skill supplies play a large role in
changes in educational differentials for younger and prime age workers. The college wage premium for
younger workers appears more sensitive to own group and aggregate relative skill supplies than the
premium for older workers. The real minimum wage is a significant determinant of changes in the college
wage premium for younger workers, but, plausibly, does not appear important for older workers.
In summary, a simple supply-demand framework emphasizing a secular increase in the relative demand
for college workers combined with fluctuations in relative skill supplies can account for some of the key
patterns in the recent evolution of between-group inequality, including the contraction and expansion of the
college-high school gap during the 1970s and 1980s and the differential rise in the college/high-school gap
by experience group in the 1980s and 1990s.18
What drives these secular demand shifts? A large literature reviewed in Katz and Autor (1999) and Katz
(2000) yields two consistent findings suggesting that skill-biased technological change has played an
integral role.19 The first is that the relative employment of more-educated workers and non-production
workers has increased rapidly within detailed industries and within establishments in the United States
during the 1980s and 1990s, despite the sharp rise in the relative wages of these groups (Dunne,
Haltiwanger, and Troske 1997; Autor, Katz, and Krueger 1998). Similar patterns of within-industry
increases in the proportion of skilled workers are apparent in other advanced nations (Berman, Bound, and
Machin 1998; Machin and Van Reenen 1998). These findings suggest strong within-industry demand shifts
favoring the more skilled.20 Second, a wealth of quantitative and case-study evidence documents a striking
correlation between the adoption of computer-based technologies (and associated organizational
innovations) and the increased use of college-educated labor within detailed industries, within firms, and
across plants within industries (Doms, Dunne, and Troske 1997; Autor, Levy, and Murnane 2002; Levy and
Murnane 2004; Bartel, Ichniowski and Shaw 2007).
14

C. The role of the minimum wage

Several studies, including Lee (1999), Card and DiNardo (2002) and Lemieux (2006b), conclude the
minimum wage plays a primary role in the rise of wage inequality since 1980. Yet, our simple models
above do not find the minimum wage to be important in the evolution of educational wage differentials,
except possibly for young workers. Why do our conclusions differ? The discrepancy partially arises from a
disjuncture between trends in between-group inequality (the college/high-school gap) and trends in overall
and residual inequality. As seen in Figure 2, overall inequality was flat during the 1970s while betweengroup inequality fell; conversely, as between group-inequality continued to rise in the 1990s, residual
inequality stabilized. Between-group and residual inequality move closely together only during 1979-87.
Following our simple models for the college/high-school earnings gap above, we provide a time-series
analysis for the proximate sources of the growth of overall, upper-tail, and lower-tail hourly wage
inequality. As emphasized by Card and DiNardo (2002), there is a striking time series relationship between
the real value of the federal minimum wage and hourly wage inequality, as measured by the 90-10 log
earnings ratio. This relationship is depicted in Figure 7. A simple regression of the 90-10 log hourly wage
gap from the May/ORG CPS for the years 1973 to 2005 on the real minimum wage yields a coefficient of 0.74 and an R-squared of 0.71. Based in part on this tight correspondence, Card and DiNardo (2002) and
Lemieux (2006b) argue that much of the rise in overall and residual inequality over the last two decades
may be attributed to the minimum wage.21 In a cross state analysis of the minimum wage and wage
inequality for the period 1979 to 1991, Lee (1999) reaches a similar conclusion.
A potential problem for this argument is that the majority of the rise in earnings inequality over the last
two decades occurred in the upper half of the earnings distribution. Since it is not plausible that a declining
minimum wage could cause large increases in upper-tail earnings inequality, this observation suggests that
the minimum wage is unlikely to provide a satisfying explanation for the bulk of inequality growth. Not
surprisingly, as shown in the upper panel of Figure 7, the real minimum wage is highly correlated with
lower-tail earnings inequality between 1973 and 2005; a 1 log point rise in the minimum is associated with
0.26 log point compression in lower-tail inequality. Somewhat surprisingly, the minimum wage is also

15

highly correlated with upper-tail inequality: a 1 log point rise in the minimum is associated with a 0.48 log
point compression in upper-tail inequality (Figure 7, lower panel).
These bivariate relationships may potentially mask other confounds. To explore these relationships in
slightly greater detail, we estimated a set of descriptive regressions for 90-10, 90-50 and 50-10 hourly
earnings inequality over 1973 to 2005. In addition to the minimum wage measure used in Figures 7, we
augmented these models with a linear time trend, a measure of college/high-school relative supply
(calculated from the May/ORG CPS), the male prime-age unemployment rate (as a measure of labor market
tightness), and in some specifications a post-1992 time trend, reflecting the estimated trend reduction in
skill demand in the 1990s. The main finding from these models is that the strong relationship between the
minimum wage and both upper and lower-tail inequality is highly robust. In a specification that includes a
linear time trend, the college/high school supply measure, and the prime-age unemployment rate variable,
the minimum wage measure has a coefficient of -0.23 for lower-tail inequality and a coefficient of -0.10 for
upper-tail inequality (both significant).
These patterns suggest that the time series correlation between minimum wages and inequality is
unlikely to provide causal estimates of minimum wage impacts. Indeed, the relationship between the
minimum wage and upper-tail inequality is potential evidence of spurious causation. Although the decline
in the real minimum wage during the 1980s likely contributed to the expansion of lower-tail inequality—
particularly for women—the robust correlation of the minimum wage with upper-tail inequality suggests
other factors are at work.22 One possibility is that federal minimum wage changes (or inaction) during these
decades were partially a response to political pressures associated with changing labor market conditions
and costs to employers of a minimum wage increase. This political economy story could help explain the
coincidence of falling minimum wages and rising upper-tail inequality.23
IV.

Rising residual inequality: The role of composition and prices

The educational attainment and labor market experience of the U.S. labor force rose substantially over
the last 30 years as the large 1970s entering (“baby boom”) college cohorts reached mid-career during the
1990s. The full-time equivalent employment share of male workers with a college degree rose from less
16

than one-fifth to approximately one-third of the U.S. male labor force from 1973 to 2005. The mean
potential experience of male workers with high school or greater education also increased substantially (by
2 to 5 years) from 1973 to 2005 with the largest gains for college workers.
As discussed by Lemieux (2006b), these shifts in labor force composition may have played a role in
changes in measured wage inequality. The canonical Mincer (1974) earnings model implies that earnings
trajectories fan out as workers gain labor market experience. Hourly wage dispersion is also typically higher
for college graduates than for less-educated workers. Thus, changes in the distribution of education or
experience of the labor force can lead to changes in wage dispersion. These compositional effects are
distinct from the standard price effects arising from shifts in supply-demand and institutional factors.
Holding market prices constant, changes in labor force composition can mechanically raise or lower
residual earnings dispersion simply by altering the employment share of worker groups that have more or
less dispersed earnings. Similarly, changes in workforce composition can also raise or lower overall
earnings dispersion by increasing or reducing heterogeneity in observed skills (Juhn, Murphy and Pierce
1993). These observations suggest that measured earnings dispersion may change due to the mechanical
impact of composition without any underlying change in market prices.
Following such an approach, Lemieux (2006b) finds that most of the growth in residual wage
dispersion from 1973 to 2003—and all of the growth after 1988—is explained by mechanical effects of
changes in workforce composition rather than shifts in residual inequality within defined skill groups (what
we call ‘price’ effects). Lemieux concludes that the rise in residual earnings inequality is mainly attributable
to institutional factors during the 1980s—especially the falling real minimum wage—and to mechanical
labor force composition effects since the late 1980s.
We reassess these conclusions, adhering closely to the methods and data sources used by Lemieux
(2006b). Our analysis differs from Lemieux in one key respect: whereas Lemieux focuses primarily on the
contribution of prices and composition to the variance of wage residuals—thus aggregating over changes in
the upper and lower tails of the distribution—we focus on the contribution of prices and composition to
changes in upper and lower-tail earnings inequality (both overall and residual). We conclude that changes in
17

labor force composition do not substantially contribute to an explanation for the diverging path of upper and
lower tail inequality, either overall or residual, over the past three decades.
A. Implementation

We employ a variant of the kernel reweighting approach introduced by DiNardo, Fortin and Lemieux
(1996, DFL hereafter).24 We write the observed density of wages at times t and t ′ as
(6)

f ( w | T = t ) = ∫ g ( w | x, T = t )h( x | T = t )dx and f ( w | T = t ′) = ∫ g ( w | x, T = t ′)h( x | T = t ′)dx .

In this expression, w is the logarithm of the hourly wage, T is a variable denoting the year from which an
observation is drawn, g ( w | x, T = t ) is the density of wages for observable attributes x at survey year t ,
and h( x | T = t ) is the density of attributes x at survey year t . Equation (6) decomposes the density of
wages into two functions: a ‘price’ function, g (i) that provides the conditional distribution of wages for
given attributes and time, and a ‘composition’ function, h(i) , that provides the density of attributes in that
time period.
Using this decomposition, we can develop counterfactual wage densities by combining the price
function gt (i) from some period t with the composition function, ht′ (i) from an alternative period t ′ . As
shown by DFL, calculating such a counterfactual simply requires reweighting the price function gt (i) in
year t by the ratio of the density of attributes x in year t ′ to the density of attributes in year t , ht ′ (i) / ht (i) .
Applying Bayes rule, this reweighting function can be written as:
(7)

h( x | T = t ′)
Pr(T = t ′ | x) 1 − Pr(T = t ′)
=
×
.
h( x | T = t ) 1 − Pr(T = t ′ | x)
Pr(T = t ′)

The reweighting function can be estimated using a logit model applied to the pooled data sources, h( x) ,
from years t and t ′ .
The validity of this counterfactual exercise rests on the partial equilibrium assumption that prices and
quantities can be viewed as independent—that is, changes in labor market quantities, h( x ) , do not affect
labor market prices, g ( x ) . Although analytically convenient, this assumption is economically unappealing,

18

and, moreover, is precisely opposite in spirit to our supply-demand analysis in Section III. Given the
dramatic changes in the education and experience of the labor market over the three decades and their
attendant affects on labor market prices documented above, the partial equilibrium assumptions underlying
this exercise are certain to be violated. Nevertheless, we view this analysis as worthwhile because it permits
a direct assessment of the substantive conclusions of Lemieux (2006b), taking the methodology as given.25
To evaluate the importance of shifts in composition and prices to observed changes in overall and
residual wage inequality, we draw on our core May/ORG hourly wage samples from 1973 to 2005 to
construct counterfactual wage distributions. In each sample year t , we apply the labor force composition
data, ht ( x) , to the price function, g ( w | x, T = t ′) from the years 1973, 1989 and 2005. This procedure
simulates (via reweighting) a hypothetical set of cases where labor force composition is allowed to evolve
as actually occurred over 1973 to 2005 while labor market prices are held at their start-of-period (1973),
mid-period (1989) or end-of-period levels (2005). In calculating the reweighting function (equation (7)), we
employ the same covariates in the x vector as used by Lemieux (2006b). These include a full set of age
dummies, dummies for nine discreet schooling categories, and a full set of interactions among the schooling
dummies and a quartic in age. All models are estimated separately by gender.
The procedure outlined above is suitable for obtaining counterfactuals for overall inequality. To
calculate analogous counterfactuals for residual inequality, we replace g ( w | x, T = t ) in equation (6) with a
‘residual pricing’ function, g (ε | x, T = t ) , which is obtained by regressing the logarithm of hourly wages in
each year on the full set of covariates in x , then replacing the wage observations in g ( w | x, T = t ) with
their corresponding residuals from the OLS regression. This residual price function provides the conditional
distribution of wage residuals in year t and can be used analogously to g ( w | x, T = t ) for calculating
counterfactual residual densities.
B. Rising inequality: The role of composition and prices

Trends in observed and counterfactual overall and residual inequality are summarized in Table 4, and
plotted in Figures 8 and 9. In these figures, differences in the vertical height of each series within a given

19

year reflect the effect of prices on overall earnings inequality, holding labor force composition at the
appointed year’s level. The over-time change in the level of each series moving along the x-axis reflects the
effect of changes in labor force composition, holding prices at their 1973, 1989 or 2005 levels.
For comparison with Lemieux (2006b), we begin by discussing residual inequality. Panel A of Table 4
shows that male 90/50 (upper-tail) residual wage inequality rose during both halves of the sample: by 4.4
log points from 1973 to 1989 and by 4.0 log points from 1989 to 2005. Holding labor force composition
constant at its 1973, 1989 or 2005 levels does not change the basic message. In all cases, the compositionconstant rise in residual 90/50 inequality is at least 65 percent as large as the unadjusted change. This
finding is readily seen in the upper-left panel of Figure 8, which plots actual and counterfactual male 90/50
residual inequality over 1973 to 2005. A comparison of the heights of the 1973, 1989 and 2005 series (that
is, pairing the 1973, 1989 and 2005 prices with the observed labor force composition in each year)
demonstrates that composition-constant male 90/50 residual wage inequality rose substantially, both
between 1973 and 1989 and between 1989 and 2005. As is visible from the shallow upward slopes of each
counterfactual series (moving along the x-axis), compositional shifts also contributed to rising residual
inequality, particularly after 1988. But these compositional shifts are modest relative to the price effects.
Next consider the evolution of lower-tail residual inequality during 1973 to 2005. Male 50/10 residual
inequality rose by 5.7 log points between 1973 and 1989 and then fell by 1.3 log points between 1989 and
2005 (panel B of Table 4). What are the roles of composition and prices in these shifts? Figure 8 shows that
both the expansion and compression of lower-tail inequality are largely explained by price changes. In
particular, during the first half of the sample, the composition-constant growth of residual 50/10 inequality
was at least 65 percent as large as the unadjusted growth. In the latter half of the sample, price changes were
also paramount: composition-constant lower tail residual inequality fell by somewhere between 3.5 and 7.1
log points during 1989 to 2005, with the precise magnitude depending upon the choice of the base year. In
short, the compression of residual prices during 1989 to 2005 was opposite in sign but comparable in
magnitude to the expansion of residual prices during 1973 to 1989.
There is, however, an important difference between the earlier and latter halves of the sample.
20

Consistent with Lemieux (2006b), Figure 8 shows that labor force composition exerted a countervailing,
upward effect on lower-tail residual inequality after 1989. In particular, the shallow upwards slopes of each
counterfactual inequality series starting in the mid to late-1980s indicates that, holding prices constant,
shifts in labor force composition served to increase measured residual inequality. Were it not for the
countervailing effect of these compositional shifts, the observed decline in residual lower-tail inequality
would have been even larger. The fact that we find a net decline in (non-composition-adjusted) lower-tail
residual inequality between 1989 and 2005, however, indicates that the price effects reducing residual
inequality dominated the composition effects raising it.
We have so far discussed residual inequality. Notably, our conclusions about the relative importance of
price and composition effects for the evolution of residual inequality apply with even greater force to
overall inequality. As shown in Figure 9, the dramatic rises in (overall) upper-tail inequality during both
halves of the sample are almost completely accounted for by price changes; the contribution of
compositional shifts is so small as to be almost undetectable. For lower-tail inequality, price and
compositional changes both play significant, albeit countervailing, roles, with price changes causing lowertail compression and compositional shifts leading to lower tail expansion.
C. Reconciling with Lemieux (2006b)

How can our finding that composition plays only a secondary role in explaining the time patterns of
residual inequality for males in the CPS May/ORG be reconciled with the Lemieux’s (2006b) conclusion
that the mechanical effects of changes in labor force composition explain the full rise in residual inequality
after 1988?26 The answer is seen by studying the net rise in 90/10 residual inequality (thus summing over
90/50 and 50/10 residual inequality) between 1989 and 2005. Panel C of Table 4 shows that the observed
rise in 90/10 residual inequality of 2.8 log points over 1989 to 2005 is small relative to the substantial rise in
upper-tail inequality and compression of lower-tail inequality. Consequently, the relatively modest
contribution of compositional shifts to residual inequality over this period can be said to explain all—in
fact, more than all—of the observed rise in 90/10 residual inequality. But this summary conclusion
aggregates over two, important countervailing forces. The first is the contraction in lower-tail inequality

21

after 1988, which is due to compressing residual ‘prices’ partially offset by changing composition. The
second is the rise in upper-tail inequality, which appears almost entirely explained by price changes.
Because composition over-explains the former phenomenon and under-explains the latter, it is accurate to
say that composition can “fully explain” the aggregate trend in residual inequality after 1988. But when
upper and lower-tail inequality are considered separately—as seems appropriate given their substantial
divergence—composition does not appear a satisfying explanation for either.
V.

What explains the polarization of earnings growth?

Following the monotonic surge of inequality from 1979 to 1987, changes in the U.S. wage distribution
subsequently ‘polarized,’ with a strong, persistent rise in inequality in the upper half of the distribution and
a slowing then slight reversal of inequality in the lower-half of the distribution. This polarization is seen in
overall inequality, in residual inequality, and in educational wage differentials. We believe the evidence is
clear that this polarization is not primarily explained by mechanical effects of labor force composition or by
episodic, non-market events such as the falling real minimum wage of the 1980s. But canonical supplydemand models also fail to provide a satisfying explanation for wage polarization since the late 1980s.
One potentially viable hypothesis focuses on changing demand for job tasks and their link to
computerization. As argued by Autor, Levy and Murnane 2003 (‘ALM’ hereafter) and amplified by Goos
and Manning (2003), Spitz-Oener (2006), Autor, Katz and Kearney (2006) and Dustmann, Ludsteck and
Schönberg (2007), Skill Biased Technical Change is probably an insufficiently nuanced name for the shifts
in skill demands that were induced or abetted by the rapid price declines in computer technology over the
last three decades. In the ALM task framework, computerization has non-monotone impacts on the demand
for skill throughout the earnings distribution: sharply raising demand for the cognitive and interpersonal
skills used by educated professionals and managers (‘abstract tasks’); reducing demand for clerical and
routine analytical and mechanical skills that comprised many middle-educated white collar and
manufacturing production jobs (‘routine tasks’).27 Somewhat paradoxically, computerization has probably
had little direct impact on the demand for the non-routine manual skills (‘manual tasks’) used in many ‘low-

22

skilled’ service jobs such as health aides, security guards, orderlies, cleaners, and servers. Because the
interpersonal and environmental adaptability demanded by these manual tasks has proven extraordinarily
difficult to computerize (to date), these manual activities may in fact grow in importance as a share of labor
input.28 The ALM framework suggests that computerization (among other forces such as international
outsourcing) may have raised demand for skill among higher-educated workers, depressed skill demands
for ‘middle-educated’ workers, and left the lower echelons of the wage distribution comparatively
unscathed.29 Goos and Manning (2007) label this process a “polarization of work,” and argue that it may
have contributed to a hollowing out of the wage distribution in the United Kingdom from 1975 to 2000.
Spitz-Oener (2005) and Dustmann, Ludsteck and Schönberg (2007) report a similar polarization of
employment for the former West Germany for 1979 to 1999.30
To illustrate the relevance of shifts in task demands for changes in skill demands, we link data on task
intensity by occupation from the Dictionary of Occupational Titles to data on skill level by occupation in
the 1980 Census. In this analysis, occupational skill level is measured by the mean years of education of an
occupation’s workforce (weighting workers by their annual hours worked). Figure 10 uses a locally
weighted smoothing regression to plot task intensity by occupational skill for each of the three broad task
categories above: abstract, routine and manual tasks.31 Task intensities are measured as percentiles of the
baseline distribution of job tasks in 1960. Thus, an occupation with the median intensity of ‘routine’ task
input in 1960 would receive a score of 50. This figure shows that the intensity of abstract skill input is
monotonically rising in occupational skill (i.e., education) and, conversely, the intensity of manual task
input is falling in occupational skill. Most significantly, there is a distinctly non-monotone relationship
between occupational skill and routine task input. Routine task use is highest between the 20th and 60th
percentiles of the skill distribution, and falls off sharply on either side of this range. This non-monotonic
relationship is highly relevant because, as documented by ALM, routine task input saw the sharpest decline
of all task categories over the last two decades (relative to its initial 1960 level). The substitution of
information technology for routine tasks might be expected to contribute to polarization by reducing
demand for ‘middle-skill’ occupations relative to either high or low skill occupations.
23

An implication of the polarization hypothesis is that the twisting of the wage structure observed in
recent years is, in significant part, a demand-side phenomenon, induced by rising relative demands for both
high and low-skill tasks. This implication is testable, and we provide a simple evaluation here. Following
Goos and Manning’s (2007) analysis for the U.K., we use U.S. Census data to explore how employment
growth by occupation over the last two decades is related to occupational skill as proxied by educational
levels.32 Our hypothesis is that, if the wage structure changes observed in the 1980s and 1990s are driven in
substantial part by demand shifts, wages changes by earnings level and employment changes by skill level
should positively covary in both decades.
To test this implication, we plot in Figure 11 the change in the share of total hours worked in the
economy from 1980-1990 and 1990-2000 by occupation skill percentile, using the education-based
occupational skill measure developed above.33 For the decade of the 1980s, we see substantial declines in
employment shares at the bottom end of the skill distribution with strongly monotone increases in
employment shares as we move up the skill distribution. In contrast, employment growth in the 1990s
appears to have polarized. There is rapid employment growth the in highest-skill jobs (at or above the 75th
percentile), a decline in the employment shares of middle-skill jobs (those at percentiles 30 to 75) and flat
or rising employment shares in the lowest-skill jobs, those in deciles one through three.
This pattern of job growth corresponds closely with the observed pattern of wage structure changes in
each decade, as is shown in the lower panel of Figure 11. Real wage growth was essentially monotone in
wage percentile in the 1980s, with especially sharp wage growth above the 75th percentile and especially
sharp declines below the 30th percentile. In the decade of the 1990s, however, wage growth was more Ushaped. Wage growth was stronger below the 30th percentile and especially above the 80th percentile of the
distribution than throughout the remainder of the distribution. Thus, despite substantial differences in the
evolution of inequality between the 1980s and 1990s, labor market prices and quantities (as measured by
wage and skill percentiles) appear to positively covary in each decade.
To provide a slightly more rigorous assessment of this observation, we estimate a set of OLS models of
the form,
24

(8)

ΔE pτ = ατ + βτ Δ ln W pτ + ε pτ ,

where changes in log employment share by skill percentile are regressed on changes in log wages by wage
percentile in each decade. Here, ΔE pτ represents the change in occupational log employment share at skill
percentile p in decade τ and Δ ln W pτ is the change in real log hourly earnings at the corresponding wage
percentile in the same decade.34 Using data for the 4th through 97th percentiles of the earnings and skill
distributions (thus trimming outliers at the tails), we estimate that βτ = 3.00 (t=3.75) for the 1980s and that
βτ = 2.96 (t=1.90) for the 1990s. Thus, both the monotone rise of wage inequality in the 1980s and the
‘polarized’ growth of wage inequality in the 1990s are mirrored by conformal changes in employment by
skill. This is consistent with a demand-side explanation for observed wage changes.35
We have further experimented with these simple models by including linear terms in wage percentiles
in addition to (or instead) of estimated wage changes by percentile. For the decade of the 1980s, we find
that a linear function of wage percentiles fits the observed pattern of skilled employment growth better than
does the observed change in earnings by percentile. In the 1990s, by contrast, the linear term is insignificant
and the estimate of β 90−00 is hardly affected by its inclusion (either in magnitude or precision). These simple
models do not, of course, take into account the substitutability and complementary among various skill
groups (as measured by skill percentiles) and so lack a well-grounded production function interpretation.
We nevertheless view them as suggestive evidence that labor demand shifts have favored low- and highwage workers relative to middle-wage workers over the last fifteen years—a pattern that stands in contrast
to the shifts in labor demand during the 1980s, which appear to have been monotonically rising in skill.
VI.

Conclusion

The recent divergence of upper-tail and lower-tail wage inequality and the convexification in the returns
to education present puzzles for the traditional and revisionist interpretations of changes in the U.S. wage
structure. Revisionist explanations focusing on non-market factors particularly minimum wages and the
spurious effects of labor market composition on residual inequality appear unable to provide a compelling

25

explanation for the strong, secular rise in upper-tail inequality over the last least 25 years and the
polarization of employment growth since 1990. Explanations based on relatively steady trend relative
demand growth for more skilled workers and fluctuations in relative skill supplies based on canonical
supply-demand models, such as the two factor CES used by Katz and Murphy (1992) and Autor, Katz and
Krueger (1998), imply a puzzling slowdown in relative demand growth starting in the early 1990s.
Despite our rejection of ‘unicausal’ explanations for the complex pattern of wage changes we
document, the simple analysis above demonstrating that employment and wage growth by skill percentile
are positively correlated in each of the last two decades leaves us confident that skill demand shifts have
played a central role in reshaping the wage structure, both during the monotone rise of inequality during the
1980s and the polarization of wage growth that followed. These trends towards wage structure
‘polarization’ can we believe be partially reconciled by a reinterpretation of the skill biased technical
change hypothesis along the lines developed by Autor, Levy and Murnane (2003), Autor, Katz and Kearney
(2006), and Goos and Manning (2007).
Nevertheless, there is more to be understood about the interactions among supply and demand, labor
market institutions, and macroeconomic conditions than is accommodated by this simple ‘polarization’
model. Equally important, the factors contributing to the evolution of U.S. inequality in the decade(s) to
come may differ significantly from those identified above. International trade and outsourcing factors
appear likely to become increasingly important, due both to rapid economic development in Asia and
improvements in computer and communications technology that have dramatically reduced the costs of
large scale international trade in goods and services. Devising innovative and rigorous means to evaluate
the impacts of more realistic form of technical change and these evolving globalization forces on inequality
and economic well-being constitutes a significant agenda item for further research in this field.

26

VII. References

Acemoglu, Daron. 1999. “Changes in Unemployment and Wage Inequality: An Alternative Theory and
Some Evidence.” American Economic Review, 89 (December), 1259—1278.
Acemoglu, Daron. 2002. “Technical Change, Inequality and the Labor Market.” Journal of Economic
Literature 40 (March), 7-72.
Acemoglu, Daron, Philippe Aghion and Giovanni L Violante. 2001. “Deunionization, Technical Change
and Inequality.” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 55(0), 229—64.
Angrist, Joshua, Victor Chernozhukov and Iván Fernández-Val. 2006. “Quantile Regression under
Misspecification, with an Application to the U.S. Wage Structure.” Econometrica, 74(March), 639–63.
Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Alan B. Krueger. 1998. “Computing Inequality: Have Computers
Changed the Labor Market?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 113 (November), 1169-1213.
Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney. 2005. “Residual Wage Inequality: The Role of
Composition and Prices.” NBER Working Paper No. 11628, September.
Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney. 2006. “The Polarization of the U.S. Labor
Market.” American Economic Review, 96:2 (May), 189-194.
Autor, David H., Frank Levy, and Richard J. Murnane. 2002. “Upstairs Downstairs: Computers and Skills
on Two Floors of a Large Bank.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 55 (April), 432–447.
Autor, David H., Frank Levy, and Richard J. Murnane. 2003. “The Skill Content of Recent Technological
Change: An Empirical Investigation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118 (November), 1279-1333.
Bartel, Ann P., Casey Ichniowski, and Kathryn L. Shaw. 2007. “How Does Information Technology Really
Affect Productivity? Plant-Level Comparisons of Product Innovation, Process Improvement and
Worker Skilsl.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (November), forthcoming.
Berman, Eli, John Bound, and Stephen Machin. 1998. “Implications of Skill-Biased Technological Change:
International Evidence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113 (November), 1245—1279.
Bound, John and George Johnson. 1992. “Changes in the Structure of Wages in the 1980s: An Evaluation
of Alternative Explanations.” American Economic Review, 82 (June), 371-92.
Card, David and John E. DiNardo. 2002. “Skill-Biased Technological Change and Rising Wage Inequality:
Some Problems and Puzzles.” Journal of Labor Economics 20 (October): 733-83.
Card, David and Thomas Lemieux. 2001. “Can Falling Supply Explain the Rising Return to College for
Younger Men?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (May): 705-46.
Card, David, Thomas Lemieux, and W. Craig Riddell. 2003. “Unionization and Wage Inequality: A
Comparative Study of the U.S., the U.K., and Canada.” NBER Working Paper No. 9473, February.
Cutler, David M. and Lawrence F. Katz. 1992. “Rising Inequality? Changes in the Distribution of Income
and Consumption in the 1980s.” American Economic Review 82 (May): 546-51.

27

DiNardo, John, Nicole Fortin and Thomas Lemieux. 1996. “Labor Market Institutions, and the Distribution
of Wages, 1973-1992: A Semiparametric Approach.” Econometrica 64 (September), 1001-1044.
Doms, Mark, Timothy Dunne, and Kenneth R. Troske. 1997. “Workers, Wages, and Technology.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (February), 253-90.
Dunne, Timothy, John Haltiwanger, and Kenneth R. Troske. 1997. “Technology and Jobs: Secular Changes
and Cyclical Dynamics.” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 46 (June). 107-178
Dustmann, Christian, Johannes Ludsteck and Uta Schönberg. 2007. “Revisiting the German Wage
Structure.” Mimeograph, University of Rochester, February.
Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon H. Hanson. 1999. “The Impact of Outsourcing and High-Technology
Capital on Wages: Estimates for the United States, 1979-1990.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114
(November), 907-940.
Goldin, Claudia and Lawernce F. Katz. 2001. “Decreasing (and then Increasing) Inequality in America: A
Tale of Two Half-Centuries.” In F. Welch, ed., The Causes and Consequences of Increasing Income
Inequality. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 37-82.
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz. 2007. “The Race between Education and Technology: The
Evolution of U.S. Educational Wage Differentials, 1890 to 2005.” NBER Working Paper No. 12984.
Goos, Maarten and Alan Manning. 2007. “Lousy and Lovely Jobs: The Rising Polarization of Work in
Britain.” Review of Economics and Statistics 89 (February), 118-33
Hamermesh, Daniel S. 1999. “Changing Inequality in Markets for Workplace Amenities.”Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 114(4), November, 1085-1123.
Hirsch, Barry T. and Edward J. Schumacher. 2004. “Match Bias in Wage Gap Estimates due to Earnings
Imputation.” Journal of Labor Economics, 22(July), 689-722.
Jaeger, David A. 1997. “Reconciling the Old and New Census Bureau Education Questions:
Recommendations for Researchers,” Journal of Business and Economics Statistics, 15, 300–309.
Juhn, Chinhui. 1994. “Wage Inequality and Industrial Change: Evidence from Five Decades.” NBER
Working Paper No. 4684.
Juhn, Chinhui, Kevin M. Murphy and Brooks Pierce. 1993. “Wage Inequality and the Rise in Returns to
Skill.” Journal of Political Economy, 101(June), 410-442.
Karoly, Lynn and Gary Burtless. 1995. “Demographic Change, Rising Earnings Inequality, and the
Distribution of Well-Being, 1959-1989.” Demography 32, 379-405.
Katz, Lawrence F. 2000. “Technological Change, Computerization, and the Wage Structure,” in E.
Brynjolfsson and B. Kahin, eds., Understanding the Digital Economy, Cambridge: MIT Press, 217244.
Katz, Lawrence F. and David H. Autor. 1999. “Changes in the Wage Structure and Earnings Inequality.” In
O. Ashenfelter and D. Card, eds. Handbook of Labor Economics, volume 3, North Holland.

28

Katz, Lawrence F. and Kevin M. Murphy. 1992. “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-87: Supply and
Demand Factors.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (February), 35-78.
Lee, David S.1999. “Wage Inequality in the U.S. during the 1980s: Rising Dispersion or Falling Minimum
Wage?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (August), 977-1023.
Lemieux, Thomas. 2006a.“Post-Secondary Education and Increasing Wage Inequality.” NBER Working
Paper No. 12077, March.
Lemieux, Thomas. 2006b. “Increased Residual Wage Inequality: Composition Effects, Noisy Data, or
Rising Demand for Skill.” American Economic Review, 96(June), 461–498.
Levy, Frank and Richard J. Murnane. 2004. The New Division of Labor. New Jersey: Princeton University
Press.
Machin, Stephen, and John Van Reenen. 1998. “Technology and Changes in Skill Structure: Evidence from
Seven OECD Countries,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113 (November), 1215—1244.
Machado, José and José Mata. 2005. “Counterfactual Decompositions of Changes in Wage Distributions
Using Quantile Regression.” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 20(4), 445-65.
Meyers, Peter B. and Anastasiya M. Osborne. “Proposed Category System for 1960–2000 Census
Occupations.” U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics Working Paper No. 383, September 2005.
Mincer, Jacob. 1974. Schooling, Experience, and Earnings. New York: NBER.
Mishel, Lawrence, Jared Bernstein, and Heather Boushey. 2002. The State of Working America: 2002-03.
Ithaca, ILR Press.
Murphy, Kevin M. and Finis Welch. 1992. “The Structure of Wages.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107
(February), 285-326.
Murphy, Kevin M. and Finis Welch. 2001. “Wage Differentials in the 1990s: Is the Glass Half-Full or HalfEmpty?” In F. Welch, ed., The Causes and Consequences of Increasing Income Inequality. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 341-64.
Park, Jin Heum, “Estimation of Sheepskin Effects and Returns to Schooling Using the Old and the New
CPS Measures of Educational Attainment,” Princeton University, Industrial Relations Section Working
Paper No. 338, December 1994.
Pierce, Brooks. 2001. “Compensation Inequality.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (November), 14931525.
Piketty, Thomas and Emmanuel Saez. 2003. “Income Inequality in the United States, 1913-1998.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (February), 1-39.
Spitz-Oener, Alexandra. 2006. “Technical Change, Job Tasks and Rising Educational Demands: Looking
Outside the Wage Structure.” Journal of Labor Economics 24 (April), 235-70.
Weinberg, Bruce. 2000. “Computer Use and the Demand for Female Workers,” Industrial and Labor
Relations Review, 53, 209-308.

29

Welch, Finis (2000), “Growth in Women’s Relative Wages and in Inequality among Men: One
Phenomenon or Two?” American Economic Review, 90 (May), 444—449.

30

VIII. Data appendix
A. Basic processing of May/ORG CPS data

We use the May CPS for 1973 to 1978 and the CPS Merged Outgoing Rotation Groups for years 1979 to
2005. All samples include wage/salary workers ages 16 to 64 with 0 to 39 years of potential experience in
current employment. Earnings weights, equal to the product of CPS sampling weights and hours worked in
the prior week, are used in all calculations. Hourly wages are the logarithm of reported hourly earnings for
those paid by the hour and the logarithm of usual weekly earnings divided by hours worked last week (not
usual weekly hours) for non-hourly workers. We use hours last week instead of usual weekly hours because
usual weekly hours is not consistently available: starting with the CPS redesign in 1994, workers who report
that their weekly hours vary are not asked to report usual weekly hours, yielding a non-report rate of 7 to 9
percent of workers in 1994 to 2005. To check sensitivity, we have tabulated and plotted overall and residual
inequality measures using imputed usual weekly hours in place of hours last week in all years. This has
little impact on our results.
Topcoded earnings observations are multiplied by 1.5. Hourly earners of below $1.675/hour in 1982 dollars
($2.80/hour in 2000$) are dropped, as are hourly wages exceeding 1/35th the topcoded value of weekly
earnings. All earnings numbers are deflated by the chain-weighted (implicit) price deflator for personal
consumption expenditures (PCE). Allocated earnings observations are excluded in all years, except where
allocation flags are unavailable (January 1994 to August 1995). As discussed by Hirsch and Shumacher
(2004), only about 25 percent of allocated observations in the MORG CPS are actually flagged as allocated
between 1989 and 1993. Following Lemieux (2006b), we identify and drop non-flagged allocated
observations by using the unedited earnings values provided in the source data.
B. Basic processing of March CPS data

We use the March Current Population Survey for sample years 1964 to 2006 (covering earnings years 1963
to 2005) for workers age 16 to 64 (during the earnings year) with 0 to 39 years of potential experience
whose class of work in their longest job was private or government wage/salary employment. Most analyses
are limited to full-time, full-year workers, which we define as those who work 35 hours per week (using the
Census Bureau’s full-time worker flag) and 40-plus weeks in the prior year. Full-time weekly earnings are
calculated as the logarithm of annual earnings over weeks worked for the full-time, full-year sample.
Allocated earnings observations are excluded after (sample year) 1966 using family earnings allocation
flags (1964 to 1975) or individual earnings allocation flags (1976 forward). Weights are used in all
calculations. Full-time earnings are weighted by the product of the CPS sampling weight and weeks
worked. Online reference Tables 1a, 1b and 2 additionally use March CPS hourly earnings for earnings
years 1975 forward. Hourly earnings are calculated as annual earnings divided by the product of weeks
worked and usual hours in the prior year and are weighted by the product of the CPS sampling weight,
weeks worked, and hours worked in the prior year (available starting in earnings year 1975).
Prior to the March 1988 survey, all wage and salary income in the March CPS was reported in a single
variable, which was topcoded at values between $50,000 and $99,999 in years 1964 to 1987. For these
cases, we multiply the topcoded earnings value by 1.5, following Katz and Murphy (1992). Commencing in
1989, wage and salary incomes were collected in two separate earnings variables, corresponding to primary
and secondary labor earnings. After adjusting for topcoding, we sum these values to calculate total wage
and salary earnings. Starting in 1988, topcodes are handled as follows. For the primary earnings variable,
topcoded values are reported at the topcode maximum up to 1995. We multiply these values by 1.5. Starting
in 1996, topcoded primary earnings values are assigned the mean of all topcoded earners. In these cases, we
simply reassign the topcoded value and, again, multiply by 1.5. For the secondary earnings value, the
topcoded maximum is set at 99,999 from 1988 to 1995, falls to 25,000 for 1996 through 2002, and rises to
31

35,000 in 2003 through 2006. For lack of a superior alternative, we again use the topcoded value multiplied
by 1.5. Earnings numbers are deflated using the PCE deflator.
After making adjustments for topcoding, full-time earnings of below $67/week in 1982$ ($112/week in
2000$) are dropped.
C. Processing of Census Samples

We use the Census IPUMS 5 percent extracts for years 1980, 1990 and 2000 available at www.ipums.org.
Our sample includes respondents ages 18 through 64 who were currently employed in the civilian labor
force at the time of the survey, were not in unpaid family work, and who did not live in correctional
institutions, mental institutions or other non-institutional group quarters. Our labor supply measure is the
product of weeks worked and usual hours worked in the prior year. For respondents with missing hours, we
impute labor supply using the mean of workers of the same occupation and education group (high school
dropout, high school graduate, some college, college graduate). Where the occupation-education cell is
empty, we assign the mean for the education group. We employ a consistent set of occupation codes for
Census years 1980, 1990 and 2000 developed by Meyer and Osborne (2005). For wage calculations using
Census data, we further exclude the self-employed and those with missing hours or weeks worked. Hourly
wages are calculated as total wage and salary income divided by hours of labor supply. We drop the bottom
1 percent of hourly earners and multiply hourly wages of top-coded earners by 1.5. We limit the maximum
hourly wage (via truncation) to the 1.5 times the maximum annual income amount divided by 1,750 (35
hours per week for 50 hours per year). This correction prevents part-time workers from having a higher
feasible hourly wage than full-time workers. All calculations are weighted by the product of Census person
weights and calculated or imputed annual labor supply. Earnings numbers are deflated using the PCE
deflator.
D. Coding of education and potential experience in CPS and Census samples

To attain comparable educational categories across the redefinition of Census Bureau’s education variable
introduced in 1992 in the CPS and the 1990 Census, we use the method proposed by Jaeger (1997). In
samples coded with the older education question, we defined high school dropouts as those with fewer than
12 years of completed schooling; high school graduates as those having 12 years of completed schooling;
some college attendees as those with any schooling beyond 12 years (completed or not) and less than 16
completed years; and college plus graduates as those with 16 or more years of completed schooling. In
samples coded with the revised education question, we define high school dropouts as those with fewer than
12 years of completed schooling; high school graduates as those with either 12 completed years of
schooling and/or a high school diploma or G.E.D.; some college as those attending some college or holding
an Associate’s Degree; and college plus as those with a B.A. or higher.
To calculate potential experience in data years coded with the revised education question, we use figures
from Park (1994) to assign years of completed education to each worker based upon race, gender and
highest degree held. Years of potential experience were calculated as age minus assigned years of education
minus 6, rounded down to the nearest integer value.
E. Construction of relative wage series

We calculate composition-adjusted college-high school relative wages overall and by age or experience
using the March and May/ORG samples described above. These data are sorted into sex-educationexperience groups based on a breakdown of the data into 2 sexes, 5 education categories (high school
dropout, high school graduate, some college, college plus, and greater than college), and 4 potential
experience categories (0-9, 10-19, 20-29, and 30+ years). Log weekly wages of full-time, full-year workers
32

(March CPS) and all hourly workers (May/ORG) are regressed in each year separately by sex on the
dummy variables for 4 education categories, a quartic in experience, 3 region dummies, black and other
race dummies, and interactions of the experience quartic with 3 broad education categories (high school
graduate, some college, and college plus). The (composition-adjusted) mean log wage for each of the 40
groups in a given year is the predicted log wage from these regressions evaluated for whites, living in the
mean geographic region, at the relevant experience level (5, 15, 25 or 35 years depending on the experience
group). Mean log wages for broader groups in each year represent weighted averages of the relevant
(composition-adjusted) cell means using a fixed set of weights, equal to the mean share of total hours
worked by each group over 1963 to 2005 from the March CPS.
F. Construction of relative supply measures

We calculate college/high-school relative supply measures using the March and May/ORG samples above.
We form a labor ‘quantity sample’ equal to total hours of worked by all employed workers (including those
in self-employment) with 0 to 39 years of potential experience in 400 gender × education × potential
experience cells: experience groups are single-year categories of 0 to 39 years; education groups are high
school dropout, high school graduate, some college, college graduate, and post-college. The quantity data
are merged to a corresponding ‘price sample’ containing real mean full-time weekly (March CPS) or real
mean hourly (May/ORG CPS) wages by year, gender, potential experience and education. (Wage data used
for the price sample correspond to the earnings samples described above.) Wages in each of the 400
earnings cells in each year are normalized to a relative wage measure by dividing each by the wage of highschool graduate males with 10 years of potential experience in the contemporaneous year. (The choice of
the base earnings group is innocuous.) We compute an ‘efficiency unit’ measure for each genderexperience-education cell as the arithmetic mean of the relative wage measure in that cell over 1963
through 2005.
The quantity and price samples are combined to calculate relative log college/high-school supplies. Define
the efficiency units of labor supply of a gender × education × potential experience group in year t as the
efficiency unit wage measure multiplied by the group’s quantity of labor supply in year t. Following Autor,
Katz and Krueger (1998) and Card and Lemieux (2001), we calculate aggregate college-equivalent labor
supply as the total efficiency units of labor supplied by college or college-plus workers plus half of the
efficiency units of labor supplied by workers with some college. Similarly, aggregate high-school
equivalent labor supply is the sum of efficiency units supplied by high-school or lower workers, plus half of
the efficiency units supplied by workers with some college. Our college/high-school log relative supply
index is the natural logarithm of the ratio of college-equivalent to non-college equivalent labor supply (in
efficiency units) in each year. This measure is calculated overall for each year and by 10 year potential
experience groupings.

33

1

A narrowing of gender wage differentials is the primary exception to the widening U.S. wage structure

since 1980.
2

See Katz and Autor (1999), Goldin and Katz (2001), and Acemoglu (2002) for overviews of this literature.

See Berman, Bound and Machin (1998) and Machin and Van Reenen (1998) for international comparisons.
3

DiNardo, Fortin and Lemieux (1996) also conclude that labor market institutions are the most important

factor explaining rising wage inequality in the 1980s, but they do not attribute the majority of the increase
to this factor.
4

These explanations are not intrinsically at odds, and numerous studies focused on the experience of the

1980s support the view that institutions and market forces both contributed to rising inequality (Katz and
Autor 1999).
5

Approximately eighty percent of the rise in 90-10 earnings inequality from 1980 to 2005 is accounted for

by the rise in the 90-50 wage gap using hourly wages for all male wage and salary workers in both the CPS
ORG and March data.
6

Murphy and Welch (2001) and Lemieux (2006a) also find a "convexification" in the returns to schooling.

Lemieux concludes that the majority of the rise in wage inequality from 1973 to 2005 is accounted for by
increased returns to post-secondary schooling.
7

We also drop from the sample (full-time) workers with weekly earnings below ½ the value of the real

minimum wage in 1982 ($67 a week in 1982 dollars or $112 a week in 2000 dollars). Starting in 1976
(earnings year 1975), the March survey began collecting information on hours worked in the prior year, and
this allows us to create a second March sample of hourly wage data for all wage and salary workers for
earnings years 1975 to 2005. Supplemental tables using the hourly wage sample for the March CPS are
available in an online appendix (see online reference Tables 1a, 1b and 2).

34

8

Autor, Katz, and Kearney (2005) and Lemieux (2006b) find large discrepancies in trends in residual

inequality in the May/ORG versus March samples beginning in 1994. These series closely parallel each
other from 1979 to 1994, and then diverge sharply, with the March data showing a continued rise in residual
inequality from 1994 to 2005 for hourly workers while the ORG data show a flattening. Lemieux attributes
the bulk of this divergence to a differential rise in measurement error in the March sample. Autor, Katz and
Kearney call attention to another source of the discrepancy: the redesign of the CPS ORG survey in 1994.
This redesign changed the format (and increased the complexity) of the earnings component of the survey,
and was followed by a striking increase in earnings non-response: from 15.3 percent in 1993 (immediately
prior to the redesign) to 23.3 percent in the last quarter of 1995 (the first quarter in which allocation flags
are available in the redesigned survey), reaching 31 percent by 2001 (Hirsch and Schumacher 2004). The
contemporaneous rise in the earnings imputation rate in the March survey was comparatively small.
9

The top-coding of CPS wage data makes it not very useful for measuring changes in the very top part of

the distribution. Thus, we symmetrically trim the top and bottom parts of the distribution in Figure 1 and
focus on wage changes from the 3rd to 97th percentile.
10

The robustness of conclusions concerning the timing of changes in overall and residual wage inequality

changes to the choice of wage concept and sample are illustrated in an online reference Tables 1a and 1b,
which presents changes over consistent sub-periods from 1975-2005 of different measures of inequality for
males, females, and both combined using weekly earnings for full-time workers and hourly wages for all
workers for the March CPS and May/ORG CPS.
11

The divergent growth of the 90-50 and 50-10 wage differentials previously has been emphasized by

Murphy and Welch (2001) and Mishel, Bernstein and Boushey (2002) and is noted by Lemieux (2006b).
Using decennial Census earnings data, Angrist, Chernozhukov and Fernández-Val (2006) document a sharp
rise in residual inequality from 1980 to 1990, with a continuing increase from 1990 to 2000 concentrated in
the upper half of the wage distribution.

35

12

The March and May/ORG samples appear equally valid for measuring between-group wage trends and

show almost identical patterns in between-group wage differentials since 1973. The March data cover an
additional decade.
13

The present analysis of the college wage premium extends earlier work in Katz and Murphy (1992) and

Katz and Autor (1999), drawing on additional years of data.
14

We use a standard measure of college/non-college relative supply calculated in “efficiency units” to

adjust for changes in labor force composition by gender and experience groups. Full details are provided in
the Data Appendix.
15

In fact, Goldin and Katz (2007) find that rather steady relative demand growth for college workers

combined with relative supply growth fluctuations does a nice job of explaining the longer-run evolution of
the U.S. college wage premium from 1915 to 2005. Their analysis implies a modest acceleration in demand
growth after 1950 as well as a slowdown in the trend demand after 1990. The slowing of relative demand
growth for college workers after 1990 also has been noted by Autor, Katz and Krueger (1998), Katz and
Autor (1999) and Card and DiNardo (2002).
16

Similar conclusions of a significant slowdown in trend relative demand growth for college workers arise

in models allowing trends breaks in any year from 1989 to 1994.
17

For females, earnings growth between 1988 and 2005 among post-college educated workers was

substantially greater than for college-only workers but the pattern was reversed for 1979 to 1988.
18

However, the divergence of post-college and college-only wages is inconsistent with this simple two skill

group CES framework and demands its own explanation, to which we return below.
19

Skill-biased technological change refers to any introduction of a new technology, change in production

methods, or change in the organization of work that increases the demand for more-skilled labor relative to
less-skilled labor at fixed relative wages.

36

20

Foreign outsourcing of less-skilled jobs is another possible explanation for this pattern (Feenstra and

Hanson 1999). But large within-industry shifts towards more skilled workers are pervasive even in sectors
with little or no observed foreign outsourcing activity. Foreign outsourcing appears likely to become
increasingly important, however.
21

Lemieux (2006b) focuses on the tight fit between the real minimum wage and residual wage variance for

men and women from 1973 to 2003. We find greater time series explanatory power of the real minimum
wage for residual wage inequality measures than for actual wage inequality measures. This is puzzling for
minimum wage hypothesis since the minimum wage should "bite" more for actual low wage workers than
for residual low wage workers.
22

Lee (1999) also noted a puzzling relationship between the ‘effective’ state minimum wage (the log

difference between the state median and the state minimum) and upper-tail inequality. Opposite to the
simple time-series regressions above, Lee finds in a cross-state analysis that increases in the effective state
minimum wage appear to reduce upper-tail inequality, both for males and for the pooled-gender
distribution, leading him to advise caution in causally attributing trends in male and pooled-gender earnings
inequality to the minimum wage.
23

In a similar vein, Acemoglu, Aghion and Violante (2001) argue that the decline in union penetration in

the United States and the United Kingdom is partly explained by changing skill demands that reduced the
viability of rent sharing bargains between high and low skill workers. Furthermore, the direct effects of
union decline on U.S. wage inequality growth appear to be modest. Card, Lemieux and Riddell (2003) find
that falling unionization explains about 14 percent of the growth of male wage variance from 1973 to 2001
(in models allowing for skill group differences in the impact of unions) with an even smaller union effect
for the growth of female wage variance.
24

In Autor, Katz and Kearney (2005), we provide a more complete reanalysis of the Lemieux (2006b) using

a quantile decomposition approach proposed by Machado and Mata (2005) and comparing the findings for

37

the CPS March and May/ORG samples. Here we adopt the kernel reweighting approach of Lemieux to
facilitate a direct comparison.
25

In their analysis of the contributions of price and quantities to rising inequality during the 1980s,

DiNardo, Fortin and Lemieux (1996) perform supply and demand adjustments for observed wages by
education by experience cells (in addition to applying a kernel reweighting procedure). DFL find these
supply-demand adjustments to be important, explaining 21 to 33 percent of the growth in male 90/10 log
hourly earnings inequality between 1979 and 1988. This indicates that the assumption that aggregate skill
supplies do not affect skill prices is likely to be far from innocuous.
26

A similar analysis performed using the March CPS samples also supports this conclusion (see online

reference Table 2).
27

A related earlier model along these lines is developed in Juhn (1994).

28

See Levy and Murnane (2004) for numerous paradigmatic examples. The fact that computerization

causes manual tasks to grow as a share of labor input may be understood as a form of Baumol’s disease.
29

Welch (2000) and Weinberg (2000) argue that these technical changes are particularly likely to have been

favorable to demand for female labor.
30

Acemoglu (1999) offers an alternative theory of job polarization based on endogenous changes in

production techniques as a response to a rise in the availability of skilled labor.
31

The task intensity data are constructed by matching Census 1980 data by occupation and gender with task

measures from the Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT). Task intensities by occupational skill
percentile are plotted using a locally weighted smoothing regression with bandwidth 0.5 (i.e., one-half of
one percentile). Details on the processing and matching of DOT task measures to occupations are given in
Autor, Levy and Murnane (2003). The abstract task category we use in Figure 10 is the arithmetic average
of ALM’s ‘non-routine cognitive/analytic’ and ‘non-routine cognitive/interactive’ category and, similarly,

38

our routine task category is the average of ALM’s ‘routine manual’ and ‘routine cognitive’ categories. Our
manual category is equivalent to ALM’s ‘non-routine manual’ category.
32

Autor, Katz and Kearney (2006) present a similar analysis using Census data for changes in occupational

employment and CPS May/ORG data for changes in wage levels by earnings percentile. In the present
analysis, we use exclusively Census data covering the same time periods.
33

We employ a consistent set of occupation codes for Census years 1980, 1990 and 2000 developed by

Meyers and Osborne (2005). We use a locally weighted smoothing regression (bandwidth 0.8 with 100
observations) to fit the relationship between decadal growth in occupational employment share and
occupations’ initial skill percentile in the 1980 skill distribution.
34

In contrast to Figure 11, we use raw changes in employment shares by occupational wage percentile as

the dependent variable rather than smoothed changes. If we were to instead use smoothed changes, this
would not affect the point estimates by much but would substantially increase the precision of the estimates.
35

Notably, this pattern appears inconsistent with the hypothesis that a declining minimum wage played a

leading role in the expansion of lower-tail inequality in the 1980s. A decline in a binding wage floor should
have lead to a (modest) rise in low-wage employment rather than a sharp contraction.

39

Table 1. Changes in Real, Composition-Adjusted Log Weekly wages for FullTime, Full-Year Workers, 1963 - 2005.
(100 x Change in Mean Log Real Weekly Wages)
19631971

19711979

19791987

19871995

19952005

19632005

All

19.5

0.6

-0.8

-4.8

7.6

22.2

Sex
Men
Women

21.1
17.3

0.1
1.4

-4.9
4.9

-7.8
-0.7

6.7
9.0

15.3
31.8

Education (years of schooling)
0-11
17.0
12
17.6
13-15
18.6
16+
25.4
16-17
22.9
18+
31.3

1.8
3.2
0.6
-4.2
-4.9
-2.6

-8.4
-3.2
1.2
6.8
5.6
9.5

-10.3
-6.6
-5.3
2.8
1.0
6.8

2.5
5.8
9.5
12.5
11.9
14.0

2.6
16.8
24.6
43.3
36.5
59.0

Experience (Males)
5 years
25-35 years

-3.6
3.4

-8.5
-1.6

-7.6
-8.1

9.0
3.8

9.3
19.2

0.7
6.3

-16.1
-2.5

-10.3
-7.6

7.1
0.3

0.7
13.6

-11.0
1.7

9.3
2.6

-1.9
-2.2

10.0
13.8

29.5
50.9

20.0
21.6

Education and Experience (Males)
Education 12
Experience 5
19.4
Experience 25 - 35
17.0
Education 16+
Experience 5
Experience 25 - 35

23.1
35.0

Tabulated numbers are changes in the (composition-adjusted) mean log wage for each
group, using data on full-time, full-year workers ages 16 to 64 from the March CPS
covering earnings in calendar years 1963 to 2005. The data are sorted into sexeducation-experience groups of 2 sexes, 5 education categories (high school dropout,
high school graduate, some college, college graduate, and post-college), and 4
potential experience categories (0-9, 10-19, 20-29, and 30-39 years). Log weekly
wages of full-time, full-year workers are regressed in each year separately by sex on
dummy variables for 4 education categories, a quartic in experience, 3 region
dummies, black and other race dummies, and interactions of the experience quartic
with 3 broad education categories (high school graduate, some college, and college
plus). The (composition-adjusted) mean log wage for each of the 40 groups in a given
year is the predicted log wage from these regressions evaluated for whites, living in the
mean geographic region, at the relevant experience level (5, 15, 25 or 35 years
depending on the experience group). Mean log wages for broader groups in each year
represent weighted averages of the relevant (composition-adjusted) cell means using a
fixed set of weights, equal to the mean share of total hours worked by each group over
1963 - 2005. All earnings numbers are deflated by the chain-weighted (implicit) price
deflator for personal consumption expenditures. Earnings of less than $67/week in
1982$ ($112/week in 2000$) are dropped. Allocated earnings observations are
excluded in earnings years 1967 forward using either family earnings allocation flags
(1967 - 1974) or individual earnings allocation flags (1975 earnings year forward).

Table 2. Regression Models for the College/High School Log Wage Gap, 1963 - 2005
(1)
1963 1987
CLG/HS relative -0.636
supply
(0.130)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

1963- 2005
-0.411 -0.619 -0.599 -0.609 -0.728 -0.403
(0.046) (0.066) (0.112) (0.102) (0.155) (0.067)

Log real
minimum wage

-0.049 -0.117 -0.144
(0.051) (0.047) (0.065)

Male prime-age
unemp. rate

0.004 -0.001 -0.018
(0.004) (0.004) (0.003)

Time

0.026
(0.005)

0.018 0.026 0.028 0.021 0.028 0.017 0.006
(0.001) (0.002) (0.006) (0.006) (0.007) (0.002) (0.001)

Time2 / 100

-0.011 0.030 0.017
(0.006) (0.015) (0.017)

Time3 / 1000

-0.006 -0.005
(0.002) (0.002)

Time x Post1992
Constant
Observations

-0.008
(0.002)
-0.159
(0.119)
25

0.043 -0.146 -0.143 -0.124 -0.160 0.266 0.689
(0.037) (0.057) (0.108) (0.098) (0.191) (0.112) (0.120)
43

43

43

43

43

43

43

R-squared
0.563
0.934 0.953 0.940 0.952 0.955 0.944 0.891
Standard errors in parentheses. Each column presents an OLS regression of the fixedweighted college high school wage differential on the indicated variables. The U.S.
federal minimum wage is deflated by the Personal Consumption Expenditure Deflator.
Source for labor supply and earnings measures is the March CPS, earnings years
1963-2005.

Table 3. Regression Models for the College/High School Log Wage Gap by Potential
Experience Group, 1963-2005, Males and Females Pooled.
Potential Experience Groups
All Experience Groups

0-9 yrs

10-19 yrs 20-29 yrs 30-39 yrs

Own Supply Minus
Aggregate Supply

-0.282
(0.027)

-0.281
(0.027)

-0.169
(0.130)

-0.325
(0.084)

0.101
(0.084)

0.002
(0.119)

Aggregate Supply

-0.600
(0.087)

-0.705
(0.131)

-0.855
(0.262)

-0.474
(0.182)

-0.398
(0.224)

-0.544
(0.239)

Log Real Minimum
Wage

-0.074
(0.037)

-0.340
(0.076)

-0.145
(0.049)

0.098
(0.054)

0.028
(0.067)

Prime Age Male
Unemployment

0.004
(0.003)

0.005
(0.007)

0.002
(0.004)

0.003
(0.005)

0.000
(0.006)

Time

0.027
(0.004)

0.031
(0.006)

0.040
(0.012)

0.015
(0.009)

0.016
(0.011)

0.027
(0.011)

Time2 / 100

-0.009
(0.005)

-0.012
(0.006)

-0.025
(0.012)

0.010
(0.009)

0.000
(0.010)

-0.021
(0.012)

Constant

-0.046
(0.079)

-0.013
(0.151)

0.268
(0.300)

0.359
(0.223)

-0.032
(0.256)

-0.065
(0.275)

172

172

43

43

43

43

N

R-squared
0.863
0.868
0.926
0.969
0.898
0.663
Standard errors in parentheses. Each column presents an OLS regression of the fixedweighted college/high school wage differential on the indicated variables. The
college/high school wage premium is calculated at the mid-point of each potential
experience group. Real minimum wage is deflated by the Personal Consumption
Expenditure Deflator. Columns 1 and 2 also include dummy variables for the 4 potential
experience groups used in the table.

Table 4. 100 x Observed and Composition-Constant Changes in Overall and
Residual Hourly Inequality Measures (May/ORG CPS 1973, 1989 and 2005)
Residual Inequality
1973198919731989
2005
2005

Overall Inequality
1973198919731989
2005
2005

A. Δ 90/50
Observed
1973 X's
1989 X's
2005 X's

4.4
4.0
3.6
2.8

4.0
2.8
2.6
2.9

Males
8.4
6.8
6.2
5.7

10.2
11.2
8.8
7.9

14.2
9.2
13.5
13.0

24.4
20.4
22.3
20.9

Observed
1973 X's
1989 X's
2005 X's

8.2
6.8
7.6
8.0

4.8
-0.9
1.9
4.0

Females
12.9
5.9
9.5
12.0

11.3
11.8
13.2
10.7

9.8
9.9
10.5
10.1

21.1
21.7
23.7
20.8

B. Δ 50/10
Observed
1973 X's
1989 X's
2005 X's

5.7
3.9
6.3
4.9

-1.3
-7.1
-4.0
-3.5

Males
4.4
-3.2
2.3
1.4

8.1
8.7
5.2
15.7

2.1
-12.6
-6.4
-8.4

10.2
-3.9
-1.2
7.3

Observed
1973 X's
1989 X's
2005 X's

8.8
4.4
5.7
6.2

0.4
-4.5
-3.9
-2.5

Females
9.2
-0.1
1.8
3.7

14.4
4.9
8.5
8.3

2.8
-8.4
-7.9
-0.1

17.3
-3.5
0.6
8.2

2.8
-4.3
-1.5
-0.7

C. Δ 90/10
Males
12.8
3.6
6.5
7.0

18.3
19.9
13.7
23.4

16.4
-3.4
7.0
4.6

34.6
16.5
20.7
28.0

Observed
1973 X's
1989 X's
2005 X's

10.1
7.9
8.0
7.7

Females
Observed
16.9
5.2
22.1
25.7
12.7
38.4
1973 X's
11.2
-5.4
5.8
16.7
1.5
18.2
1989 X's
13.3
-2.0
11.3
21.7
2.6
24.3
2005 X's
14.2
1.4
15.6
18.9
9.9
28.8
Tabulated statistics present observed and composition-constant residual and
overall wage inequality from May/ORG CPS hourly earnings series for 1973 2005. Residual inequality statistics are obtained from a regression of log
hourly wages on a full set of age dummies, dummies for nine discreet
schooling categories, and a full set of interactions among the schooling
dummies and a quartic in age. All models are estimated separately by
gender. Compositional adjustments are made using the DiNardo-FortinLemieux (1996) kernel reweighting approach. See text for further details.

1
.9
0

.1

Log Earnings Change
.2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8
0

10

20

30

40
50
60
70
Weekly Wage Percentile
Males

80

90

100

Females

Figure 1. Change in Log Real Weekly Wage by Percentile, Full Time Workers,
1963 - 2005.
Source: March CPS data for earnings years 1963-2005, full-time, full-year
workers ages 16 to 64 with 0 to 39 years of potential experience whose class of
work in their longest job was private or government wage/salary employment.
Full-time, full-year workers are those who usually worked 35-plus hours per week
and worked 40-plus weeks in the previous year. Weekly earnings are calculated
as the logarithm of annual earnings divided by weeks worked. Calculations are
weighted by CPS sampling weights and are deflated using the Personal
Consumption Expenditure (PCE) deflator. Earnings of below $67/week in 1982$
($112/week in 2000$) are dropped. Allocated earnings observations are excluded
in earnings years 1967 forward using either family earnings allocation flags (1967
- 1974) or individual earnings allocation flags (1975 earnings year forward).

A. March CPS Full-Time Weekly Earnings, 1963 - 2005
1.7

0.70
1973

1979

1992

1.6

0.65

1.5

Log Earnings Ratio

Overall 90/10
0.55

1.3
College/HS Gap

1.2

0.50

1.1

Residual 90/10

Log College/HS Wage Gap

0.60
1.4

0.45

1.0
0.40

0.9

0.8
1963

0.35
1969

1975

1981

1987

1993

1999

B. MORG CPS Hourly Earnings, 1973 - 2005

1.7

0.70

1992

1979
1.6

2005

Overall 90/10

0.65

1.5

Log Earnings Ratio

0.55

1.3

1.2

0.50
College/HS Gap

1.1

Log College/HS Wage Gap

0.60
1.4

0.45
1.0
Residual 90/10
0.40

0.9

0.8
1973

0.35
1977

1981

1985

1989

1993

1997

2001

2005

Figure 2. Three Measures of Wage Inequality: College/High School Premium,
Male 90/10 Overall Inequality and Male 90/10 Residual Inequality

Figure 2 note:
Sample for Panel A is full-time, full-year workers from March CPS for earnings years
1963-2005. Sampe for Panel B is CPS May/ORG all hourly workers for earnings years
1973-2005. Processing of March CPS data A is detailed in Table 1 and Figure 1 notes. For
Panel B, samples are drawn from May CPS for 1973 to 1978 and CPS Merged Outgoing
Rotation Group for years 1979 to 2005. Sample is limited to wage/salary workers ages
16 to 64 with 0 to 39 years of potential experience in current employment. Calculations
are weighted by CPS sample weight times hours worked in the prior week. Hourly wages
are equal to the logarithm of reported hourly earnings for those paid by the hour and the
logarithm of usual weekly earnings divided by hours worked last week for non-hourly
workers. Topcoded earnings observations are multiplied by 1.5. Hourly earners of below
$1.675/hour in 1982 dollars ($2.80/hour in 2000$) are dropped, as are hourly wages
exceeding 1/35th the topcoded value of weekly earnings. All earnings are deflated by the
chain-weighted (implicit) price deflator for personal consumption expenditures (PCE).
Allocated earnings observations are excluded in all years, except where allocation flags
are unavailable (January 1994 to August 1995). Where possible, we identify and drop
non-flagged allocated observations by using the unedited earnings values provided in the
source data.
The college/high school wage premium series depicts a fix-weighted ratio of college to
high-school wages for a composition-constant set of sex-education-experience groups (2
sexes, 5 education categories, and 4 potential experience categories). See Table 1 notes
and Data Appendix for further details.
The overall 90/10 inequality series depicts the difference between the 90th and 10th
percentile of log weekly (March) or log hourly (May/ORG) male earnings. The residual
90/10 series depicts the 90-10 difference in wage residuals from a regression of the log
wage measure on a full set of age dummies, dummies for nine discreet schooling
categories, and a full set of interactions among the schooling dummies and a quartic in
age.

Overall Female 90/50 Wage Inequality

.45

.45

.5

.5

Log 90/50 wage ratio
.55 .6 .65 .7 .75

Log 90/50 wage ratio
.55 .6 .65 .7 .75

.8

.8

.85

.85

Overall Male 90/50 Wage Inequality

1963

1969

1975

1981

1987

CPS March Full-Time

1993

1999

2005

1963

CPS May/ORG Hourly

1969

1975

1981

1987

CPS March Full-Time

1999

2005

CPS May/ORG Hourly

Overall Female 50/10 Wage Inequality
Log 50/10 wage ratio
.4 .45 .5 .55 .6 .65 .7 .75 .8 .85

Log 50/10 wage ratio
.4 .45 .5 .55 .6 .65 .7 .75 .8 .85

Overall Male 50/10 Wage Inequality

1993

1963

1969

1975

1981

CPS March Full-Time

1987

1993

1999

CPS May/ORG Hourly

2005

1963

1969

1975

1981

CPS March Full-Time

1987

1993

1999

2005

CPS May/ORG Hourly

Figure 3. 90/50 and 50/10 Full-Time Weekly and Hourly Wage Inequality in March (Full-Time) and May/ORG (Hourly)
CPS Series, 1963 - 2005. See notes to Figure 2 for details on samples and data processing.

-.15

-.1

-.05

Log Points
0
.05

.1

.15

A. Detrended College-High School Wage Differential and Relative Supply, 1963-2005

1963

1969

1975

1981

1987

Detrended Wage Differential

1993

1999

2005

Detrended Relative Supply

.35

.45

Log Wage Gap
.55
.65

.75

B. Katz-Murphy Prediction Model for the College-High School Wage Gap

1963

1969

1975

Observed CLG/HS Gap

1981

1987

1993

1999

2005

Katz-Murphy Predicted Wage Gap: 1963-1987 Trend

Figure 4. College/High School Relative Supply and Wage Differential,
1963 - 2005 (March CPS) — Panel A. Detrended Measures of Supply and Wage
Differentials — Panel B. Katz-Murphy Model for College/HS Wage Differential:
Observed and Predicted Values Using 1963 - 1987 Model Estimation.

Figure 4 note:
Composition-adjusted college-high school relative wages are calculated using March FT/FY earners
data, sorted into sex-education-experience groups of 2 sexes, 5 education categories and 4 potential
experience categories. Mean log wages for broader groups in each year represent weighted
averages of the relevant (composition-adjusted) cell means using a fixed set of weights that are equal
to the mean share of total hours worked by each group over 1963 to 2005 from the March CPS. See
Table 1 notes for additional details.
The college/high-school log relative supply index is the natural logarithm of the ratio of collegeequivalent to non-college equivalent labor supply in efficiency units in each year. See the Data
Appendix for details.
The detrended supply and wage series in panel A are the residuals from seperate OLS regressions of
the relative supply and relative wage measures on a constant and a linear time trend. The KatzMurphy predicted wage gap series in panel B is the fitted values from an OLS regression of the
college/high school wage gap for years 1963 through 1987 on a constant and the college/high school
relative supply measure. Plotted 1988 to 2005 values are out-of-sample predictions.

Changes in Log Real Wage Levels (1963 = 0)
-.1
0
.1
.2
.3
.4
.5
.6

A. Males

1963

1969

1975

1981

1987

Changes in Log Real Wage Levels (1963 = 0)
-.1
0
.1
.2
.3
.4
.5
.6

HS Dropout
Some College
Post-College

1993

1999

2005

HS Grads
Exactly College

B. Females

1963

1969

1975

1981

HS Dropout
Some College
Post-College

1987

1993

1999

HS Grads
Exactly College

Figure 5. Trends in Composition-Adjusted Real Log Weekly Full-Time Wages by
Gender and Education, 1963 - 2005 (March CPS).
See notes to Table 1 for details on samples and data processing.

2005

.3

.4

Log Wage Gap
.5

.6

.7

A. College-High School Wage Gap by Potential Experience Group

1963

1969

1975

1981

1987

Experience 0-9

1993

1999

2005

Experience 20-29

-1

Log Relative Supply Index
-.5
0

.5

B. College-High School Relative Supply by Potential Experience Group

1963

1969

1975

1981

Experience 0-9

1987

1993

1999

2005

Experience 20-29

Figure 6. Composition Adjusted Log Relative College/High Wage and Supply
by Potential Experience and Age Groups, 1963 - 2003 (March CPS).
See notes to Figure 4 for details on construction of supply and wage series.

Log 90/10 Hourly Earnings Inequality and Real Minimum Wage

.1

1.4
Log Points
1.3 1.35

-.1

1.2

-.15

1.15

1.25

-.05

Log Points
0
.05

1.45

.15

1.5

.2

Log Changes in the Real Federal Minimum Wage 1973-2005 (1973=0)

90/10 Gap = 2.60 (0.14) - 0.74 (0.09) x MinWage, R-Squared=0.71

-.2

1973
1973

1977

1981

1985

1989

1993

1997

2001

1977

1981

1985

1989

90-10 Wage Gap

2005

1997

2001

2005

E(90-10 Gap | Min Wage)

Log 90/50 Hourly Earnings Inequality and Real Minimum Wage

.55

.55

.6

.6

.65

Log Points
.65

Log Points
.7

.75

.7

.8

.75

Log 50/10 Hourly Earnings Inequality and Real Minimum Wage

1993

50/10 Gap = 1.09 (0.07) - 0.26 (0.04) x MinWage, R-Squared=0.58

1973

1977

1981

1985

50-10 Wage Gap

1989

1993

1997

E(50-10 Gap | Min Wage)

2001

2005

90/50 Gap = 1.51 (0.14) - 0.48 (0.08) x MinWage, R-Squared=0.52

1973

1977

1981

1985

90-50 Wage Gap

1989

1993

1997

2001

2005

E(90-50 Gap | Min Wage)

Figure 7. Log Real Federal Minimum Wage and Log 90/10, 90/50 and 50/10 Hourly Wage Differentials, 1973-2005 (May/ORG CPS).
Note: Nominal minimum wages are deflated to real log values using the PCE deflator. In the first panel, the real log minimum wage measure is normalized to zero
in 1973. Subsequent panels depict the observed wage gap (90/10, 90/50, and 50/10) for all hourly workers from the May/ORG CPS samples in each year plotted
alongside the predicted values from separate OLS regressions of the relevant wage gap on a constant and the contemporaneous real log minimum wage.

Female 90/50
.55
.5

log 90/50 ratio

.4

.45

.5
.45
.4

log 90/50 ratio

.55

Male 90/50

1973

1977

1981

1985

1989

1973 f(e | skills)
2005 f(e | skills)

1993

1997

2001

2005

1973

1977

1989 f(e | skills)
Actual Residual

1981

1989

1993

1973 f(e | skills)
2005 f(e | skills)

1997

2001

2005

1989 f(e | skills)
Actual Residual

Female 50/10

.5
.45
.35

.35

.4

.4

.45

.5

log 50/10 ratio

.55

.55

.6

.6

Male 50/10

log 50/10 ratio

1985

1973

1977

1981

1985

1989

1973 f(e | skills)
2005 f(e | skills)

1993

1997

2001

1989 f(e | skills)
Actual Residual

2005

1973

1977

1981

1985

1989

1973 f(e | skills)
2005 f(e | skills)

1993

1997

2001

2005

1989 f(e | skills)
Actual Residual

Figure 8. Actual and Counterfactual 90/50 and 50/10 Residual Hourly Wage Inequality 1973-2005 (CPS May/ORG)

Figure 8 note:
Data source: CPS May/ORG samples for all hourly workers are detailed in notes to
Figure 2. Series labeled "observed residual" presents the 90-50 or 50-10 difference in
wage residuals from an OLS regression (weighted by CPS sampling weight times hours
worked in the prior week) of log hourly earnings on a full set of age dummies, dummies
for nine discreet schooling categories, and a full set of interactions among the schooling
dummies and a quartic in age. All models are estimated separately by gender.
Series labeled "YEAR f(e | skills)" present 90-50 or 50-10 difference in wage residuals
for a reweighted residual wage distribution from year "YEAR," where weights are
proportional to ratio of the density of skills (defined by age, schooling and their
interactions) in the year depicted on the x-axis to the corresponding density of skills in
year "YEAR." Thus, the series labeled "1973 f(e|skills)" plots the 90-50 or 50-10
difference in wage residuals using the 1973 density of wage residuals reweighted using
the skills distributions of years 1973 through 2005. See text for additional details of
reweighting procedure.

Female 90/50

.55

.55

.6

Log 90/50 wage ratio
.65
.7
.75
.8

Log 90/50 wage ratio
.6 .65 .7 .75 .8

.85

.85

Male 90/50

1973

1977

1981

1985
1989
1993
Year of Skill Distribution

1973 f(w | skills)
2005 f(w | skills)

1997

2001

2005

1973

1977

1989 f(w | skills)
Observed 90/50

1981

1985
1989
1993
Year of Skill Distribution

1973 f(w | skills)
2005 f(w | skills)

2001

2005

1989 f(w | skills)
Observed 90/50

Female 50/10

.4 .45

Log 50/10 wage ratio
.5 .55 .6 .65 .7

.75

Log 50/10 wage ratio
.4 .45 .5 .55 .6 .65 .7 .75 .8

.8

Male 50/10

1997

1973

1977

1981

1985
1989
1993
Year of Skill Distribution

1973 f(w | skills)
2005 f(w | skills)

1997

2001

1989 f(w | skills)
Observed 50/10

2005

1973

1977

1981

1985
1989
1993
Year of Skill Distribution

1973 f(w | skills)
2005 f(w | skills)

1997

2001

2005

1989 f(w | skills)
Observed 50/10

Figure 9. Actual and Counterfactual 90/50 and 50/10 Overall Hourly Wage Inequality 1973-2005 (CPS May/ORG).
Samples and data processing are identical to Figure 8 except that observed hourly wages are used in place of hourly
wage residuals.

DOT Task Input: Pctile of 1960 Task Distn
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90

Task Input by Occupational Skill Percentile 1980

0

20

40

60

80

100

Skill Percentile
Abstract tasks
Manual tasks

Routine tasks

Figure 10. Task Intensity by Occupational Skill Percentile, Defined as
Occupational Rank (in Percentiles) in Mean Years of Schooling.
Note: Task intensity by occupational percentile is plotted using a locally
weighted smoothing regression with bandwidth 0.5 (i.e., one-half of one
percentile). Occupational skill is measured as the employment-weighted
percentile rank of an occupation's mean years of education in the Census
IPUMS 1980 5-percent extract. Mean education in each occupation is calculated
using workers' hours of annual labor supply times the Census sampling weight.
Data on task intensity by occupation is from the Dictionary of Occupational
Titles and compiled by Autor, Levy and Murnane (2003). Task intensities are
measured as percentiles of the baseline distribution of job tasks in 1960. Thus,
an occupation with the median intensity of routine task input in 1960 would
receive a score of 50.

-.2

100 x Change in Employment Share
-.15 -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1 .15

.2

Smoothed Changes in Employment by Occupational Skill, 1980-1990 and 1990-2000

0

20

40

Skill Percentile

60

1980-1990

80

100

1990-2000

-.05

0

Log real earnings change
.05
.1
.15

.2

Change in Real Hourly Earnings by Wage Percentile 1980-1990 and 1990-2000

2

10

18

26

34

42

50

58

66

74

82

90

98

Wage Percentile
1980 - 1990

1990 - 2000

Figure 11.
(A) Change in Occupation's Employment Shares 1980-1990 and 1990-2000
by Occupational Skill Percentile in 1980.
(B) Changes in Real Hourly Earnings by Wage Percentile, 1980-1990 and
1990-2000 (Census 1980, 1990 and 2000, All Hourly Workers)

Figure 11 note:
Data source: Census IPUMS 5 percent extracts for years 1980, 1990 and 2000. Samples
includes respondents ages 18 through 64 who were currently employed in the civilian
labor force at the time of the survey, were not in unpaid family work, and who did not
live in correctional institutions, mental institutions or other non-institutional group
quarters. The labor supply measure is the equal to the Census sample weight times the
product of weeks worked and usual weekly hours in the prior year. For respondents with
missing hours, we impute labor supply using the mean of workers of the same
occupation and education group (high school dropout, high school graduate, some
college, college graduate). Where the occupation-education cell is empty, we assign the
mean for the education group.
Panel A plots log changes in employment shares by 1980 occupational skill percentile
rank using a locally weighted smoothing regression (bandwidth 0.8 with 100
observations), where skill percentiles are as defined in the notes to Figure 10. Consistent
occupation codes for Census years 1980, 1990 and 2000 are from Meyer and Osborne
(2005).
Panel B plots decadal changes in real log wages by wage percentile. Wage calculations
exclude the self-employed and those with missing hours or weeks worked. Hourly wages
are calculated as total wage and salary income divided by hours of labor supply. The
bottom 1 percent of hourly earners are dropped. Hourly wages of top-coded earners are
multiplied by 1.5. We limit the maximum hourly wage (via truncation) to the 1.5 times
the maximum annual income amount divided by 1,750 (35 hours per week for 50 hours
per year). All wage calculations are weighted by the product of Census person weights
and calculated or imputed annual labor supply. Earnings are deflated using the PCE
deflator.

