                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           VENTURE CAPITAL CONTRACTING AND
                             SYNDICATION: AN EXPERIMENT IN
                           COMPUTATIONAL CORPORATE FINANCE

                                           Zsuzsanna Fluck
                                           Kedran Garrison
                                           Stewart C. Myers

                                         Working Paper 11624
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11624


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2005




We are grateful for helpful comments from Ulf Axelson, Amar Bhide, Francesca Cornelli, Paul Gompers,
Steve Kaplan, Josh Lerner, Tom Noe, David Scharfstein, Per Str¡§omberg, Michael Weisbach and
participants at presentations at LSE, MIT, Michigan State University, the University of Minnesota, the
Conference on Venture Capital and Private Equity (Stockholm), the Financial Intermediation Research
Society Conference (Capri) and the American Finance Association meetings (Philadelphia). The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

©2005 by Zsuzsanna Fluck, Kedran Garrison and Stewart C. Myers. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Venture Capital Contracting and Syndication: An Experiment in Computational Corporate
Finance
Zsuzsanna Fluck, Kedran Garrison and Stewart C. Myers
NBER Working Paper No. 11624
September 2005
JEL No. G24, G32

                                           ABSTRACT




This paper develops a model to study how entrepreneurs and venture-capital investors deal with

moral hazard, effort provision, asymmetric information and hold-up problems. We explore several

financing scenarios, including first-best, monopolistic, syndicated and fully competitive financing.

We solve numerically for the entrepreneur's effort, the terms of financing, the venture capitalist's

investment decision and NPV. We find significant value losses due to holdup problems and under-

provision of effort that can outweigh the benefits of staged financing and investment. We show that

a commitment to later-stage syndicate financing increases effort and NPV and preserves the option

value of staged investment. This commitment benefits initial venture capital investors as well as the

entrepreneur.



Zsuzsanna Fluck                                       Stewart C. Myers
Michigan State University                             Sloan School of Management
Department of Finance                                 MIT, Room E52-451
Graduate School of Management                         50 Memorial Drive
315 Eppley Center                                     Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
East Lansing, MI 48824-1122                           and NBER
fluck@bus.msu.edu                                     scmyers@mit.edu

Kedran Garrison
MIT - EFA
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139-4307
garrisk@mit.edu
1       Introduction
This paper develops a model to study how entrepreneurs and venture-capital investors deal
with eﬀort provision, moral hazard, asymmetric information and hold-up problems when
contracts are incomplete and investment proceeds in stages. How much value is lost in the
entrepreneur-venture capital relationship relative to first-best value? How does the value
lost depend on risk and the time-pattern of required investment? What determines whether
a positive-NPV project can in fact be financed? What are the advantages and disadvantages
of staged financing? Are there significant eﬃciency gains from syndication of later-stage
financing?
    We argue that these and related questions should not be analyzed one by one, but
jointly in a common setting. Some features of venture-capital contracting may not solve a
particular problem, but instead trade oﬀ one problem against another. For example, a study
that focused just on the option-like advantages of staged investment could easily miss the
costs of staging, particularly the negative feedback to eﬀort if venture-capital investors can
hold up the entrepreneur by dictating financing terms in later stages. (We find many cases
where hold-up costs outweigh the advantages of staged financing and full upfront financing
actually increases value.)
    A joint analysis of the problems inherent in the entrepreneur-venture capital relationship
does not lead to closed-form solutions or simple theorems. Therefore we embark on an
experiment in computational corporate finance, which is the formal study of financing and
investment problems that do not have closed-form solutions.1 We believe the time is ripe
for a computational model of venture capital. Venture-capital institutions, contracts and
procedures were well documented more than a decade ago. It was clear then that the agency
and information problems encountered in ordinary financing decisions are especially acute
in venture capital. The successes of venture capital have stimulated theoretical work on how
these problems are mitigated. But most theoretical papers have focused on only one problem
or tradeoﬀ and run the risk of missing the bigger picture.
   Of course the breadth and richness of a computational model do not come free, and
numerical results are never absolutely conclusive. One can never rule out the possibility
that results would have been diﬀerent with diﬀerent inputs or modeling choices. But our
model, though simplified, follows actual practice in venture capital. We have verified our
main results over a wide range of inputs. We believe our results help to clarify why venture-
capital investment works when it works and why it sometimes fails.
    The structure of venture-capital financing is known from many sources, including Sahlman
(1990), Lerner (1994), Fenn, Liang and Prowse (1995), Gompers (1995), Gompers and Lerner
(1996, 2002), Hellman and Puri (2000, 2002) and Kaplan and Strömberg (2003). We will
preview our model and results after a brief review of the features of venture-capital con-
tracting that are most important to our paper. The review includes comments on related
    1
    Computational models are frequently used to understand the value of real and financial options, but
their use on the financing side of corporate balance sheets is an infant industry. The short list of com-
putational papers on financing includes Mello and Parsons (1992), Leland (1994, 1998), Boyd and Smith
(1994), Parrino and Weisbach (1999), Robe (1999, 2001), Parrino, Poteshman and Weisbach (2002) and Ju,
Parrino, Poteshman and Weisbach (2004). These papers explore the tradeoﬀ theory of capital structure and
the risk-shifting incentives created by debt financing.


                                                   1
theoretical work.

1.1     Venture capital contracting
Venture capital brings together one or more entrepreneurs, who contribute ideas, plans, hu-
man capital and eﬀort, and private investors, who contribute experience, expertise, contacts
and most of the money. For simplicity, we will refer to one entrepreneur and to one initial
venture-capital investor. Their joint participation creates a two-way incentive problem. The
investor has to share financial payoﬀs with the entrepreneur in order to secure her commit-
ment and eﬀort. Thus the investor may not be willing to participate even if the startup has
positive overall NPV. Second, the entrepreneur will underinvest in eﬀort if she has to share
her marginal value added with the investor.2

1.1.1    Sweat equity
The entrepreneur invests even when she puts up none of the financing. She contributes her
eﬀort and absorbs part of the firm’s business risk. The diﬀerence between her salary and
her outside compensation is an opportunity cost. Specialization of her human capital to the
new firm also creates an opportunity cost if the firm fails.3
    The entrepreneur receives shares in exchange for these investments. These shares may not
vest immediately, and they are illiquid unless and until the firm is sold or goes public.4 The
venture capitalist frequently requires the entrepreneur to sign a contract that precludes work
for a competitor. The entrepreneur therefore has a strong incentive to stick with the firm
and make it successful. In our model, the entrepreneur contributes no financial investment
and is willing to continue so long as the present value of her shares exceeds her costs of eﬀort.

1.1.2    Staged investment and financing
A startup is a compound call option. Financing and investment are made in stages. The
stages match up with business milestones, such as a demonstration of technology or a suc-
cessful product introduction.
    We assume that the entrepreneur and venture capitalist cannot write a complete contract
to specify the terms of future financing. The terms are determined by bargaining as financing
is raised stage by stage. If additional investors join in later stages, the bargain has to be
acceptable to them as well as the entrepreneur and initial venture capitalist.
   The option value added by staging is obvious, but staging may also serve other purposes.
In Bergemann and Hege (1998) and Nöldeke and Schmidt (1998), staging allows the venture
capitalist to learn the startup’s value and thereby induce the entrepreneur’s eﬀort. In Neher
   2
     This is an extreme version of Myers’s (1977) underinvestment problem.
   3
     This opportunity cost could perhaps be reduced if new ventures are developed as divisions of larger
firms. See Gromb and Scharfstein (2003) and Gompers, Lerner and Scharfstein (2003).
   4
     Employees typically receive options that vest gradually as employment continues and the startup sur-
vives. But our entrepreneur is a founder, not an employee hired later. Founders typically receive shares, not
options. The entrepreneur’s shares are fully vested, but additional shares may be granted later. See Kaplan
and Strömberg (2003).




                                                     2
(1996) and Landier (2002), the venture capitalist’s ability to deny financing at each stage
forces the entrepreneur to exert higher eﬀort and prevents her from diverting cash flows.
    Venture capital investors usually buy convertible preferred shares. If the firm is shut
down, the investors have a senior claim on any remaining assets. The shares convert to
common stock if the firm is sold or taken public.5 Ordinary debt financing is rarely used,
although we will consider whether debt could serve as an alternative source of financing.

1.1.3    Control
The venture capitalist does not have complete control of the new firm. For example, Kaplan
and Strömberg (2003, Table 2) find that venture-capital investors rarely control a majority of
the board of directors. But Kaplan and Strömberg also find that venture capitalists’ control
increases when the firm’s progress is unsatisfactory.
    Staged financing can give incumbent venture capitalists eﬀective control over access to
financing. Their refusal to participate in the second or later rounds of financing would send a
strong negative signal to other potential investors and probably deter them from investing.6
In practice, the incumbents’ decision not to participate is usually a decision to shut down
the firm.
   Giving venture capitalists eﬀective veto power over later-stage investment is in some
respects eﬃcient. The decision to shut down or continue cannot be left to the entrepreneur,
who is usually happy to continue investing someone else’s money as long as there is any
chance of success. The venture capitalist is better equipped to decide whether to exercise
each stage of the compound call option.
    Thus staged financing has a double benefit, at least for the venture capitalist. It can block
the entrepreneur’s incentive to continue and it allows the venture capitalist to exploit the
startup’s real-option value. But it is also costly if the venture capitalist can use the threat of
shutdown to hold up the entrepreneur and dilute her stake. Anticipated dilution feeds back
into the entrepreneur’s incentives and eﬀort and reduces overall value. This is the holdup
problem of staged financing. For a wide range of parameter values we find that the holdup
problem is so severe that the venture capitalist is better oﬀ abandoning staged financing and
providing all financing upfront. When later financing stages are syndicated on competitive
terms, however, staged financing is always more eﬃcient than full upfront financing. We will
also show that the holdup problem cannot be solved simply by substituting debt for equity
financing. When contracts are incomplete, stage by stage bargaining enables the incumbent
venture capitalist to extract surplus regardless of the form of financing.
   Most prior theory assumes that venture-capital investors retain residual rights of control.
The venture capitalist’s rights to decide on investment (Aghion and Bolton (1992)) and to
replace the entrepreneur (Fluck (1998), Hellman (1998), Myers (2000), Fluck (2001)) play
an important role in enforcing financial contracts between investors and entrepreneurs. The
   5
     The use of convertible securities in venture capital is analyzed in Green (1984), Berglof (1994), Kalay
and Zender (1997), Repullo and Suarez (1998), Cornelli and Yosha (2003), Schmidt (2003) and Winton and
Yerramilli (2003).
   6
     The role of the monopolist financier was investigated in Rajan (1992), Petersen and Rajan (1994) and
Cestone wand White (2004).



                                                     3
entrepreneur’s option to reacquire control and realize value in an initial public oﬀering is
a key incentive in Black and Gilson (1998), Myers (2000) and Aghion, Bolton and Tirole
(2001).

1.1.4   Syndication of later-stage financing
Later-stage financing usually comes from a syndicate of incumbent and new venture-capital
investors. We show how a commitment to syndicate can alleviate the holdup problem by
assuring the entrepreneur more favorable terms in later rounds of financing. This encourages
eﬀort in all periods, which increases overall value.
    Syndication of venture capital investments has been explained in several other ways.
It is one way to gather additional information about a startup’s value — see, for example,
Gompers and Lerner (2002, Ch. 9) and Sah and Stiglitz (1986). Wilson (1968) attributes
syndication to venture capitalists’ risk aversion. Syndication may also reflect tacit collusion:
early investors syndicate later rounds of financing, and the syndication partners return the
favor when they develop promising startups (Pichler and Wilhelm (2001)). In Cassamatta
and Haritchabalet (2004), venture capitalists acquire diﬀerent skills and experience and
syndication pools their expertise. We oﬀer a diﬀerent rationale: syndication can protect the
entrepreneur from ex post holdup by investors and thereby encourage eﬀort.

1.1.5   Exit
Entrepreneurs can rely on venture capitalists to cash out of successful startups. Venture
capital generally comes from limited-life partnerships, and the partners are not paid until
the startups are sold or taken public. Myers (2000) shows that venture capitalists would
cash out voluntarily in order to avoid the adverse incentives of long-term private ownership.
   Chelma, Habib and Lyngquist (2002) consider how the various provisions of venture-
capital contracts are designed to mitigate multiple agency and information problems. Their
paper focuses on exit provisions and does not consider syndication.

1.2     Preview of the model and results
We aim to capture the most important features of venture capital. For simplicity we assume
two stages of financing and investment at dates 0 and 1. If successful, the firm is sold or
taken public at date 2, and the entrepreneur and the investors cash out. The entrepreneur
and the investors are risk-neutral NPV maximizers, although the entrepreneur’s NPV is net
of the costs of her eﬀort.
    We value the startup as a real option. The underlying asset is the potential market value
of the firm, which we assume is lognormally distributed. But full realization of potential
value requires maximum eﬀort from the entrepreneur at dates 0 and 1. The entrepreneur’s
eﬀort is costly, so her optimal eﬀort is less than the maximum and depends on her expected
share of the value of the firm at date 2. The venture capitalist and the entrepreneur negotiate
ownership percentages at date 0, but these percentages change at date 1 when additional
financing is raised and invested.



                                               4
   We assume that the firm cannot start or continue without the entrepreneur. If financing
cannot be arranged on terms that satisfy her participation constraints, no investment is
made and the firm shuts down. The venture capitalist’s date-0 and date-1 participation
constraints must also be met, since he will not invest if his NPV is negative.
  The eﬃciency of venture-capital investment hinges on the nature and terms of financing.
We compare six cases.

   1. First-best. If the entrepreneur could finance the startup out of her own pocket, she
      would maximize overall value, net of the required financial investments and her costs
      of eﬀort. First-best is our main benchmark for testing the eﬃciency of other cases.
   2. Fully competitive. In this case, financing is available on competitive terms (NPV = 0)
      at both date 0 and date 1, which gives the highest possible value when the entrepreneur
      must raise capital from outside investors. We include this case as an alternative bench-
      mark to first-best.
   3. Monopoly, staged investment. Here the initial venture capitalist can dictate the terms
      of financing at dates 0 and 1 and can hold up the entrepreneur at date 1.7 The venture
      capitalist does not squeeze the last dollar from the entrepreneur’s stake, however. He
      squeezes just enough in each period to maximize the present value of his shares.
   4. Monopoly, no staging. In this case, the venture capitalist commits all necessary funds
      at date 0 and lets the entrepreneur decide whether to continue at date 1. This means
      ineﬃcient investment decisions at date 1, because the entrepreneur is usually better oﬀ
      continuing, even when the odds of success are low and overall NPV is negative. But
      eﬀort increases at both date 0 and date 1, because the venture capitalist can no longer
      control the terms of later-stage financing. This case helps clarify the tradeoﬀ between
      the real-option value of staged investment and the under-provision of eﬀort because of
      the holdup problem.
   5. Syndication. In this case a syndicate of additional investors joins the original venture
      capitalist at date 1. We assume that the syndicate financing comes on more com-
      petitive terms than in the monopoly case, for simplicity we will focus on the fully
      competitive case (NPV = 0). Syndication mitigates the holdup problem, increasing
      the entrepreneur’s eﬀort and overall NPV.
   6. Debt. Venture capitalists rarely finance startups with ordinary debt, but we neverthe-
      less consider debt financing briefly as an alternative. Debt financing eﬀectively gives
      the entrepreneur a call option on the startup’s final value at date 2.

   We assume that the initial venture capitalist and the entrepreneur are equally informed
about potential value, although potential value is not verifiable and contractible. But fi-
nancing terms in the syndication case depend on the information available to new investors.
We start by assuming complete information, but also consider asymmetric information and
explore whether the terms of the incumbent venture capitalist’s participation in date-1 fi-
nancing could reveal the incumbent’s inside information.
   7
    This would be the case if the venture capitalist decided that certain non-verifiable performance milestones
had not been met.

                                                      5
   We solve the model for each financing case over a wide range of input parameters, in-
cluding the potential value of the firm, the variance of this value, the amount and timing of
required investment and the marginal costs and payoﬀs of eﬀort. We report a representative
subset of results in Table 1 and Figures 3 through 10. Results are especially sensitive to the
marginal costs and payoﬀs of eﬀort, so we vary these parameters over very wide ranges. Our
main results include the following:

  1. We find economically significant value losses, relative to first best, even when the dollar-
     equivalent cost of eﬀort is a small fraction of required financial investment. Thus many
     startups with positive NPVs cannot be financed. Value losses decline as the marginal
     benefit of eﬀort increases or the marginal cost declines.

  2. Value losses are especially high in the monopoly case with staged investment, where
     the incumbent venture capitalist can dictate the terms of financing at date 1. For
     a wide range of parameter values, both the venture capitalist and entrepreneur are
     better oﬀ in the no-staging case with full upfront financing. That is, the costs of the
     no-staging case (ineﬃcient investment at date 1) can be less than the value loss due to
     under-provision of eﬀort in the monopoly, staged financing case.

  3. Syndicate financing at date 1 increases eﬀort and the date-0 NPVs of both the en-
     trepreneur and the initial venture capitalist. The venture capitalist is better oﬀ than
     in the monopoly case, despite taking a smaller share of the venture. Moreover, staged
     financing with syndication always produces higher overall values than the no-staging
     case. The combination of staged financing and later-stage syndication dominates the
     alternative of giving the entrepreneur all the money upfront.

  4. Syndicate financing is most eﬀective when new investors are fully informed. The incum-
     bent venture capitalist may be able to reveal his information through his participation
     in date-1 financing. However, the fixed-fraction participation rule derived by Admati
     and Pfleiderer (1994) does not achieve truthful information revelation in our model,
     because the terms of financing eﬀect the entrepreneur’s eﬀort. The fixed-fraction rule
     would lead the venture capitalist to over-report the startup’s value: the higher the
     price paid by new investors, the more the entrepreneur’s existing shares are worth, and
     the harder she works. The incumbent venture capitalist captures part of the gain from
     her extra eﬀort. A modified fixed-fraction rule works in some cases, however. With the
     modified rule, the incumbent’s fractional participation increases as the reported value
     increases.

  5. We expected venture-capital contracting to be more eﬃcient for high-variance invest-
     ments, but that is not generally true. Increasing the variance of potential value some-
     times increases value losses, relative to first best, and sometimes reduces them, de-
     pending on eﬀort parameters and the financing case assumed.

  6. Debt financing does not solve the holdup problem, because the venture capitalist can
     still squeeze the entrepreneur by demanding a high interest rate on debt issued at date
     1. Debt financing is more eﬃcient in some cases but not generally. Debt can improve
     the entrepreneur’s incentives at later financing stages, but many startups that can be
     financed with equity cannot raise financing by issuing debt. Switching from equity to

                                               6
       debt financing does add value in some cases, but not generally. In most cases, syndicate
       financing with equity rather than debt increases both overall NPV and the NPV to
       the original venture capitalist.


   We recognize that we have left out several aspects of venture capital that could influence
our results. First, we ignore risk aversion. The venture capitalist and entrepreneur are
assumed risk-neutral. This is reasonable for venture capitalists, who have access to financial
markets.8 It is less reasonable for entrepreneurs, who can’t hedge or diversify payoﬀs without
damaging incentives.9
   Second, we do not explicitly model the costs and value added of the venture capitalist’s
eﬀort. We are treating his eﬀort as a cost sunk at startup and fixed afterwards. In eﬀect, we
assume that if the venture capitalist decides to invest, he will exert appropriate eﬀort, and
that the cost of this eﬀort is rolled into the required investment.
    Third, we assume that final payoﬀs to the entrepreneur and venture-capital investors
depend only on the number of shares bargained for at dates 0 and 1. We do not explic-
itly model the more complex, contingent contracts observed in some cases by Kaplan and
Strömberg (2003),10 and we do not attempt to derive the optimal financial contracts for our
model setup. However, our results in Section 4 suggest that the use of contingent share
awards may facilitate truthful revelation of information by the initial venture capitalist to
members of a later-stage financing syndicate.
    Finally, we do not model the search and screening processes that bring the entrepreneur
and venture capitalist together in the first place. The costs and eﬀectiveness of these pro-
cesses could aﬀect the terms of financing.11 For example, if an entrepreneur’s search for alter-
native financing would be cheap and quick, the initial venture capitalist’s bargaining power is
reduced. Giving the entrepreneur the option to search for another initial investor would not
change the structure of our model, however. It would simply tighten the entrepreneur’s par-
ticipation constraint at date 0 and thereby reduce the intial venture capitalist’s bargaining
power.
    The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 sets up our model and solves
the first-best case. Section 3 covers monopoly financing with and without staging. Section
4 covers the syndication and fully competitive cases. Numerical results are summarized and
interpreted in Section 5. Section 6 briefly considers debt financing. Section 7 sums up our
conclusions and notes questions remaining open for further research.
   8
     Of course, the venture capitalist will seek an expected rate of return high enough to cover the market
rate of risk in the startup. The payoﬀs in our model can be interpreted as certainty equivalents.
   9
     Perhaps the entrepreneur’s risk aversion is cancelled out by optimism. See Landier and Thesmar (2003).
  10
     Kaplan and Strömberg (2003, Table 3) find contingent contracts in 73% of the financing rounds in their
sample. The most common contingent contract depends on the founding entrepreneur staying with the firm,
for example a contract requiring the entrepreneur’s shares to vest. Vesting is implicit in our model, because
the entrepreneur gets nothing if the firm is shut down at date 1. Contingent contracts are also triggered by
sale of securities, as in IPOs, or by default on a dividend or redemption payment. But solving the incentive
and moral hazard problems in our model would require contracts contingent on eﬀort or interim performance,
which are non-verifiable in our model. Such contracts are rare in Kaplan and Strömberg’s sample.
  11
     Inderst and Muller (2003) present a model of costly search and screening, with bargaining and endogenous
eﬀort by both the entrepreneur and the venture capitalist. Their model does not consider staged investment
and financing.

                                                     7
2     Model Setup and the First-Best Case
The entrepreneur possesses a startup investment opportunity that requires investments I0
and I1 at dates 0 and 1. If both investments are made, the startup continues to date 2 and
the final value of the firm is realized.
    If the investment at date 1 is not made, or if the entrepreneur refuses to participate, the
startup is shut down and liquidated. We assume for simplicity that liquidation value is
zero. (It is typically small for high-tech startups.) This assumption simplifies our analysis
of financing, because the venture capitalist’s preferred shares have value only if converted.
Thus, we can treat these shares as if they were common in the first place.
   The total payoﬀ at date 2 is P , which is stochastic and depends on the entrepreneur’s
eﬀort at time 0 and time 1, x0 and x1 , and on V2 , the potential value of the firm at date 2.
Eﬀort aﬀects the payoﬀ multiplicatively through the eﬀort functions f0 (x0 ) and f1 (x1 ):

                                            P = f0 f1 V2                                     (1)

Eﬀort generates positive but decreasing returns, that is, f (0) = 0, f > 0 and f < 0.
The entrepreneur bears the costs of her eﬀort, g0 (x0 ) and g1 (x1 ). The eﬀort cost function is
strictly increasing and convex, that is, g(0) ≥ 0, g > 0 and g > 0.
    The potential value V2 is the sole source of uncertainty. We define the expected value
E1 (V2 ) at date 1 as V1 and expected value E0 (V2 ) at date 0 as V0 . The expected payoﬀs at
dates 0 and 1, assuming that the firm will survive until date 2, are:

                         E1 (P ) = E1 (f0 f1 V2 ) = f0 f1 E1 (V2 ) = f0 f1 V1
                                                                                             (2)
                         E0 (P ) = E0 (E1 (P )) = f0 E0 (f1 V1 |V0 )
where E0 (f1 V1 |V0 ) is an integral that accounts for the dependence of f1 on V1 . We assume
risk-neutrality and a risk-free interest rate of zero. We use lognormal probability distributions
for V1 and V2 , with standard deviation σ per period.
    Define the eﬀort function f and the eﬀort cost function g as

                                          ft = 1 − e−θf xt
                                                                                             (3)
                                          gt = eθg xt
for t = 0,1. The eﬀort function f asymptotes to 1, so we interpret V1 and V2 as maximum
attainable values as x → ∞. The degree of concavity and convexity of f and g depends on
θf and θg . The eﬀort functions are plotted in Figure 1 for several values of θf and θg .
    The timeline of the financing process is as follows:

        −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→
         t=0                              t=1                              t=2
         V0 known                         V1 realized                      V2 realized
           C                                C
         α0 determined                    α1 determined                    P = f0 f1 V2
         I0 , x∗0 invested if N P V0M ≥ 0 I1 , x∗1 invested if N P V1M ≥ 0
                         and N P V0C ≥ 0                  and N P V1C ≥ 0



                                                  8
First, the entrepreneur (M ) goes to the initial venture capitalist (C ) to raise startup financ-
ing. If he is willing to invest, then she and he negotiate the initial ownership shares α0M
and α0C . At date 1, V1 is observed and there is another round of bargaining over the terms
of financing. If the initial venture capitalist also supplies all financing at date 1, then he
can dictate the terms and his share becomes α1C , with a corresponding adjustment in α1M .
If the initial venture capitalist brings in a syndicate of new investors at date 1, then the
syndicate receives an ownership share of α1S , and α1M and α1C adjust accordingly. The terms
of financing are fixed after date 1.

2.1    First-best
In the first-best case, the entrepreneur supplies all of the money, I0 + I1 , and owns the firm
(α0M = α1M = 1). The entrepreneur maximizes NPV net of her costs of eﬀort. If she decides
to invest, she expends the optimal eﬀorts x0 and x1 .
    The entrepreneur has a compound real call option. The exercise price at date 1 is
endogenous, however, because it includes the cost of eﬀort, and eﬀort depends on the realized
potential value f0 V1 . Since we use the lognormal, our solutions will resemble the Black-
Scholes formula, with extra terms capturing the cost of eﬀort.
   We now derive the first-best investment strategy, solving backwards. Details of this and
subsequent derivations are in the Appendix. By date 1, the entrepreneur’s date-0 eﬀort and
investment are sunk. Her date-1 NPV is


                      N P V1M = max[0, max(f0 f1 (x1 )V1 − g1 (x1 ) − I1 )]                      (4)
                                        x      1


                                                    g1
The first-order condition for eﬀort is f0 V1 =      f1
                                                       ,   which determines optimal eﬀort x1 and the
benefit and cost of eﬀort, f1 (x1 ) and g1 (x1 ).
   Define the strike value V 1 such that N P V1M (V 1 ) = 0. The entrepreneur exercises her
option to invest at date 1 when V1 > V 1 and N P V1M > 0. This strike value is similar to
the strike price of a traded option, except that the strike value has to cover the cost of the
entrepreneur’s eﬀort g1 (x1 ) as well as the investment I1 .
   At date 0, the entrepreneur anticipates her choice of eﬀort and continuation decision at
date 1. She determines the eﬀort level x0 that maximizes N P V0 , the diﬀerence between the
expected NPV at date 1 and the immediate investment I0 and cost of eﬀort x0 .

                    N P V0M = max[0, max
                                      x
                                        (E0 (N P V1M (x0 )) − g0 (x0 ) − I0 )]
                                          0


E0 (N P V1M (x0 )) depends on x0 in two ways. First, increasing eﬀort at date 0 increases f0 ,
and thus increases the value of the startup when it is in the money at date 1. Second,
increasing eﬀort at date 0 decreases the strike value V 1 for investment at date 1 and makes
it more likely that the startup will continue.
   The tradeoﬀ between eﬀort cost and startup value is illustrated in Figure 2. The top
payoﬀ line is the date-1 NPV for a call option with no cost of eﬀort. In this case the value
would be V1 and the strike price I1 . The lower payoﬀ line shows the net NPV when the

                                                    9
entrepreneur exerts less than the maximum eﬀort at date 0 (f0 < 1). N P V1 is close to linear
in V1 , but the slope and the level of N P V1 are reduced by the cost of eﬀort. We have added
a lognormal distribution to show the probability weights assigned to these NPVs. The two
horizontal lines are the date-0 financial investment I0 and the full cost I0 + g0 of investment
and eﬀort.

   We calculate E0 (N P V1 ) by integrating from V 1 (x0 ). Since N P V1M (x0 , V 1 (x0 )) = 0, the
entrepreneur’s first-order condition reduces to

                                            E0 (N P V1M (x0 )) = g0 (x0 ).

From (4) we obtain

                          ⎡                                                                                                   ⎤
                                  ∞                                             1
                                                                                                    ∞                  1
                        ⎢                                 1         θr
                                                                 − 1+θ                   θr
                                                                                      − 1+θ
                                                                                                                            dV ⎥
                                                                              1+θr                                   1+θr
E0 (N P V1M (x0 )) = f0 ⎣                 Π(V )V dV −          θr      r
                                                                           + θr      f0     r
                                                                                                            Π(V )V             ⎦
                                                        1 + θr
                              V 1 (x0 )                                                         V 1 (x0 )
                                                                                                                       (5)
where Π(V ) is the lognormal density and θr = θf /θg .
   We solve for x0 analytically, using properties of the lognormal distribution. Then we
evaluate N P V0M (x0 ) = E0 (N P V1M (x0 )) − g0 − I0 . When N P V0M (x0 ) > 0, the entrepreneur
invests and the firm is up and running.
    Table 1 includes examples of first-best numerical results. Start with the first two lines
of Panel A, which report Black-Scholes and first-best results when potential value is V0 =
E0 (V2 ) = 150 and required investments are I0 , I1 = 50, 50. The standard deviation is σ = 0.4
per period. The eﬀort parameters are θf = 1.8 and θg = 0.6, so the value added by eﬀort
is high relative to the cost. Thus the option to invest in the startup should be well in the
money, even after the costs of eﬀort are deducted.
    If the costs of eﬀort were zero, first-best NPV could be calculated from the Black-Scholes
formula, with a date-1 strike price of V = 50. But when the cost of eﬀort is introduced, V
increases and NPV declines. First-best NPV is 37.90, less than the Black-Scholes NPV by
12.13. The diﬀerence reflects the cost of eﬀort and the increase in strike value to V = 55.35.12
    Panel B repeats the example with higher standard deviation of σ = 0.8. Panels C and D
assume lower investment at date 0 and higher investment at date 1 (I0 , I1 = 10, 90). NPV
increases for higher standard deviations and when more investment can be deferred. The
first-best initial eﬀort decreases in these cases, though not dramatically. Panels E and F
assume θf = 0.6, so that eﬀort is less eﬀective, and also back-loaded investment (again, I0 ,
I1 = 10, 90).13 First-best eﬀort actually increases, compared to panels C and D, but NPV
declines dramatically.
  12
     The eﬀort parameters in panel A of Table 1 are θf = 1.8 and θg = 0.6. Date 0 eﬀort is x0 = 2.4, so
f0 = 0.99 and g0 = 4.59. Of course the date 0 eﬀort is sunk by date 1. From (4), f1∗ = 0.978 and g1∗ = 3.58.
The breakeven value level V = 55.35 is determined by 0.99 × 0.978 × 55.35 − 3.58 = I1 = 50.
  13
     We do not include panels for equal investment (I0 , I1 = 50, 50) and θf = 0.6, because NPVs are negative
in all cases where outside venture-capital financing is required. A startup with these parameters could not
be financed.



                                                         10
    Figure 3 plots first-best NPV for a wide range of standard deviations and eﬀort parame-
ters. Due to exponential function choice, only θr = θf /θg , the ratio of the eﬀort parameters,
matters, so that ratio is used on the bottom-left axis. The ratio is θr = 3 in Panels A to
D of Table 1 and θr = 1.0 in Panels E and F. In Figure 3, θr is varied from 1/11 to 11.
The startup becomes worthwhile, with first-best N P V ≥ 0, for θr slightly below 1.0. NPV
increases rapidly for higher values of θr , then flattens out. NPV also increases with standard
deviation, especially when most investment can be deferred to date 1.


3     Monopoly financing and staged investment
Now we explore the monopoly case in which the entrepreneur approaches the venture capi-
talist for financing and the initial venture capitalist can dictate terms of financing at both
date 0 and date 1, subject to the entrepreneur’s participation constraints. The venture
capitalist will not exploit all his bargaining power, however, because of the feedback to the
entrepreneur’s eﬀort. In some cases, the venture capitalist is better oﬀ if he gives up bar-
gaining power and gives the entrepreneur all the financing upfront. We do not argue that
the monopoly case is realistic, but it is a useful benchmark, and we believe that venture
capitalists do have bargaining power, especially in early-stage financing, and receive at least
some (quasi) rents.
    By “terms of financing” we mean the fraction of common shares held by the entrepreneur
and venture capitalist at dates 0 and 1. The entrepreneur’s fractional share at dates 1 and
2 is α1M , the complement of α1C . The entrepreneur’s share at date 0 is irrelevant in the
monopoly case, because a monopolist venture capitalist can force the terms of financing at
date 1 and is free to dilute shares awarded earlier. We do assume that the entrepreneur has
clear property rights to her shares at date 2 and that these shares cannot be taken away or
diluted between dates 1 and 2. The division of the final payoﬀ P is enforceable once date-1
financing is completed.

3.1    Eﬀort and investment at date 1.
Both the entrepreneur and the venture capitalist now have the option to participate at date
1. There are two derivative claims on one underlying asset. Both must be exercised in order
for the project to proceed.
   At date 1 the entrepreneur decides whether to exercise her option to continue, based on
her strike price, the cost of optimal eﬀort g1 (x1 ). But first the venture capitalist sets α1C and
α1M = 1−α1C and decides whether to put up the financial investment I1 . We can focus on the
venture capitalist’s decision if we incorporate the entrepreneur’s response into the venture
capitalist’s optimization problem.
    The equation for the entrepreneur’s NPV is similar to Eq. (4), except that the second-
period investment I1 drops out and firm value is multiplied by the entrepreneur’s share
α1M .

                     N P V1M (α1C ) = max[0, max
                                              x
                                                (α1M f0 f1 (x1 )V1 − g1 (x1 ))]                (6)
                                                1




                                                11
The maximum share the venture capitalist can take is obtained by setting N P V1M (α1C ) = 0.
This defines α1C (max) and α1M (min). When α1M (min) ≥ α1M , the entrepreneur will not
participate.14 The venture capitalist chooses α1C to maximize his date-1 NPV, subject to
his and the entrepreneur’s participation constraints.
                                        ⎡                                                ⎤

                       N P V1C   = max ⎣0,          max         α1C f0 f1 (x1 )V1 −I 1   ⎦              (7)
                                              1 ∈(0,α1 (max)]
                                             αC      C


    If the entrepreneur’s participation constraint is binding, the venture capitalist assigns
                                                                                           C
α1C (max).  Otherwise, he assigns an interior value. But in most of our experiments, V 1 , the
venture capitalist’s strike value for the monopoly case, falls in the region α1C ∈ 0, α1C (max)
where the entrepreneur’s NPV is positive. In these cases the venture capitalist is better oﬀ
by taking a share α1C < α1C (max) in order to give the entrepreneur stronger incentives. Nev-
ertheless, those incentives are weaker than first-best, because α1M (x0 ) < 1, which decreases
the expected payoﬀ by reducing x1 .
    Figure 4 plots values of α1C as a function of V1 when I0 = I1 =50, σ = 0.4, θf = 1.8,
and θg = 0.6, the same parameters used in Panel A of Table 1. The optimal share α1C
                                                                               C
is less than the maximum share α1C (max) = 1 − α1M (min) for all V1 ≥ V , the venture
capitalist’s strike value at date 1. Thus the maximum share that the venture capitalist could
extract is irrelevant. But notice that the venture capitalist’s optimum share increases as the
project becomes more valuable, with a corresponding decline in the entrepreneur’s share.
This implication of the monopoly case is contrary to the evidence in Kaplan and Stromberg
(2003), who find that entrepreneurs gain an increasing fraction of payoﬀs as and if the firm
succeeds. This suggests that in practice later-stage venture-capital financing is not provided
on monopolistic terms.
                                                                                   C
    Assuming the α1C (max) constraint does not bind, we compute V 1 by looking for the pair
  C          C                                                                C
V 1 , α1C (V 1 ) that sets N P V1C equal to zero. Investment occurs if V1 > V 1 .

3.2       Eﬀort and exercise at date 0.
In the first-best case, the entrepreneur anticipates x1 and I1 in her choice of x0 . In the
monopoly case, the entrepreneur also anticipates the venture capitalist’s decisions at date
1. She then evaluates whether N P V0C (x0 ) ≥ 0. As in the first-best case, higher eﬀort at
t = 0 lowers the threshold for investment at t = 1 (makes it more likely that both the
entrepreneur’s and venture capitalist’s options are in the money) and increases the value of
the project when the option is in the money.
       The entrepreneur’s date 0 value is

                        N P V0M = max[0, max(E0 (N P V1M (x0 )) − g0 (x0 ))]                            (8)
                                               x0

with the first-order condition

                      E0 (N P V1M (x0 )) = Π(V 1 )N P V1M (f0 , V 1 )V 1 + g0 (x0 )                     (9)
  14
     When f0 is small or V1 is low, α1M (min) may be greater than 1, so that continuation is impossible even
if the entrepreneur is given 100% ownership.

                                                     12
   Here there are no closed-form expressions. We solve the first-order condition and de-
termine x∗0 numerically. Given x∗0 , and assuming that the entrepreneur wants to go ahead
(N P V0M (x∗0 ) > 0), the venture capitalist invests if:

                            N P V0C = max[0, E0 (N P V1C (x0 )) − I0 ] > 0                           (10)
      Thus two options must be exercised at date 0 in order to launch the startup. The
entrepreneur picks x∗0 to maximize the value of her option to continue at date 1, and then
determines whether this value exceeds her current strike price, the immediate cost of eﬀort
g0∗ . The venture capitalist values his option to invest I1 at date 1, taking the entrepreneur’s
immediate and future eﬀort into account, and then decides whether to invest I0 .
    Monopoly financing can be extremely ineﬃcient. The venture capitalist’s ability to claim
a large ownership fraction at date 1 reduces the entrepreneur’s eﬀort at date 0 as well as date
                                                                                C
1, reducing value and increasing the venture capitalist’s breakeven point V 1 . For example,
compare the monopoly and first-best results in Panel A of Table 1. The entrepreneur’s
                                                                                                C
initial eﬀort falls by about 50 percent from the first-best level and the date-1 strike value V 1
increases by almost 30 percent. The entrepreneur’s NPV drops by more than 90 percent.
Overall NPV drops by more than half. Similar value losses occur in panels B to F. In Panel
E, a startup with first-best NPV of 10.98 cannot be financed in the monopoly case. NPV
would be negative for both the entrepreneur and the initial venture capitalist.

3.3     Monopoly financing without staged investment
The incentive problems of the monopoly case can sometimes overwhelm the option-like ad-
vantages of staged financing. All may be better oﬀ if the entire investment I0 + I1 is given
to the entrepreneur upfront and she is granted full control thereafter.
     In the monopoly, no-staging case, the entrepreneur and venture capitalist bargain only
once at date 0 to determine their ownership shares αM and αC , which are then fixed for
dates 1 and 2. The entrepreneur calculates her NPV at date 1 just as in the monopoly
case with staging, but her share of the firm α1M is predetermined. Also, she ignores the
financial investment I1 and continues at date 1 so long as her NPV exceeds her cost of eﬀort,
g1 (x1 ).15 The venture capitalist retains monopoly power over financing at date 0, but loses
all his bargaining power at date 1. He sets αC to maximize his NPV at date 0, taking into
account the eﬀects on the entrepreneur’s eﬀort at dates 0 and 1. His maximization problem
is identical in appearance to Eq. (10) but the values of x∗0 , x∗1 and α1C = α0C are diﬀerent. The
entrepreneur’s date-0 maximization problem closely resembles Eq. (8) except for the choices
of x∗1 and α1C = α0C . If both parties’ participation constraints are met at date 0 (N P V0C ≥ 0
and N P V0M ≥ 0), the startup is launched.
   The value loss from the holdup problem in the monopoly, staged financing case can be
so severe that it can actually exceed the cost of ineﬃcient continuation in the no-staging
case. For example, note the improvement in the no-staging case in Panel A of Table 1. The
  15
     We do assume that the entrepreneur cannot launch the firm at date 0 and then run oﬀ with the date-1
investment I1 . Venture-capital investors typically hold convertible preferred shares and have priority in
liquidation.




                                                   13
NPV to the entrepreneur more than doubles, compared to the monopoly case with staged
investment, and overall NPV increases from 16.47 to 26.89.
   Figures 5 and 6 compare the monopoly NPVs with and without staging. Figure 5 assumes
equal investment in both periods (I0 , I1 = 50, 50). Here NPV is higher without staging,
except at extremely high standard deviations. Figure 6 assumes back-loaded investment (I0 ,
I1 = 10, 90), which adds to option value and the value of staging. In Figure 6, a monopolist
venture capitalist would give up staging and provide 100% upfront financing only at relatively
low standard deviations.


4      Syndication
The value losses in the monopoly case would be reduced if the entrepreneur could promise
higher eﬀort at date 1, or if the venture capitalist could promise to take a lower ownership
fraction α1C . Neither promise is credible, however, since eﬀort and potential value are non-
contractible. But suppose that the venture capitalist can commit (explicitly or implicitly)
to bring in a syndicate of new investors to join him in the date-1 financing. Suppose further
that the incumbent venture capitalist does not collude with syndicate members and allows
them to dictate the terms of financing. We will show that these commitments are in the
initial venture capitalist’s interest. Syndication alleviates the holdup problem and generates
extra eﬀort and value.
    Syndication of later stage financing is common in practice. The initial venture capitalist
approaches a group of other venture-capital investors that he has worked with in the past,
or hopes to work with in the future, and oﬀers participation in the financing. We interpret
syndication as a mechanism that introduces competition into date-1 financing and restrains
the initial venture capitalist’s temptation to hold up the entrepreneur. We do not know
what NPV syndicates obtain in practice, but it is natural to explore NPV = 0 as a limiting
case. (If the syndicate gets positive NPV, but still less than a monopolist venture capitalist
could extract, there are still value gains relative to the monopoly case.) We start with the
full-information case, where the investors who compete to join the syndicate have the same
information as the incumbent venture capitalist.16
    The results for syndicate financing diﬀer from the monopoly case in at least two ways.
First, the terms of financing shift in the entrepreneur’s favor. The new syndicate investors
are forward-looking. They do not care about the value of the existing shares held by the
incumbent venture capitalist and have no incentive to hold up the entrepreneur. The in-
cumbent has no control over the terms of financing at date 1, so his ultimate ownership
and payoﬀ are determined by his initial share α0C and the performance of the startup. The
syndicate accepts N P V S = 0 and does not trade oﬀ extra NPV against reduced eﬀort from
the entrepreneur. Thus the syndicate’s ownership share α1S will generate lower N P V S than
the NPV-maximizing share α1C∗ that a monopolist incumbent would set. The entrepreneur
suﬀers less dilution, exerts more eﬀort, and total value increases. This outcome benefits the
initial venture capitalist at date 0. By delegating the terms of date-1 financing, he solves the
  16
     We doubt that potential syndicate investors really have full information. If they did, then the en-
trepreneur could negotiate with these investors directly and possibly hold up the incumbent venture capi-
talist. This scenario seems implausible and we do not explore it in this paper.


                                                   14
incomplete contracting problem that causes the holdup problem in the monopoly case with
staged financing.
    Second, under zero-NPV date-1 financing, the initial venture capitalist eﬀectively owns a
call option with a zero exercise price and will always want the investment to proceed at date
1 whether or not the project can generate enough value to cover the syndicate’s investment.
With full information, it does not matter whether the initial venture capitalist participates in
the syndicate, because the syndicate’s investment is zero-NPV. Of course the initial venture
capitalist’s participation matters if the syndication terms are not fully competitive. The
higher the NPV for the syndicate, the closer is the syndicate case to the monopoly case.

4.1    Eﬀort and investment at date 1
For a given share α1M , the entrepreneur’s NPV and maximization problem at date 1 are the
same as in the monopoly case. We obtain x1 , f1 , g1 , and N P V1M (α1S ) exactly as in Eq. (6),
but with α1M = α0M (1 − α1S ). The share given to the outside syndicate, α1S , is determined by
                                                                                          S
N P V1S = 0, that is, by I1 = α1S f0 f1 (x1 )V1 . Investment at date 1 occurs for V1 > V 1 . We
            S
solve for V 1 by finding the value of α1S that maximizes N P V1 , subject to the constraint that
N P V S = 0 for the syndicate. The solution is generally in the region where N P V1M (α1S ) > 0
at V 1 and α1M < α1M (min).
     Figure 7 plots ownership shares against value at date 1 for the syndicate case when
I0 , I1 = 50, 50, σ = 0.4, θf = 1.8 and θg = 0.6, the same parameters used in Panel A of
Table 1. The top two lines show the syndicate’s maximum and optimal shares if the new
investors were given free rein to maximize their NPV. The maximum share is irrelevant, as
                                                                                         S
in Figure 4. The syndicate’s actual share equals its optimal share at the strike value V 1 and
then declines as V1 increases. The shares held by the entrepreneur and incumbent venture
capitalist therefore increase as performance improves, consistent with the evidence in Kaplan
and Stromberg (2003) and contrary to the pattern in the monopoly case, as plotted in Figure
4.
    One might expect the better financing terms from the syndicate to decrease the strike
value V 1 from the monopoly case. But V 1 is actually higher in the syndicate case — for
example, V 1 is 84.9 in Figure 7 and 70.8 in Figure 4. This increase can be traced to the initial
venture capitalist’s fixed original ownership share in the syndicate-financing case. When the
original venture capitalist provides both rounds of financing, he picks the share at date 1
that is best for him at date 1. He may reduce his share to strengthen the entrepreneur’s
incentives. Unlike the monopolist, the syndicate cannot reset the venture capitalist’s original
share α0C and is there therefore faced with a free-riding incumbent. The syndicate has a
smaller value pie to carve up, and a higher threshold for investment.
   Thus the commitment to syndicate later-stage financing has two countervailing eﬀects.
The syndicate may require a higher threshold for investment, so that marginal projects will
be rejected more often. On the other hand, syndication provides better incentives for the
entrepreneur, so that low values of f0 V1 are less likely. Our numerical analysis will show that
the second eﬀect outweighs the first and that shifting from monopoly to syndication always
adds value.



                                               15
4.2     Renegotiation at date 1
Of course a low realization of V1 could trigger a renegotiation between the incumbent and the
entrepreneur to reset the incumbent’s initial share α0C before syndicate financing is sought.
The incumbent can transfer ownership to the entrepreneur, retaining αC (R) < α0C∗ , where
αC (R) denotes the incumbent’s renegotiated equity stake. The incumbent may be better
oﬀ accepting a reduced ownership share to improve the chance of success for low values
                                                S
of V1 or to increase continuation for V1 < V 1 . By accepting a lower ownership share, the
incumbent improves eﬀort incentives for the entrepreneur to the point where enough extra
value is added to support syndicate financing at NPV = 0. Of course the incumbent will
give up as little as possible. In the worst renegotiation case, where V1 approaches a lower
bound, the value of the incumbent’s shares approaches zero, just as in the monopoly case.
    Renegotiation requires dilution of the incumbent venture capitalist’s ownership share.
Dilution could happen in several ways. For example, the incumbent could provide bridge
financing on terms favorable to the entrepreneur. Dilution could also occur in a ”down
round” — a round of financing where new investors buy in at a price per share lower than in
previous rounds. But our model says that a down round should dilute the entrepreneur less
than the incumbent venture capitalist. The entrepreneur could be given additional shares
or options, for example.
    While renegotiation adds value ex post by improving eﬀort and preserving access to
financing, the flexibility to reset shares at date 1 could introduce new problems. Suppose
the initial venture capitalist sets α0C at a very high level, knowing that he can renegotiate
down to the monopoly level at date 1, even when the realized value V1 exceeds the syndicate
               S
strike value V 1 .17 The entrepreneur would then cut back eﬀort at dates 0 and 1 and reduce
the value of the firm. This strategy amounts to a return to monopoly financing. It would
reduce date-0 value to the venture capitalist as well as the entrepreneur.
    Thus two conditions must hold in order for syndicate financing to work as we have
described it. First, the initial venture capitalist has to commit at date 0 to syndicate at
date 1. In practice this is not an explicit, formal commitment, but syndication is standard
operating procedure. As part of the commitment, the initial venture capitalist has to limit
his initial ownership share α0C to its level in the syndicate case, so that he cannot start with a
higher value and bargain down to the monopoly share α1C∗ at date 1. The commitment is in
the venture capitalist’s interest, because it increases his ex ante value relative to the monopoly
case. Second, the terms of financing in later rounds should be reasonably competitive. In
practice they may not be perfectly competitive, but we believe the terms are materially
better for the entrepreneur than the monopoly terms would be.
    It turns out that opportunities for renegotiation are rare in our numerical experiments
for the syndicate case. Therefore, incorporating the benefits of renegotiation would add
relatively little to NPV at date 0. For example, including renegotiation gains would increase
the NPVs reported in Table 1 by about 2% of the required total investment of I0 +I1 = 100.18
  17
     The entrepreneur could retain the upside if she could bypass the incumbent venture capitalist and go
directly to the syndicate for financing. In practice the incumbent could block this end run by refusing to
participate in the syndicate. The syndicate would assume that the incumbent has inside information, and
would interpret the refusal to participate as bad news suﬃcient to deter their investment.
  18
     We approximate renegotiation gains (holding αC∗
                                                   0 and x0 constant) by solving for (1) the value realization



                                                     16
4.3     Eﬀort and exercise at date 0
At date 0, the venture capitalist sets α0C and the entrepreneur decides how much eﬀort to
exert. Given α0C , the entrepreneur chooses x0 to maximize:

               N P V0M (α0C ) = max[0, max
                                        x
                                          (E0 (N P V1M (x0 (α0C ), α0C ) − g0 (x0 (α0C )))]               (11)
                                               0


The entrepreneur anticipates the syndicate’s share α1S as a function of date-1 value V1 . For
a given α0C , date-1 syndicate financing will result in less dilution of her share than in the
monopoly case, so she provides higher eﬀort at t = 0 as well as at t = 1. We cannot express
NPV or eﬀort in closed form, so we compute them numerically.
    The venture capitalist anticipates the entrepreneur’s reaction when he sets α0C . He must
restrict his search to α0C ∈ 0, α0C (max) , where α0C (max) is determined by

                  E0 (N P V1M (x0 (α0C (max)), α0C (max)) − g0 (x0 (α0C (max)))) = 0                      (12)
This constraint rarely binds, since at the margin there is almost always value added by
leaving positive value to the entrepreneur. Thus α0C∗ is determined by

                      α0C = arg              max          E0 (N P V1C (x0 (α0C ), α0C )) − I0             (13)
                                  αC
                                   0 ∈   (
                                         0,αC
                                            0 (max)   ]

If N P V0C ≥ 0, investment proceeds.
   Typical results for syndicate financing are shown in Table 1. Eﬀort and value increase
                                                            S
across the board, despite increases in the strike value V 1 from the monopoly case. We find
that syndicate financing dominates monopoly financing with or without staged financing.
Syndicate financing is better ex ante for the initial venture capitalist and also increases overall
NPV. This is true for all parameter values, including values outside the range reported in
Table 1. Yet there are still value losses relative to the first best.

4.4     The fully competitive case
Of course first best is never attainable when the entrepreneur has to seek outside financing.
Table 1 shows an alternative benchmark, the fully competitive case, in which all venture
capital investors, including the initial investor at date 1, receive N P V = 0. Fully competitive
financing gives an upper bound on the overall NPV when the entrepreneur has no money
and has to share her marginal value added with outside investors. Solution procedures for
the fully competitive case are identical to the syndication case, except that α0C is set so that
N P V0C = 0.
    Figure 8 shows date-1 ownership shares for the fully competitive case in the same format
as the syndication case in Figure 7. Two things stand out. First, the entrepreneur’s share
at which the venture capitalist will start to reduce his share; (2) the new strike value and (3) the integral
of NPV changes over this range. Only a small portion of the renegotiation gains come from more eﬃcient
                           S               S
continuation decisions (V 1 (R) < V1 < V 1 ). Most of the gains can be attributed to better eﬀort incentives
                                                                          S
(higher x1 ) in the region where the project continues regardless (V1 > V 1 ). These gains further increase the
value advantages of syndicate financing over monopoly financing.



                                                           17
is higher and the initial venture capitalist’s lower than in Figure 7, because competitive
financing at date 0 gives relatively more shares to the entrepreneur. Both shares of course
increase with the realized value V1 . Second, the strike value V 1 is lower in the competitive
case, primarily because the entrepreneur’s initial eﬀort is higher. Note also that the fully
competitive NPVs, which go entirely to the entrepreneur, are less than in the first-best
case, because the entrepreneur’s eﬀort is lower. There is always some value loss when the
entrepreneur has to share the marginal value added by her eﬀort with outside investors.

4.5     Syndication with asymmetric information
So far we have assumed that the incoming syndicate investors and the incumbent venture
capitalist are equally informed. Now we consider asymmetric information between the in-
cumbent and new investors.
   Both the incumbent and entrepreneur want the syndicate to perceive a high value V1 .
The more optimistic the syndicate, the higher the ownership shares retained by the incum-
bent and entrepreneur. Reducing the syndicate’s share also increases the entrepreneur’s
eﬀort. Therefore, mere announcements of “great progress” or “high value” coming from the
entrepreneur or incumbent are not credible.
    Credibility may come from the incumbent’s fractional participation in date-1 financing.
Suppose the incumbent invests βI1 and the outside syndicate the rest. What participation
fraction β is consistent with truthful revelation of V1 ? If we could hold the entrepreneur’s
eﬀort constant, we could rely on Admati and Pfleiderer’s (1994) proof that β should be fixed
at the incumbent investor’s ownership share at date 0, that is, at α0C . This fixed-fraction
rule would remove any incentive for the incumbent to over-report V1 . (The more he over-
reports, the more he has to overpay for his new shares. When β = α0C , the amount overpaid
cancels out any gain in the value of his existing shares.)19 The fixed-fraction rule would also
insure optimal investment, since the incumbent’s share of date-1 investment exactly equals
his share of the final payoﬀ V2 . Admati and Pfleiderer also show that no other financing rule
or procedure works in their setting.
    Fixed-fraction financing does not induce truthful information revelation in our model,
although a modified fixed-fraction financing works in some cases. The problem is the eﬀect
of the terms of date-1 financing on the entrepreneur’s eﬀort. Suppose the incumbent investor
takes a fraction β = α0C of date-1 financing and then reports a value V̂1 that is higher than the
true value V1 . If the report is credible, the new shares are over-priced. The incumbent does
not gain or lose from the mispricing, because β = α0C , but the entrepreneur gains on his old
shares at the syndicate’s expense. Since the entrepreneur’s ownership share is higher than it
would be under a truthful report, she exerts more eﬀort, firm value increases, and both the
entrepreneur and incumbent are better oﬀ. Therefore the incumbent will over-report.
   A modified fixed-fraction rule can work, however, provided that β is set above α0C and
eﬀort is not too sensitive to changes in the entrepreneur’s NPV at date 1. The required
diﬀerence between β and α0C depends on the responsiveness of the entrepreneur’s eﬀort to
  19
    The fixed-fraction rule would also remove any incentive to underreport. The more the incumbent under-
reports, the more he gains on the new shares. But the amount of profit made on the new shares is exactly
oﬀset by losses incurred on existing shares.



                                                   18
her ownership share. In many cases, a constant β set a few percentage points above α0C
removes the incentive to overreport over a wide range of V1 realizations. But this rule may
break down as a general revelation mechanism in at least three ways.
   First, when V1 is very low but exceeds V 1 , we find situations where the required β exceeds
1. This would make sense only if the new syndicate investors could short the company, so
we must constrain β < 1. This outcome is common in our numerical results, because the
incumbent’s initial share α0C is frequently above 85% - 90%, and in some of these cases the
entrepreneur’s eﬀort is very sensitive to the value of her stake in the firm. There is not
much room for β to increase between these starting points and a maximum level strictly less
than 1. When β hits the maximum, the modified fixed fraction rule fails to induce truthful
revelation.20
   Second, the modified fixed fraction rule also fails when V1 falls just below V 1 . In this case
the incumbent’s incentive to over-report becomes very strong, and only extremely high βs
can discipline the incumbent to tell the truth. This problem flows from the discontinuity of
the entrepreneur’s eﬀort at the strike value V 1 . Here the limit of β as V1 approaches V 1 from
below is infinity and no fixed-fraction rule works. This problem can be solved, however, if the
incumbent and the entrepreneur renegotiate their ownership shares when V1 falls between
                                               C        S
the monopoly and syndicate strike values V 1 and V 1 . If the incumbent venture capitalist
renegotiates, the lower strike value removes the discontinuity of eﬀort. As the incumbent’s
share declines, it is easier to find a β < 1 that works. The required β approaches 0 as V1
               C
approaches V 1 and the incumbent’s share approaches zero.
    The third problem arises at high levels of V1 . Setting β > α0C gives the incumbent
venture capitalist an incentive to under-report V1 . The incumbent would gain more from
underpricing the new shares and buying them cheaply than he would lose from dilution of
his existing stake. Revelation works only if this incentive is oﬀset by the impact on the
entrepreneur’s eﬀort. But as V1 and V̂1 increase, eﬀort becomes higher and less sensitive to
the terms of financing. As eﬀort tops out, the incentive to under-report takes over. This
could be prevented locally by allowing β to decrease with V̂1 , returning to β = α0C at very high
values. But then the almost-fixed fraction rule fails globally to induce truthful information
revelation, because at lower V1 realizations he wants to over-report to these higher levels at
which β = α0C .
    One possible solution, not fully explored here, is to introduce more complex contracts
that allow signalling along two dimensions. For example, the incentive for the incumbent
venture capitalist to under-report at high levels of V1 could be oﬀset by an incentive contract
that grants the entrepreneur extra shares if the incumbent reports very high project value.
With this additional provision in place, it should be possible to allow β to decrease with V̂1 ,
reaching β = α0C at high values of V1 . This could be one justification for contingent share
awards to the entrepreneurs, as observed in Kaplan and Stromberg (2003). Alternatively,
the entrepreneur could be granted a series of stock options with increasing exercise prices,
so that the entrepreneur’s final ownership share increases at high values of V2 .
  20
    This failure is less frequent if the entrepreneur has some personal wealth and can co-invest with the
venture capitalist at date 0. The coinvestment reduces the venture capitalist’s ownership share and provides
more room for β to increase to a maximum level strictly less than 1.



                                                    19
    When the modified fixed fraction rule fails, the syndicate investors face the asymmetric
information problem analyzed by Myers and Majluf (1984). In the special case of their model
that is closest to our problem here, the firm has no assets in place (no value in liquidation),
so it goes ahead with financing on terms fixed by the new investors’ knowledge of the average
value of V1 . Syndicate investors would have to infer the average V1 from conditions at date
0, the entrepreneur’s eﬀort functions and the entrepreneur’s and incumbent’s decision rules,
given the anticipated terms of date-1 financing. But the investors do not know the true
value V1 , so their new financing is overpriced when V1 is low and underpriced when V1 is
high. This leads to more eﬀort when V1 is low and less when it is high, compared to the
full-revelation case. But again there are problems. For example, if V1 is high, the incumbent
will be better oﬀ cancelling syndicate financing and providing the date-1 money directly.
But if this is allowed, then the incumbent will have an incentive to claim a high value V1 in
order to reclaim monopoly power over the terms of financing. In addition, if the syndicate
investors know less than the incumbent and the incumbent is free to finance the investment
from his own pocket, then the incumbent will only raise syndicate financing if the syndicate
is paying too much. Therefore a rational syndicate will not invest.21
   Even if the revelation mechanism fails, there may be other ways to convey V1 . The
value of the incumbent investor’s reputation could generate truthful reports in a repeated
game setting, for example. The syndicate usually includes other venture capitalists that the
incumbent has worked with in the past and expects to work with in the future.


5       Summary of Numerical Results
Table 1 illustrates our main results. It shows surprisingly large value losses in most cases,
relative to first-best. (For now ignore the debt-financing entries.) Value losses are greatest
in the monopoly case where the initial venture capitalist provides all financing and dictates
the terms of financing at date 1 as well as date 0. This does not imply that the venture
capitalist extracts all value, leaving the entrepreneur with zero NPV. The venture capitalist
wants to preserve the entrepreneur’s incentives to some extent. Nevertheless, the financing
terms that maximize value for the venture capitalist usually leave the entrepreneur with a
small minority slice of a diminished pie.
   The problem with staged financing is that a monopolistic venture capitalist cannot com-
mit not to hold up the entrepreneur ex post. Thus NPV can be higher and the initial venture
capitalist better oﬀ if staged financing is abandoned and all financing is committed at date
0. Complete upfront financing is superior for all eﬀort parameters (all values of θr = θf /θg )
when option value is relatively low, as it is for most of the range of standard deviations
in Figure 5. Figure 6 shows that when the option value is high, staged financing is more
eﬃcient, despite the monopoly holdup problem.
    Syndication of date-1 financing always makes both the entrepreneur and the initial ven-
ture capitalist better oﬀ as long as the syndicate’s financing terms are reasonably competi-
tive. This key result of our paper is evident in Table 1 and also holds generally. We believe
that our syndicate case, in which the initial venture capitalist can set financing terms at
date 0 but not date 1, is a good match to actual venture capital contracting. Of course we
 21
      This is a variation of Myers and Majluf’s (1984) pecking-order proofs.


                                                      20
observe syndication in practice, but that observation does not settle whether the terms of
syndicate financing are competitive (NPV = 0) or monopolistic. Our analysis indicates that
syndication terms are reasonably competitive. With monopoly financing terms at date 1,
we find that the entrepreneur’s final ownership share is a decreasing function of firm value.
With competitive terms, as in our syndication case, the entrepreneur’s share is an increasing
function of value, consistent with practice (Kaplan and Stromberg (2003)).
   The syndicate case is still ineﬃcient, because it gives the initial venture capitalist the
bargaining power to set financing terms at date 0. We believe that venture capitalists do have
bargaining power and receive at least some (quasi) rents in early financing rounds. They have
bargaining power because of experience and expertise, because of the fixed costs of setting up
a venture capital partnership and because of the cost and delay that the entrepreneur would
absorb in looking for another venture-capital investor. But there are obviously eﬃciency
improvements if and as the terms of date-0 financing become more competitive. The fully
competitive case shows the limit where the initial venture capitalist has no special bargaining
power and just receives NPV = 0. Even the fully competitive case falls short of first best,
however. The entrepreneur’s eﬀort falls whenever outside financing has to be raised, because
the entrepreneur bears the full cost of eﬀort, but has to share the marginal value added by
eﬀort with the outside investors.
   Figure 9 summarizes value losses for the monopoly, no-staging, syndication and fully
competitive cases over a wide range of the eﬀort parameter θr . Value loss is defined as the
diﬀerence between NPV at date 0 and first-best NPV. The four panels correspond to panels
A to D in Figure 1, except for the variation in θr . Figure 10 repeats Figure 9 for a more
profitable startup with V0 = 200.
    The value losses plotted in Figure 9 increase rapidly with θr when θr is below 1.0, but
the losses are always less in the syndication case than in the monopoly cases. The losses
in the syndicate case still appear economically significant, however. The only situations in
which losses do not appear significant occur in the fully competitive case when θr is above
2.0. High values for θr mean that eﬀort generates value at relatively little cost, so that the
entrepreneur is willing to expend close to first-best eﬀort in the fully competitive case, even
though the marginal benefit of eﬀort is shared with outside investors.
    Value losses in the monopoly, no staging case increase as standard deviation is increased
from σ = 0.4 to 0.8. This is as expected, since staged financing is more valuable as volatility
increases. But value losses may also increase with standard deviation in the monopoly and
syndication cases, at least for the region where θr is about 1.0 and higher. We found this sur-
prising. Our original intuition was that increased uncertainty would enhance the optionality
of investment and mitigate incentive problems. Instead it can make these problems worse,
because more uncertainty can lead to lower initial eﬀort.22 Compare the bottom-left and
bottom-right panels in Figure 9, for example. The eﬀects of volatility on eﬀort and value
can also be seen in panels E and F of Table 1. In the syndicate case, the value loss in panel
  22
    When overall NPV is near zero, the entrepreneur’s eﬀort x0 increases rapidly with σ. The more un-
certainty, the greater chance that the entrepreneur’s call option will be in the money and the greater the
marginal reward to eﬀort. But as θr increases and NPV rises, eﬀort eventually declines as σ increases,
because the marginal impact of eﬀort is less. The diﬀerence can be traced to the slope of the cumulative
lognormal, which is lower at the mean when σ is high.



                                                   21
E, with σ = 0.4, is 10.98 - 1.55 = 9.43. In panel F, with σ = 0.8, value loss is 27.72 - 17.50
= 10.22. Initial eﬀort falls from x0 = 3.05 in panel E to x0 = 2.80 in panel F.
    The value-loss patterns in Figure 9 are repeated in Figure 10, where V0 = 200 rather
than 150. Financing is feasible in Figure 10 at lower levels of the eﬀort parameter θr . Value
losses are lower for the fully competitive case, but actually increase for the monopoly and
syndication cases. This problem can be traced to the initial venture capitalist’s bargaining
power at date 0. Consider the monopoly case. Since the marginal product of eﬀort is higher
when V0 = 200, the entrepreneur will put in more eﬀort at date 1. This allows the initial
venture capitalist to tighten the screws and extract a greater ownership share, which in turn
feeds back to lower eﬀort by the entrepreneur at date 0.
    The eﬀects of other parameters on our results are generally as expected. NPV increases
when the ratio θr = θf /θg increases. The strike value V falls with θr , increasing the proba-
bility that the date-1 option to invest is in the money, and when the option is in the money
it is worth more. Overall NPV increases when σ increases (generating more uncertainty in
V1 and V2 ) and when a greater fraction of investment can be deferred to date 1. These eﬀects
are natural for investments in real options.


6    Debt financing
So far we have considered only equity financing, following venture-capital practice. Is equity
financing eﬃcient for venture capitalists? We cannot answer this question without deriving
optimal contracts, a task that we do not attempt in this paper. But it is interesting to
consider the alternative of debt financing. We have interpreted syndicate financing as a
device to secure the entrepreneur’s eﬀort by protecting her from ex-post holdup. Could a
switch to debt financing achieve the same or better result? In traditional agency models,
debt financing calls forth maximum eﬀort, because the entrepreneur retains the maximum
fraction of the value added at the margin by her eﬀort. Perhaps we have oversimplified
venture-capital practice to the extent that debt dominates equity as a financing contract.
   In this section we show that debt is not superior to equity. When eﬀort and investment
are made in stages, debt financing can actually amplify the hold-up problem and reduce
the entrepreneur’s initial eﬀort at date 0. We will show that debt financing could increase
eﬃciency in some cases, however.
    Suppose that the startup firm issues debt rather than equity to venture-capital investors.
The face value of the debt equals the required investment. Of course, this debt faces a high
probability of default, so the promised payoﬀ at date 2, including interest, is well above face
value. (Safe debt is nearly impossible, given the high variance of most startups and most
entrepreneurs’ limited funds available for equity investment.) The promised debt payoﬀ
(face value plus interest) sets a strike value for V2 below which the startup defaults and the
investors receive all of the startup’s payoﬀ P . Above this point the investors’ payoﬀ is capped
and the entrepreneur receives the residual. Thus debt financing converts the entrepreneur’s
stake to a call option, and our discussion of debt financing also applies if the entrepreneur
receives no shares but only options. The implicit call options created by debt financing
would probably be out of the money, however, because the promised payment to the venture


                                              22
capitalists would have to exceed total investment by enough to cover the risk of failure and
default.
    Now we revisit the monopoly case, holding all aspects of our model constant, except that
at date 1 the venture capitalist and entrepreneur negotiate a promised debt payoﬀ K1 instead
of ownership shares α1C and α1M . (With debt, α1M = 1.) The entrepreneur’s NPV at date 1
is her expected residual payout at date 2, that is, E0 [max(0, f0 f1 V2 − K1 )]. As before, the
entrepreneur chooses eﬀort to maximize N P V1M , and the venture capitalist chooses K1∗ to
maximize N P V1C . The startup continues if N P V1C > I1 . At date 0, the entrepreneur antic-
ipates K1∗ and chooses initial eﬀort accordingly. We solve numerically for the entrepreneur’s
eﬀort, the promised payoﬀ K1∗ and the venture capitalist’s and entrepreneur’s NPVs. If both
parties’ participation constraints are met at date 0, the venture is launched.
    Table 1 shows examples comparing debt versus equity financing in the monopoly case.
It is immediately clear that debt is no panacea. When monopoly debt financing is feasible,
it can enhance eﬀort and NPV. In Panels B and D of Table 1, for example, initial eﬀort is
higher and NPVs increase in the monopoly (debt) cases. The resulting NPVs in these cases
approach the fully competitive outcome. But in Panels A, C and F startups that could be
financed by a monopolist venture capitalist with equity cannot be financed with debt. This
breakdown occurs because debt makes the holdup problem worse. At date 1, the venture
capitalist is able to set the promised debt payoﬀ so high that the entrepreneur is left with
with a very small slice of value. The entrepreneur’s eﬀort at date 1 is increased, given K1∗ ,
because the entrepreneur holds an option and receives all value in excess of K1∗ . But the
entrepreneur’s date-1 NPV is very small, and her eﬀort at date 0 is drastically reduced. It
appears that linear equity contracts between the entrepreneur and venture capitalist mitigate
the hold-up problem at date 1 and generate more eﬃcient eﬀort at date 0.
    In the syndicate financing case, the venture capitalist negotiates an initial debt level K0C
at date 0 in exchange for initial funding. At date 1, if V1 is large enough, new, pari passu
debt with face value K1S is issued to a syndicate of investors for zero expected return. The
incumbent venture capitalist and syndicate share in debt payouts at date 2 according to their
                             K0C          K1S
shares of debt ownership K C +K  S and K C +K S . The entrepreneur makes the same decisions
                            0    1       0    1
as in the monopolistic case, but faces the combined debt level K0C + K1S . As before, the
syndicate provides date-1 financing on competitive terms.
    Introducing debt contracts in the syndication case increases the entrepreneur’s initial
eﬀort, but also increases V , the threshold for project continuation. Higher eﬀort increases
NPV and higher V reduces it. If the first (second) eﬀect outweighs the second (first), then
syndicated debt yields higher (lower) NPV. In Panels A to D and F of Table 1, overall NPV
falls when financing is syndicated and debt is substituted for equity. Note the high values
for V in Panels A to D and F. Panel E is an exception, where syndicate financing is feasible
with debt but not with equity.
    Syndication in the debt financing case reduces the initial venture capitalist’s financial
flexibility. Since the syndicate does not allow the initial venture capitalist to hold up the
entrepreneur ex post, he sets the face value of his own date-0 debt higher in order to extract
as much upside as possible. This creates a debt overhang, which translates in turn to higher


                                              23
strike values (higher V s) and to lower NPV.
    According to Table 1, the initial venture capitalist should abandon syndication and switch
to monopoly debt financing if faced with the parameter values in panels B and D. Why
is syndicate debt financing not better than monopoly debt financing? Syndicated debt
should eliminate holdup problems at date 1. One answer is that Table 1 does not include
potential gains from renegotiation at date 1 before syndicate financing is raised. We discussed
renegotiation for the syndicated equity case, but left it out of our calculations. Opportunities
for renegotiation are rare with equity financing, and syndicated equity is more eﬃcient than
monopoly equity even when potential gains from renegotiation are ignored. With syndicated
debt, opportunities for renegotiation are much more common, because of the high strike
values created by the initial venture capitalist’s debt holdings, and potential value gains
much larger.
    Other things equal, including the date-1 strike value V 1 , financing on competitive rather
than monopolistic terms at date 1 must improve eﬀort and ex ante NPV. But it is not clear
whether renegotiation is a reliable mechanism to reduce the high strike values that we have
calculated for the debt syndication case. Frequent opportunities for renegotiation may also
mean frequent opportunities for the incumbent venture capitalist to reassert his monopoly
power. The incumbent could force renegotiation even when the startup is performing well
and V1 > V 1 . The syndicate investors, who are unlikely to be fully informed about V1 , have
no particular reason to object to renegotiation, since their investment is zero-NPV in any
case. These issues, which we leave as a topic for further research, are probably second-order
with equity financing, because opportunities to add value by renegotiation are rare and only
occur at low values of V1 , for example in down rounds. These issues may be much more
serious with syndicated debt financing.
    The syndication results in Table 1 may shed some light on why venture capitalists choose
to hold equity when later-stage financing is syndicated. In Panels A through D and F,
syndicate financing with equity rather than debt increases both overall NPV and the NPV
to the original venture capitalist. Hence, if the choice of financing can be dictated by the
venture capitalist at time 0, then he would maximize his NPV by oﬀering equity financing
to the entrepreneur. The entrepreneur does better with debt, but cannot bribe the venture
capitalist to change to debt. Even if the entrepreneur had independent wealth to finance
a bribe, no deal could be struck, because the change from equity to debt would decrease
overall value. Panel E is the exception where a switch from equity to debt would make both
the entrepreneur and the venture capitalist better oﬀ.23
   We summarize our findings on debt versus equity in venture capital as follows. First,
debt does not eliminate the holdup problem when incumbent venture capitalists can dictate
the terms of later-stage financing. Second, debt financing is not generally more eﬃcient than
  23
    We have not explored diﬀerences between debt and equity over all possible parameter values. Thus we
cannot rule out cases where a switch from equity to debt in the syndication case increases overall NPV at
the venture capitalist’s expense. In such cases the entrepreneur could compensate the venture capitalist for
the switch, providing she has suﬃcient wealth. If her wealth is not suﬃcient, the alternative is to oﬀer the
venture capitalist some extra shares, options or warrants at date 1. But then we have a mix of debt and
equity financing, which would aﬀect eﬀort and value. For the use of equity securities in debt renegotiation,
see Kalay and Zender (1997) and Bhattacharya and Faure-Grimaud (2001).


                                                    24
equity. Even in the fully competitive case, switching from equity to debt sometimes adds
value (in Panels C, E and F of Table 1) and sometimes reduces value (Panels A, B and D).
Third, debt financing for high-risk startups is equivalent to compensating the entrepreneur
exclusively with options rather than shares. We think that the most eﬃcient contract will be
a mixture of shares and options for the entrepreneur — or equivalently, a combination of an
initial share award plus additional shares conditional on high realized value for the startup.
Kaplan and Strömberg (2003) document such contingent payoﬀs in practice.24
    Contingent compensation for the entrepreneur should also help reveal the startup’s value
to potential syndicate investors. Recall our discussion of the modified fixed-fraction rule,
in which the incumbent venture capitalist’s participation in date-1 financing can negate his
incentive to over-report the value of the startup. We noted that that options or contingent
share awards to the entrepreneur may be necessary to prevent a breakdown of revelation at
high values of V1 .
    An investigation of optimal contracts for venture capital will have to address (1) the mix
of shares, options or other securities given to the entrepreneur and venture capitalists, (2)
bargaining and renegotiation between incumbent venture capitalists and the entrepreneur
before additional financing is raised and (3) information revelation. We believe that these
three issues are interconnected. We leave them for further research.


7        Conclusions
As far as we know, this paper is the first to combine the main features of venture-capital
contracting in a consistent formal model. As we expected, the model has no closed-form
solution, except in the first-best case, so we embarked on an experiment in computational
corporate finance. We show how multiple contractual provisions that are common in ven-
ture capital contracts aﬀect the moral hazard, eﬀort provision, asymmetric information and
holdup problems in the entrepreneur-venture capital relationship. Venture capital contract-
ing does not solve these problems indvidually but trades them oﬀ. For example, staged
financing induces more eﬃcient investment decisions in later stages but creates a potential
holdup problem. A commitment to later stage syndication can alleviate the holdup problem
between the entrepreneur and the initial venture capitalist but introduces information rev-
elation problems between the incumbent venture capitalist and members of the later stage
syndicate.
   Venture capital financing comes with eﬃciency losses. We find significant underinvest-
ment: many positive NPV-projects cannot be financed. For projects that can be financed,
there can be large value losses due to under-provision of eﬀort, even for relatively small eﬀort
costs. A commitment to syndicate financing in later stages reduces the entrepreneur’s un-
derprovision of eﬀort, increasing overall eﬃciency. Syndication increases the NPVs of both
the entrepreneur and the initial venture capitalist. The venture capitalist’s profits increase
despite taking a smaller share than in the monopoly case.
       Syndicate financing is most eﬀective when the incumbent venture capitalist’s inside in-
  24
    Contingent payoﬀs are implicit in our model, at least in the syndication and the fully competitive cases,
because the entrepreneur’s share of the firm increases as date-1 value increases. See Figures 7 and 8.


                                                     25
formation is revealed through his participation in financing. However, the fixed-fraction
participation rule derived by Admati and Pfleiderer (1994) does not work as a revelation
mechanism in our model, because the terms of financing aﬀect the entrepreneur’s eﬀort. A
modified fixed-fraction rule, in which the incumbent’s fractional participation increases as
the reported value increases, can work in some cases. We suggest that a combination of
the modified rule with additional contingent share awards to the entrepreneur should work
generally, although a full analysis of asymmetric information and revelation will remain a
topic for further research.
   The startups that venture capitalists invest in are compound call options. Therefore
we expected strong option-like behavior, for example a strong dependence of strike values
and NPVs on the variance of final payoﬀs. But this expected behavior was attenuated or
overridden by agency and incentive problems. We noted how increased uncertainty dampens
the entrepreneur’s eﬀort, for example. This feedback is not a result of risk aversion, because
the entrepreneur is assumed risk-neutral. It arises because increased uncertainty reduces the
marginal value added by eﬀort when potential value is suﬃciently high.
    The option-like properties of venture capital investments are also attenuated because
financing is feasible only for startups that are well in the money, from a purely financial
point of view. They have to be well in the money to overcome incentive problems and costs
of eﬀort. That is why all the numerical results presented in this paper assume expected
potential value of V0 = 150 or 200, versus total investment of only 100. Even with these
prospects, financing may not be feasible, even with competitive syndicate financing. Note
the negative NPVs in panel E of Table 1, for example.
    Of course numerical results are never conclusive. One can never rule out the possibility
that results would have been diﬀerent with diﬀerent inputs or modeling choices. But we
verified our results over a wide range of inputs. Our model, though simplified, follows actual
practice in venture capital. Once we simplified, our only judgment calls were the choices of
the lognormal distribution for the startup’s value and of exponential functions for the value
added and cost of eﬀort. We believe these assumptions are reasonable, but further research
could explore alternatives.


8       Appendix
8.1     Appendix 1. Solving the optimization problems.
8.1.1    First-best.
Date 1: The entrepreneur’s date-1 N P V is

                       N P V1M = max[0, max(E1 P (x1 ) − g1 (x1 ) − I1 )]                (14)
                                         x  1


                                                g
with first-order condition for eﬀort f0 V1 = f1 . This implies the first-best eﬀort level and
                                               1
function values
                                   x1 = 1θ ln(θr f0 V1 )
                                   f1 = 1 − (θr f0 V1 )−θf /θ                             (15)
                                                    θg /θ
                                   g1 = (θr f0 V1 )

                                                26
letting θ = θf + θg , θr = θf /θg . Substituting f1∗ and g1∗ into (14) yields

                                  N P V1M = max[0, f0 V1 − θ(f0 V1 )θg /θ − I1 ]                                                              (16)
             −θ /θ      θg /θ
letting θ = θr f + θr .
    Investment procedes when N P V1M ≥ 0. Let V 1 be such that N P V1M (V 1 ) = 0. Then
V 1 is calculated numerically from

                                               I1 = f0 V 1 − θ(f0 V 1 )θg /θ                                                                  (17)

   Date 0: The entrepreneur’s date-0 N P V is the diﬀerence between her expected date-1
N P V and the t = 0 costs of investment and eﬀort:

                       N P V0M = max[0, max
                                         x
                                           (E0 N P V1M (x0 ) − g0 (x0 ) − I0 )]                                                               (18)
                                                            0


The NPV expectation is taken by weighting each possible N P V1M realization (Eq. (16))
from V 1 onwards

                                ∞                                                 ∞                                       ∞
                                                                      θg /θ                        θg /θ
  E0 N P V1M (x0 )   = f0               Π(V )V dV − θf0                                   Π(V )V           dV − I1                Π(V )dV     (19)
                            V 1 (x0 )                                         V 1 (x0 )                               V 1 (x0 )


where Π(V ) is the lognormal density. Since N P V1M (x0 , V 1 (x0 )) = 0, the entrepreneur’s
first-order condition for eﬀort reduces to

                                              E0 (N P V1M (x0 )) = g0 (x0 )

with E0 (N P V1M (x0 )) taken from (19)
                                          ⎡                                                                                             ⎤
                                                  ∞                                                         ∞
                                 ⎢                                                        θg θ −θf /θ
                                                                                                                                      dV ⎥
                                                                                                                              θg /θ
         E0 (N P V1M (x0 )) = f0 ⎣                        Π(V )V dV −                         f0                    Π(V )V               ⎦    (20)
                                                                                           θ
                                              V 1 (x0 )                                                 V 1 (x0 )



   Change of variables on the lognormal establishes that
                         ∞
                                                             k2 σ 2
                                          k                    2
                                                                    +µk                      µ − ln a
                              Π(V )V dV = e                                     N(0,1)                + kσ                                    (21)
                        a
                                                                                                σ

where µ = E(ln V ), σ 2 = V ar(ln V ), and N(0,1) is the standard normal cdf.                                                           Using this
property the entrepreneur’s first-order condition simplifies to
                                                          θf θg σ 2
    1 θx0               1                            −                   θg θ̃ θg /θ −θf /θ              2θg − θ
                                                            2θ 2
       e = V0 N(0,1) φ + σ − e                                                V0    f0      N(0,1) φ + σ                                      (22)
    θr                  2                                                 θ                                2θ

letting φ = σ1 ln VV0 . We solve numerically for x0 since φ = φ(V 1 (x0 )). A calculation whether
                    1
N P V0M (x0 ) ≥ 0 determines whether the initial I0 + g0 investment will be made.

                                                                        27
8.1.2    Monopolist case.
Date 1: The entrepreneur’s date-1 eﬀort and NPV are similar to Eqs. (14)-(16). Firm
value is multiplied by the entrepreneur’s share of the project α1M = 1 − α1C and I1 drops out
of her NPV term, yielding

                        N P V1M (α1C ) = max[0, max
                                                 x
                                                    α1M E1 P (x1 ) − g1 (x1 ) ]                                    (23)
                                                            1




                                             x1 = 1θ ln(θr α1M f0 V1 )
                                             f1 = 1 − (θr α1M f0 V1 )−θf /θ                                        (24)
                                             g1 = (θr α1M f0 V1 )θg /θ
                         N P V1M (α1C ) = max 0, α1M f0 V1 − θ(α1M f0 V1 )θg /θ                                    (25)
   The venture capitalist chooses α1C to maximize his date 1 N P V , equal to his share of
the firm value decreased by time 1 investment costs. Plugging in f1 from (24) yields
                        ⎡                                                      ⎤

   N P V1C = max ⎣0,                   max          α1C E1 P (x1 (α1C )) − I1 ⎦                                    (26)
                            αC
                             1 ∈   (
                                   0,αC
                                      1 (max)   ]
                        ⎡                                                                                         ⎤
                                                                                                     −θf /θ
              = max ⎣0,                max          α1C f0 V1 − θr−θf /θ (f0 V1 )θg /θ α1C 1 −   α1C          − I1 ⎦
                            αC
                             1 ∈   (
                                   0,αC
                                      1 (max)   ]

    The venture capitalist operates subject to the entrepreneur’s participation constraint of
N P V1M (α1C ) ≥ 0. The maximum α1C share he can take is obtained by setting the last term
in (25) equal to zero. This yields

                                                                              θ̃θ/θf
                                   α1C (max) = 1 − α1M (min) = 1 −                                                 (27)
                                                                              f0 V1

the limit point for α1C in (26). The unconstrained first-order condition for α1C is:

                                                                               θg C
                            (θr f0 V1 )θf /θ = (1 − α1C )−θf /θ−1 1 −            α                                 (28)
                                                                               θ 1

If α1C ∈ 0, α1C (max) , the venture capitalist chooses the unconstrained value; if not, he
assigns α1C (max).25
    However, in most parameterizations the constraint never binds. That is, V1 , the con-
tinuation point, is typically high enough that the entrepreneur’s participation constraint is
always slack. For large V1 , α1C grows more slowly than α1C (max), so it is only for small V 1
  25
     This follows because N P V1C is concave in αC    M
                                                 1 . α1 (min) may be greater than 1 if f0 is small or the V1
realization is low. Liquidation would ensue.




                                                           28
(which result from small I1 ) that the constraint may bind. For realistic parameterizations,
the entrepreneur enjoys positive N P V everywhere past (and including) V 1 .26
   Since the venture capitalist typically hits his participation constraint first, his N P V
                                C                          C        C
determines V 1 . We compute V 1 by looking for the pair V 1 , α1C V 1     that sets N P V1C =
0. This pair solves, from Eq. (26),
                            C           C                C θg /θ                  C                                  C     −θf /θ
              I1 = α1C   V 1 f0 V 1 − f0 V 1                       α1C           V1        θr 1 − α1C           V1                     (29)

and from Eq. (28)

                            C θf /θ                                C     −θf /θ−1                        θg C        C
                     θr f0 V 1          = 1 − α1C                 V1                          1−           α    V1                     (30)
                                                                                                         θ 1
       Solving this system of equations implies
                                                                       θg C               C
                                                 C       I1 1 −          α
                                                                        θ 1
                                                                                      V1
                                             V   1   =                                C       2                                        (31)
                                                           θf
                                                              f
                                                            θ 0
                                                                       α1C       V1
                                    C
after first solving for α1C       V1        numerically from
                                                                                                            1
                                        θg                 C       2             θg C                C     θr
                                         θ
                                                 α1C     V1             1−         α
                                                                                  θ 1
                                                                                         V1
                                 I1 =                                                                                                  (32)
                                                                             C    (1+θ/θf )
                                                       1−   α1C         V    1

                                   C
Investment occurs if V1 > V 1 .
       Date 1: The entrepreneur’s date 0 value is

                          N P V0M = max[0, max(E0 N P V1M (x0 ) − g0 (x0 ))]                                                           (33)
                                            x                 0


with first-order condition
                                                              C                                     C      C
                    E0 N P V1M (x0 )             = Π V 1 N P V1M f0 , V 1 V 1 + g0 (x0 )                                               (34)
                                                                                                  ∂αC
   To compute (N P V1M (x0 )) , we need the formula for                                             1
                                                                                                   ∂x0
                                                                                                          or α1C .       Using the implicit
function theorem on Eq. (28) yields
                                                                                          θg C
                                                       f0 (1 − α1C )(1 −                    α
                                                                                           θ 1
                                                                                                    )
                                        α1C =                                θg C
                                                                                                                                       (35)
                                                              f0 2 −           α
                                                                              θ 1
  26
     One can look at the entrepreneur’s positive NPV intuitively or mathematically. Intuitively, the venture
capitialist is better oﬀ when the entrepreneur has a higher incentive to provide eﬀort. α1C (max) is generally
very high, and venture capitalist does better by taking a smaller than maximum share.
   Mathematically, the continuation point V 1 is determined by the venture capitalist’s NPV because of the
additive investment cost function. Since I1 does not aﬀect F OC1C or F OC1M , by altering I1 one alters the
venture capitalist’s profitability without changing the optimal α1CT and the entrepreneur’s profitability. Rea-
sonable I1 is high enough to make the venture capitalist’s NPV surpass 0 without causing the entrepreneur’s
to fall below 0.




                                                                   29
Deriving entrepreneur value (Eq. (25)) with respect to initial eﬀort, taking its expectation
                                         C
over all possible V1 realizations from V 1 onwards, and using (35) yields the left-hand side
term in (34):
                                 ⎡                                                                                                    θg /θ
                                                                                                                                                ⎤
                                      ∞                                                               ∞
                                 ⎢                           α1M V                    θg −θf /θ                        α1M        V             ⎥
E0 (N P V1M (x0 )) = f0 ⎢
                        ⎣                     Π(V )                        dV −         θ̃f                   Π(V )                           dV ⎥
                                                                                                                                                 ⎦
                                                      2−       θg C
                                                                 α                    θ 0                              2−     θg C
                                                                                                                                α
                                  V 1 (x0 )                     θ 1                               V 1 (x0 )                    θ 1

                                                                                                                           (36)
                                                                                                                                          C
      The middle term in Eq. (34) is evaluated as follows.                                N P V1M     is found plugging V and             1
         C                                                                                  C
α1C    V 1 from Eq.s (31) and (32) into Eq. (25). Π                                       V 1 is      taken from the lognormal
                             C
distribution. For V 1 , the implicit function theorem on Eq. (31) and α1C from Eq. (35)
yield
                                                      C
                                         C     −f0 V 1
                                       V1 =                                                 (37)
                                               f0 α1C
    We solve numerically for x0 from Eq. (34). We evaluate the integrals point-by-point,
ending the summation at 6 times the standard deviation of V1 . Given x∗0 , and assuming
that the entrepreneur wants to continue, i.e. N P V0M (x∗0 ) > 0, the venture capitalist decides
whether to invest. His option is worth
                                         N P V0C = max[0, E0 N P V1C (x0 ) − I0 ]                                                             (38)
with
                         ⎡                                                  ∞                                                                   ⎤
                     ⎢                                            f0                 Π(V )α1C V dV                                        ⎥
                     ⎢                                                   V 1 (x0 )                                                        ⎥
E0 N P V1C (x0 )    =⎢
                     ⎢                                ∞                                                                  ∞
                                                                                                                                          ⎥
                                                                                                                                          ⎥
                     ⎣ −θr−θf /θ f θg /θ                     Π(V )α1C (1 − α1C )−θf /θ V
                                                                                                   θg /θ
                                                                                                           dV − I1                Π(V )dV ⎦
                                  0
                                                 V 1 (x0 )                                                            V 1 (x0 )
                                                                                                                                              (39)
If   N P V0C   > 0 the venture capitalist will provide funding.

8.1.3     Monopolist case, no staging.
Date 1: The entrepreneur’s date-1 NPV and eﬀort is determined as in Eqs. (23-24) except
that α1M , the manager’s date 1 project share, has already been negotiated and set at date 0.
Denoting this as α1M = α0M , the manager’s date-1 N P V simplifies to
                                 N P V1M = max 0, α0M f0 V1 − θ(α0M f0 V1 )θg /θ                                                              (40)
Because all funding (I0 + I1 ) has been supplied upfront, the venture capitalist no longer has
any decisions to make at t = 1. The entrepreneur now makes the continuation decision, so
that V1 , the continuation point, is found by setting N P V1M = 0. This yields
                                                                          θ̃θ/θf
                                                             V1M =                                                                            (41)
                                                                         α0M f0
Letting α1C = α0C , the venture capitalist’s N P V (26) simplifies to
                             ⎧                                                                                               M
                             ⎨                                       0                                        if V1 < V 1
               N P V1C   =⎩                                                                   −θf /θ                         M                (42)
                                 α0C f0 V1 − α0C (f0 V1 )θg /θ θr 1 − α0C                                     if V1 ≥ V 1

                                                                     30
   Date 0: At date 0, the venture capitalist decides his ultimate project share α0C∗ and
the entrepreneur decides how much eﬀort to exert. For a given α0C , the entrepreneur’s value
is
             N P V0M (αC
                       0 ) = max[0, max(E0 N P V1
                                                 M
                                                   x0 (α0C ), α0C − g0 x0 (α0C ) ]      (43)
                                                 x0

The expectation of the entrepreneur’s date-1 NPV is found by weighting (40) over possible
V1 realizations. Again letting α1M = α0M and using the strike value from (41), we obtain
                                                      ∞                                                   ∞
                                                                                                                       θg /θ
      E0 N P V1M (x0 (α0C ), α0C )   =   α0M f0            Π(V )V dV −           θ(α0M f0 )θg /θ              Π(V )V           dV       (44)
                                                      M                                                   M
                                                  V   1                                               V   1

Change of variables on the lognormal (as in the first-best case) establishes that
                                                           1
        E0 N P V1M (x0 (α0C ), α0C ) = α0M f0 V0 N(0,1) φ + σ                                                                           (45)
                                                           2
                                                          −θf θg σ 2
                                                            2θ 2                            θg /θ                      2θg − θ
                                                 −e                       θ̃ α0M f0 V0              N(0,1) φ + σ
                                                                                                                         2θ
leading to the entrepreneur’s first-order condition for eﬀort
                                                         θf θg σ 2
  1 θx0                   1                          −                 θg θ̃ M         θg /θ                                    2θg − θ
                                                           2θ 2                                     −θf /θ
     e = α0M V0 N(0,1) φ + σ − e                                             α0 V0               f0           N(0,1) φ + σ
  θr                      2                                             θ                                                         2θ
                                                                                                                                      (46)
              1
letting φ =   σ
                  ln VV10M .   Again we solve numerically for x0 .
   The venture capitalist anticipates x0 (α0C ) when he sets α0C . He must restrict his search
to α0C ∈ 0, α0C (max) , where α0C (max) is such that

                      E0 N P V1M (x0 (α0C (max)), α0C (max)) − g0 (x0 (α0C (max))) = 0                                                  (47)
This constraint rarely binds, and α0C∗ will be chosen to maximize

                   N P V0C = max 0,              max             E0 N P V1C (x0 (α0C ), α0C ) − I0 − I1                                 (48)
                                            αC        C
                                             0 (max)≥α0

Taking the expectation of (42) and using x0 from the entrepreneur’s maximization and the
strike value from (41), we obtain
                                             ∞

E0 N P V1C (x0 (α0C ), α0C )   =   α0C f0         Π(V )V dV                                                                             (49)
                                             M
                                            V1
                                                                                         ∞
                                                                   θ /θ
                                   −α0C (1       −    α0C )−θf /θ f0 g θr−θf /θ                 Π(V )V θg /θ dV
                                                                                         M
                                                                                       V1
                                                     1
                               = α0C f0 V0 N(0,1) φ + σ −                                                                               (50)
                                                     2
                                                                                                 −θf θg σ 2
                                                               −θf /θ              θg /θ           2θ 2                             2θg − θ
                                   α0C    θr (1 −        α0C )              (f0 V0 )        e                  N(0,1) φ + σ
                                                                                                                                      2θ

                                                                     31
                                                                   1        V0
again using change of variables and letting φ =                    σ
                                                                       ln    M.             We solve for α0C∗ numerically, since
                                                                            V1
f0 = f0 (x0 (α0C )). If N P V0C ≥ 0 investment will proceed.

8.1.4      Syndicate case.
Date 1: At date 1, for a given share α1M , the entrepreneur’s NPV and maximization
problem are the same as before. We obtain x1 , f1 , g1 , and N P V1M (α1S ) exactly as in Eq.s
(23)-(25), but where α1M = α0M (1 − α1S ). The share given to the outside syndicate, α1S , is
determined by setting N P V1S equal to zero, which yields

                       I1 = α1S f0 f1 (α1S )V1                                                                             (51)
                                                                   −θf /θ
                           = α1S f0 V1 − α1S (1 − α1S )                     (f0 V1 )θg /θ (θr α0M )−θf /θ                  (52)

after substituting f1 . This is solved numerically for α1S .
    We solve for V 1 using the same procedure as in the monopolistic venture capitalist sce-
nario. As previously, V 1 may imply that N P V1M (V 1 ) > 0 or that N P V1M (V 1 ) = 0. Again,
for realistic values of I1 the entrepreneur’s participation constraint is always slack. There-
fore we identify V 1 by finding the point where the maximum value to the syndicate is zero.
At this point the value of α1S implied by the syndicate’s zero-profit condition (51) is equal
to the value implied by the syndicate’s hypothetical maximization problem. The syndicate’s
hypothetical F OC1S is:27

                                                                       −θf /θ−1                   θg S
                          (θr α0M f0 V1 )θf /θ = 1 − α1S                                     1−     α                      (53)
                                                                                                  θ 1
                                                          S             S                                 S            S
       We solve for V 1 by finding the pair V 1 , α1S V 1                           such that α1S V 1 = α1S          V 1 . We
                   S
compute α1S V 1 numerically from
                                                                                                     1
                                        θg                S    2              θg S     S            θr
                                         θ
                                                α1S V 1                1−        α V1
                                                                               θ 1
                             I1 α0M =                                           1+θ/θf
                                                                                                                           (54)
                                                                            S
                                                     1 − α1S V              1

                                                                            S
Using F OC1S (Eq. (53)) once again, we compute V 1 as
                                                                   θg S             S
                                            S       I1 1 −           α
                                                                    θ 1
                                                                                V1
                                        V   1   =                               S       2                                  (55)
                                                     θf
                                                      θ
                                                          f0 α1S V 1

   These two expressions are nearly identical to Eq.s (31) and (32), pertaining to the mo-
nopolistic venture capitalist’s breakeven point. The sole diﬀerence in the expressions is the
presence of α0M , the entrepreneur’s initial project share, on the left-hand side of Eq. (54).
  27
    In general there will be two solutions to the zero-profit equation, αS1 and αS1 . αS1 is the maximum
share which can be given to the syndicate and still return N P V S = 0; αS1 is the minimum share. For
α1S ∈ (αS1 , αS1 ), the syndicate enjoys positive expected profits (indeed these two values can be thought of
as bounds for the profit-maximizing share). When V1 = V 1 , then αS1 = α1ST = αS1 . We use αS1 in all
computations.


                                                              32
                      S                                      S
This lowers α1S V 1 , implying a higher V 1 than in the monopolistic venture capitalist sce-
                                                                    S
nario. Investment at date 1 occurs for V1 > V 1 .
    Date 0: At date 0, the venture capitalist decides his project share α0C∗ and the en-
trepreneur decides how much eﬀort to exert. For a given α0C , the entrepreneur’s value
is
            N P V0M (αC
                      0 ) = max[0, max(E0 N P V1M x0 (α0C ), α0C − g0 x0 (α0C ) ]   (56)
                                    x              0

Using the solutions for f1 , g1 , and α1S from Eqs. (24) and (51), we get
                                                                    ∞

        E0 N P V1M (x0 (α0C ), α0C )   =       α0M f0                           Π(V )V (1 − α1S )dV                                 (57)
                                                           V 1 (x0 (αC    C
                                                                     0 ),α0 )
                                                                                   ∞
                                                                                                                       θg /θ
                                               −θ(α0M f0 )θg /θ                                Π(V )(V (1 − α1S ))             dV
                                                                        V           C    C
                                                                            1 (x0 (α0 ),α0 )


We solve for x0 (α0C ) numerically, exactly as in the monopolistic venture capitalist case, only
using the lower α1S share in the entrepreneur’s NPV term.
   The venture capitalist anticipates x0 (α0C ) when he sets α0C . He must restrict his search
to α0C ∈ 0, α0C (max) , where α0C (max) is such that

                    E0 N P V1M (x0 (α0C (max)), α0C (max)) − g0 (x0 (α0C (max))) = 0                                                (58)

This constraint rarely binds, and α0C∗ will be chosen to maximize

                     N P V0C = max 0,                  max         E0 N P V1C (x0 (α0C ), α0C ) − I0                                (59)
                                                αC
                                                 0
                                                        C
                                                       α0 (max)


Using the solutions for f1 , g1 , and α1S from Eq.s (24) and (51), and x0 from the entrepreneur’s
maximization, we obtain
                                                       ∞

E0 N P V1C (x0 (α0C ), α0C )   =   α0C f0                         Π(V )V (1 − α1S )dV                                                (60)
                                            V 1 (x0 (αC    C
                                                      0 ),α0 )
                                                                                                ∞
                                                                θ /θ
                                   −α0C (1     −   α0C )−θf /θ f0 g θr−θf /θ                                Π(V )(V (1 − α1S ))θg /θ dV
                                                                                       V 1 (x0 (αC    C
                                                                                                 0 ),α0 )


We solve for α0C∗ numerically, again evaluating the integrals point-by-point, ending the sum-
mation at 6 standard deviations of V1 . If N P V0C ≥ 0 investment will proceed.

8.2      Appendix 2. Syndicate Financing: Asymmetric Information.
8.2.1     The Case of no eﬀort at t = 1.
Consider a project where there is no date 1 eﬀort, only the I1 cost. In expectation the
project is worth (letting f0 = 1 for simplicity) P = V1 − I1 . The original venture capitalist’s
exposure is

                                                                 33
                                            N P V1C = α1C V1 − βI1                               (61)
where

                                           α1C = α0C + α1S (β − α0C )                            (62)
     If the truth is reported in equilibrium, then
                                                      I1   I1
                                             α1S =       =     = α̂1S                            (63)
                                                      V1   V̂1
   To make the capitalist indiﬀerent between telling the truth and lying about V1 , we take
the derivative of Eq. (61) with respect to V̂1 and set it equal to zero which yields

                                                    ∂α1C       ∂β
                                               V1         = I1                                   (64)
                                                    ∂ V̂1      ∂ V̂1
or, using α̂1S V̂1 = I1 ,
                                                     −I1       ∂β         ∂β
                                     V1 (β − α0C )        + I1       = I1                        (65)
                                                     V̂12      ∂ V̂1      ∂ V̂1
    The only solution is β = α0C . Similarly, we can derive the solution when I1 can vary (for
instance if I1 influences the probability of favorable V2 realizations).

8.2.2     The Case of t = 1 eﬀort by the entrepreneur.
When we have endogenous eﬀort,

                                           N P V1C = α1C f1 V1 − βI1                             (66)

and
                                                   I1      I1
                                          α1S =         =        = α̂1S                          (67)
                                                  f1 V1   f1 V̂1
     Diﬀerentiating by V̂1 , we obtain
                                              ∂α1C        ∂f1        ∂β
                                      V1 f1         + α1C       = I1                             (68)
                                              ∂ V̂1       ∂ V̂1      ∂ V̂1
or
                          −I1 1 ∂f1         1                  ∂β             ∂f1        ∂β
                 V1 f1                    +    (β − α0C ) + I1       + V1 α1C       = I1         (69)
                         fˆ1 V̂1 fˆ1 ∂ V̂1 V̂1                 ∂ V̂1          ∂ V̂1      ∂ V̂1
     Enforcing V̂1 = V1 and using α1S f1 V1 = I1 , this reduces to
                                   I1   ∂f1                                      ∂f1
                      (β − α0C )      =       V1 α1C − V1 (β − α0C )α1S = V1 α0C                 (70)
                                   V1   ∂ V̂1                                    ∂ V̂1
that is

                                              α1C − α0C   V1 ∂f1
                                                   C
                                                        =                                        (71)
                                                 α0       f1 ∂ V̂1

                                                         34
    First we note that if the eﬀort did not change with V1 , the right-hand side would equal
zero requiring again that α1C = α0C or β = α0C . However when ∂∂fV̂1 > 0, α1C must be greater
                                                                     1
than α0C in order to prevent overreporting of V1 . The gap between α1C and α0C is responsible
for the under-reporting motive, because for high V1 realizations the venture capitalist can
increase his share of the project, relative to α0C , on an N P V > 0 basis.

8.3     Appendix 3:
8.3.1   Monopolist debt financing.
Date-2: The final payouts in the debt financing case are options on final firm value:

                                   N P V2M = max(0, f0 f1 V2 − K1 )
                                                                                                                (72)
                               N P V2C = f0 f1 V2 − max(0, f0 f1 V2 − K1 )

Let V 2 identify the point at which the entrepreneur begins receiving cashflows or
                                                              K1
                                                      V2 =                                                      (73)
                                                             f0 f1

   Date-1: The entrepreneur’s date-1 eﬀort and NPV must be solved for numerically with
debt financing. The entrepreneur’s NPV is the probability weighted expectation of her t = 2
payouts past V 2 . That is
                                          ∞                                        ∞

          N P V1M (K1 , x1 )   = f0               Π(V )f1 (x1 )V dV − K1                   Π(V )dV − g1 (x1 )   (74)
                                      V 2 (x1 )                                V 2 (x1 )

Change of variables on the lognormal establishes that
                                                                   σ                 σ
   N P V1M (K1 ) = max[0, max f0 f1 V1 N(0,1) φ +                    − K1 N(0,1) φ −   − g1 (x1 ) ]             (75)
                           x     1                                 2                 2
                                                               1
where N(0,1) is standard normal cdf and φ =                    σ
                                                                   ln VV1 .   We solve numerically for x1 since
                                                                        2
φ = φ(V 2 (x1 )).
   The venture capitalist chooses K1 to maximize his date 1 N P V , anticipating f1 (K1 )
from the entrepreneur’s maximization. The venture capitalist’s NPV is derived similarly to
the entrepreneur’s, yielding
                                                                              σ  σ
  N P V1C = max[0,       max               f0 f1 V1 1 − N(0,1) φ +                    + K1 N(0,1) φ −
                                                                                     − I1 ]
                    K1 ∈(0,K1 (max)]                                          2  2
                                                                                          (76)
    As before, the venture capitalist operates subject to the entrepreneur’s participation
constraint of N P V1M (K1 ) ≥ 0. The maximum K1 level he can take is obtained numerically,
as is K1 . If K1 ∈ [0, K1 (max)] , the venture capitalist chooses the unconstrained value; if
not, he assigns K1 (max).
                                                                                  C
    Since we impose that N P V1M (K1 ) ≥ 0, we solve for the continuation point V 1 by setting
                                                                                            C
the venture capitalist’s maximized N P V from (76) to zero. Investment occurs if V1 > V 1 .

                                                          35
   Date-0: The entrepreneur’s date 0 value is

                          N P V0M = max[0, max(E0 N P V1M (x0 ) − g0 (x0 ))]                           (77)
                                            x          0


where

                                              ∞
                                                                         σ
               E0 N P V1M (x0 )   = f0            Π(V )f1 V N(0,1) φ +     dV                          (78)
                                              C
                                                                         2
                                          V1
                                           ∞                                         ∞
                                                                       σ
                                      −           Π(V )K1 N(0,1)    φ−   dV −            Π(V )g1∗ dV   (79)
                                              C
                                                                       2             C
                                          V   1                                  V   1


Recall that each V1 realization implies K1 (V1 ), f1 (K1 (V1 )), and φ(V 2 (K1 , f1 )). We solve
for x0 numerically, evaluating the integrals point-by-point, ending the summation at 6 times
the standard deviation of V1 .
   Given x∗0 , and assuming that the entrepreneur wants to continue, i.e. N P V0M (x∗0 ) > 0,
the venture capitalist decides whether to invest. His option is worth

                                  N P V0C = max[0, E0 N P V1C (x0 ) − I0 ]                             (80)

with
                                              ∞
                                                                             σ
               E0 N P V1C (x0 )   = f0            Π(V )f1 V 1 − N(0,1) φ +               dV            (81)
                                              C
                                                                             2
                                          V   1
                                              ∞                                   ∞
                                                                       σ
                                      +           Π(V )K1 N(0,1)    φ−   dV −            Π(V )I1 dV0
                                              C
                                                                       2          C
                                        V1                                       V1


If N P V0C > 0 the venture capitalist will provide funding.

8.3.2       Debt financing with date-1 syndication.
Date-2: At t = 1 a syndicate of investors provides I1 , purchasing a pari passu debt issuance
on competitive terms. Denoting this debt level as K1S , and defining K as the total debt due
or K = K0C + K1S , final payouts are

                                   N P V2M = max(0, f0 f1 V2 − K)
                                     KC                   KC
                           N P V2C = K0 f0 f1 V2 − max(0, K0 f0 f1 V2 − K0C )                          (82)
                                     KS                   KS
                           N P V2S = K1 f0 f1 V2 − max(0, K1 f0 f1 V2 − K1S )
        S
Let V 2 identify the point at which the entrepreneur begins receiving cash flows or

                                                       S     K
                                                     V2 =                                              (83)
                                                            f0 f1


                                                           36
   Date-1:
   At date 1, for a given combined debt level K, the entrepreneur’s NPV and maximization
problem are the same as before. We obtain x1 (K), f1 (K), g1 (K), and N P V1M (K) from Eq.
(75), but using K = K0C + K1S rather than K1 .
    The face value of debt issued to the outside syndicate is determined by setting N P V1S
equal to zero. Taking the expectation of his t = 2 payouts from (82) and using change of
variables yields
                              K1S                        1                              1
         N P V1S (K1S ) =         f0 f1 V1 1 − N(0,1) φ + σ             + K1S N(0,1) φ − σ − I1         (84)
                              K                          2                              2
            1        V1
where φ =   σ
                ln    S.   This implies
                     V2

                            K1S                        1                            1
                     I1 =       f0 f1 V1 1 − N(0,1) φ + σ           + K1S N(0,1) φ − σ                  (85)
                            K                          2                            2
Substituting f1 (K) from the entrepreneur’s maximization, this is solved numerically for K1S .
    We solve for V 1 using the same procedure as in the monopolistic venture capitalist sce-
nario, finding the point where the maximum value to the syndicate is zero. There are two
diﬀerences in the syndicate’s and monopolistic venture capitalist’s maximization problem,
both stemming from the incumbent venture capitalist’s outstanding debt level. First, the
                      S                                              KS
debt default point, V 2 , is higher by K0C . Second, the presence of K1 , the syndicate’s share
of total debt, reduces the syndicate’s share of firm value when debt defaults. Both imply a
          S
higher V 1 than in the monopolistic venture capitalist scenario. Investment at date 1 occurs
            S
for V1 > V 1 .
   Date-0:
   At date 0, the venture capitalist decides his debt level K0C∗ and the entrepreneur decides
how much eﬀort to exert. For a given K0C , the entrepreneur’s value is

            N P V0M (K0C ) = max[0, max
                                     x
                                       (E0 N P V1M x0 (K0C ), K0C − g0 x0 (K0C ) ]                      (86)
                                            0


where
                                                    ∞
                                                                             1
        E0 N P V1M     x0 (K0C ), K0C     = f0           Π(V )f1 V N(0,1) φ + σ dV                      (87)
                                                     S
                                                                             2
                                                    V1
                                                     ∞                                ∞
                                                                           1
                                                −        Π(V )KN(0,1)   φ − σ dV −        Π(V )g1∗ dV
                                                    S
                                                                           2          S
                                                V1                                   V1

Each V1 realization implies K(V1 ), f1 (K(V1 )), and φ(V 2 (K, f1 )). We solve for x0 (K0C )
numerically, exactly as in the monopolistic venture capitalist case, but using the combined
debt level K = K0C + K1S .
   The venture capitalist anticipates x0 (K0C ) when he sets K0C . He restricts his search to
K0C ∈ 0, K0C (max) , where K0C (max) is such that

                     E0 N P V1M (x0 (K0C (max)), K0C (max)) − g0 (x0 (K0C (max))) = 0                   (88)

                                                           37
This constraint rarely binds, and K0C∗ is chosen to maximize

                  N P V0C = max[0,         max           E0 N P V1C (x0 (K0C ), K0C ) − I0 ]        (89)
                                       K0C (max)≥K0C


Using x0 from the entrepreneur’s maximization, the venture capitalist’s expected t = 1 value
is
                                                    ∞
                                                                   V               1
        E0 N P V1C (x0 (K0C ), K0C )   =   K0C f0        Π(V )f1     1 − N(0,1) φ + σ          dV   (90)
                                                     S
                                                                   K               2
                                                    V1
                                                     ∞
                                                                        1
                                           +K0C          Π(V )N(0,1) φ − σ dV
                                                    S
                                                                        2
                                                  V1


We solve for K0C∗ numerically, again evaluating the integrals point-by-point, ending the
summation at 6 standard deviations of V1 . If N P V0C ≥ 0 investment will proceed.




                                                     38
References
 [1] Admati, A.R. and P. Pfleiderer, 1994, “Robust Financial Contracting and the Role of
     Venture Capitalists”, Journal of Finance, 371-402.

 [2] Aghion, P. and P. Bolton, 1992, “An Incomplete Contract Approach to Financial Con-
     tracting,” Review of Economic Studies, 59, 473-494.

 [3] Aghion, P., Bolton, P. and J. Tirole, 2004, “Exit Options in Corporate Finance: Liq-
     uidity versus Incentives”, Review of Finance, forthcoming.

 [4] Bergemann and Hege, 1998, “Venture Capital Finance, Moral Hazard and Learning”,
     Journal of Banking and Finance, 22, 703-735.

 [5] Berglöf, E. 1994, “A Control Theory of Venture Capital Finance”, Journal of Law,
     Economics and Organization, 10, 247-267.

 [6] Bhattacharya, S. and A. Faure-Grimaud, 2001, “The Debt Hangover: Renegotiation
     with Noncontractible Investment,” Economics Letters, 70, 413-419.

 [7] Black, B. and R. Gilson, 1998, “Venture Capital and the Structure of Capital Markets”,
     Journal of Financial Economics, 47, 243-277.

 [8] Boyd, J. and B. Smith, 1994, How Good Are Standard Debt Contracts? Stochastic
     Versus Non-stochastic Monitoring in a Costly State Verification Environment, Journal
     of Business, 67, 539-561.

 [9] Cestone, G. and L. White, 2003, “Anticompetitive Financial Contracting: The Design
     of Financial Claims”, Journal of Finance, 58, 2109-2141.

[10] Cassamatta, C., 2003, Financing and Advising: Optimal Financial Contracts with Ven-
     ture Capitalists, Journal of Finance, 58, 2059-2086.

[11] Cassamatta, C. and C. Haritchabalet, 2004, Learning and Syndication in Venture Cap-
     ital Investments, mimeo, University of Toulouse.

[12] Chemla, G., Habib, M. and A. Lyngquist, 2002, Shareholder Agreements, Working
     Paper, University of British Columbia.

[13] Cornelli, F. and O. Yosha, 2003, “Stage Financing and the Role of Convertible Securi-
     ties”, Review of Economic Studies, 70, 1-32.

[14] Fenn, G., W. Liang and S. Prowse, 1995, ”The Economics of the Private Equity Market”,
     Boards of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Publications.

[15] Fluck, Z., 1998, “Optimal Financial Contracting: Debt versus Outside Equity,” Review
     of Financial Studies, 11, 383-418.

[16] Fluck, Z., 2001, Financial Contracting in Start-ups and Ongoing Firms: A Life-cycle
     Theory of Financing, Working Paper, Michigan State University.


                                            39
[17] Gompers, 1995, “Optimal Investment, Monitoring and the Staging of Venture Capital”,
     Journal of Finance, 50, 1461-1489.
[18] Gompers, Paul A., and J. Lerner, 1996, “The Use of Covenants: An Empirical Analysis
     of Venture Partnership Agreements”. Journal of Law and Economics, 39, No. 2, 463-498.
[19] Gompers, P. and J. Lerner, 2002, The Venture Capital Cycle, MIT Press, Cambridge,
     MA.
[20] Gompers, P., Lerner, J. and D. Scharfstein, 2003, Entrepreneurial Spawning: Public
     Corporations and the Genesis of New Ventures, 1986-1999, Working Paper, Harvard
     University.
[21] Gorman, A. and W. Sahlman, 1989, “What do Venture Capitalists Do?”, Journal of
     Business Venturing, 4, 231-248.
[22] Green, R., 1984, “Investment Incentives, Debt and Warrants”, Journal of Financial
     Economics, 13, 115-136.
[23] Gromb, D. and D. Scharfstein, 2003, Entrepreneurship in Equilibrium, Working Paper,
     MIT.
[24] Hellmann, T., 1998, “The allocation of control rights in venture capital contracts”, Rand
     Journal of Economics, 29, 57-76.
[25] Hellmann, T. and M. Puri, 2000, “The Interaction of Product market and Financing
     Strategy: The Role of Venture Capital”, Review of Financial Studies, 13, 959-984.
[26] Hellmann, T. and M. Puri, 2002, “Venture Capital and the Professionalization of Start-
     up Firms: Empirical Evidence”, Journal of Finance, 57, 169-197.
[27] Inderst and Mueller, 2003, Venture Capital Contracts and Market Structure, Working
     Paper, New York University.
[28] Kalay, A. and J. Zender, 1997, “Bankruptcy, Warrants, and State-Contingent Changes
     in the Ownership of Control”, Journal of Financial Intermediation, 6(4), 347-379.
[29] Kaplan, S. and Strömberg, 2003, “Financial Contracting Theory Meets the Real World:
     An Empirical Analysis of Venture Capital Contracts”, Review of Economic Studies, 70,
     281-315.
[30] Landier, 2001, Start-Up Financing: From Banks to Venture Capital, Working Paper,
     MIT.
[31] Landier and Thesmar, 2003, Entrepreneurial Optimism and Financial Contracting,
     Working Paper, New York University.
[32] Leland, H., 1994, “Corporate Debt Value, Bond Covenants, and Optimal Capital Struc-
     ture”, Journal of Finance, 49, 1213-1252.
[33] Leland, H., 1998, “Agency Costs, Risk Management and Capital Structure”, Journal of
     Finance, 53, 1213-1244.

                                             40
[34] Lerner, J., 1994, “The Syndication of Venture Capital Investments”, Financial Man-
     agement, Vol. 23 (Autumn), 16-27.

[35] Mello and Parsons, 1992, “ Measuring the Agency Cost of Debt”, Journal of Finance,
     47, 1887-1904.

[36] Myers, S., 1977, “The Determinants of Corporate Borrowing,” Journal of Financial
     Economics, 147-176.

[37] Myers, S., 1984, “The Capital Structure Puzzle,” Journal of Finance, 39, 575-592.

[38] Myers, S. and N. Majluf, 1984, “Financing Decisions When Firms Have Information
     that Investors Do Not Have,” Journal of Financial Economics, 13, 187-221.

[39] Myers, S. C., 2000, “Outside Equity”, Journal of Finance , 55, 1005-1038.

[40] Neher, D., 1999, “Staged Financing: An Agency Perspective”, Review of Economic
     Studies, 66, 255-275.

[41] Ju, N., Parrino, R., Poteshman, A. and M. Weisbach, 2004, “Horses or Rabbits? Trade-
     oﬀ Theory and Optimal Capital Structure”, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Anal-
     ysis, forthcoming.

[42] Nöldeke, G. and K. Schmidt, 1998, “Sequential Investments and Options to Own”, Rand
     Journal of Economics, 29, 633-653.

[43] Parrino, R. and M. Weisbach, 1999, “Measuring Investment Distortions Arising from
     the Stockholder-Bondholder Conflict”, Journal of Financial Economics, 53, 3—42.

[44] Parrino, R., Poteshman, A. and M. Weisbach, 2002, “Measuring Investment Distortions
     When Risk-Averse Managers Decide Whether to Undertake Risky Projects”, Working
     Paper, University of Illinois.

[45] Petersen and Rajan, 1994, “The Eﬀect of Credit Market Competition on Lending Re-
     lationships”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110, 407-443.

[46] Pichler, P. and W. Wilhelm, 2001, “A Theory of the Syndicate: Form Follows Function”,
     Journal of Finance, 56(6), 2237-64.

[47] Rajan R., 1992, “Insiders and Outsiders: The Choice between Informed and Arm’s
     Length Debt”, Journal of Finance, 47(4), 1367-1400.

[48] Repullo, R. and J. Suarez, 2004, “Venture Capital Finance: A Security Design Ap-
     proach”, Review of Finance, 8, 75-108.

[49] Robe, M., 1999, “Optimal versus Traditional Securities under Moral Hazard”, Journal
     of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 34, 161-189.

[50] Robe, M., 2001, “What can we learn from simulating a standard agency model?”,
     Economics Letters, 73, 137-146.


                                            41
[51] Sah and Stiglitz, 1986, “The Architecture of Economic Systems: Hierarchies and Pol-
     yarchies”, American Economic Review (September), 716-727.

[52] Sahlman, W. A., 1990, “The Structure and Governance of Venture Capital Organiza-
     tions”, Journal of Financial Economics (October), 473-521.

[53] Schmidt, K., 2003, “Convertible Securities and Venture Capital Finance”, Journal of
     Finance, 58(3), 1139-1166.

[54] Wilson, R., 1968, “The Theory of Syndicates”, Econometrica (January), 119-132.

[55] Winton, A. and V. Yerramilli, 2003, A Model of Entrepreneurial Finance, Working
     Paper, University of Minnesota.




                                          42
9     Tables and Figures
Table 1. Example of numerical results for nine cases: (1) No cost of eﬀort (Black-Scholes),
(2) First-best, (3) Monopoly (one investor provides all financing), (4) 100% Upfront financ-
ing, (5) Syndicate Financing at date 1, (6) Fully Competitive financing at dates 0 and 1,
(7) Monopoly Debt Financing (investor sets date 1 debt level instead of equity share), (8)
Syndicate Debt Financing at date 1 (initial investor sets debt level and syndicate sets pari-
passu debt level at date 1) and (9) Fully Competitive Debt Financing at dates 0 and 1. The
entrepreneur’s initial ownership share or contracted debt level, where relevant, is α0M and
K0 and eﬀort is x0 . V is the minimum value necessary for investment at date 1. NPV is
the net present value at date 0, overall and for the entrepreneur (M) and initial investor
(C). Potential value is V0 = E0 (V2 ) = 150. I0 and I1 denote fixed investment costs, and σ is
standard deviation per period of Vt . Eﬀort parameters are θf (value-added) and θg (cost).
Increases in θf and θg represent increases in marginal returns and costs to eﬀort, respectively.


    A. I0 = 50, I1 = 50, σ = 0.4, θf = 1.8, θg = 0.6

                                        α0M       K0      x0        V    NP V M     NP V C      NP V
     Black-Scholes                         -        -     ∞     50.00           -         -      50.03
     First-best                         1.00        -   2.54    55.35       37.90         -      37.90
     Monopoly                              -        -   1.18    70.84        3.43     13.58      17.01
     Monopoly, No Staging               0.09        -   1.54    23.77        7.53     19.36      26.89
     Syndicate, date 1                  0.15        -   1.72    84.93        7.05     20.50      27.55
     Competitive, dates 0, 1            0.46        -   2.22    69.10       36.02      0.00      36.02
     Monopoly (Debt)                       -        -   0.00       ∞       -1.00*   -50.00*    -51.00*
     Syndicate, date 1 (Debt)              -   109.31   2.27   124.60       17.80      3.92      21.72
     Competitive, dates 0, 1 (Debt)        -    76.69   2.39   105.48       30.47      0.00      30.47


    B. I0 = 50, I1 = 50, σ = 0.8, θf = 1.8, θg = 0.6

                                        α0M       K0      x0        V    NP V M     NP V C     NP V
     Black-Scholes                         -        -     ∞     50.00           -         -     52.55
     First-best                         1.00        -   2.52    55.37       41.48         -     41.48
     Monopoly                              -        -   1.17    71.14        2.59     19.45     22.05
     Monopoly, No Staging               0.10        -   1.55    22.97        8.11     19.42     27.53
     Syndicate, date 1                  0.13        -   1.64    87.28        7.00     23.95     30.95
     Competitive, dates 0, 1            0.48        -   2.21    68.83       39.63      0.00     39.63
     Monopoly (Debt)                       -        -   2.02    60.22        8.15     31.40     39.55
     Syndicate, date 1 (Debt)              -   355.84   2.08   143.77       16.15      7.66     23.80
     Competitive, dates 0, 1 (Debt)        -   167.75   2.29   103.12       34.85      0.00     34.85


*indicates projects that yield, at best, negative net present value to at least one party. Such projects
will not be implemented.



                                                  43
   C. I0 = 10, I1 = 90, σ = 0.4, θf = 1.8, θg = 0.6

                                        α0M      K0      x0         V     NP V M     NP V C    NP V
     Black-Scholes                         -       -     ∞       90.00          -          -     52.19
     First-best                         1.00       -    2.50     96.56      40.98          -     40.98
     Monopoly                              -       -    1.35    117.44       2.16      24.55     26.71
     Monopoly, No Staging               0.09       -    1.54     23.77       7.53      19.36     26.89
     Syndicate, date 1                  0.21       -    1.80    130.60       5.15      26.34     31.49
     Competitive, dates 0, 1            0.82       -    2.42    110.15      39.44       0.00     39.44
     Monopoly (Debt)                       -       -    0.00       ∞       -1.00*    -10.00*   -11.00*
     Syndicate, date 1 (Debt)              -   91.18    2.15    154.65      10.39      18.52     28.92
     Competitive, dates 0, 1 (Debt)        -   15.00    2.46    108.72      40.34       0.00     40.34


   D. I0 = 10, I1 = 90, σ = 0.8, θf = 1.8, θg = 0.6

                                        α0M       K0      x0         V    NP V M     NP V C     NP V
     Black-Scholes                         -        -     ∞       90.00          -         -     64.09
     First-best                         1.00        -    2.46     96.63      54.44         -     54.44
     Monopoly                              -        -    1.18    121.54       1.59     37.29     38.87
     Monopoly, No Staging               0.10        -    1.55     22.97       8.11     19.42     27.53
     Syndicate, date 1                  0.15        -    1.63    138.44       5.35     40.20     45.55
     Competitive, dates 0, 1            0.86        -    2.40    109.85      53.59      0.00     53.59
     Monopoly (Debt)                       -        -    1.97    106.86       6.87     45.87     52.74
     Syndicate, date 1 (Debt)              -   422.88    1.94    204.69       9.61     29.09     38.71
     Competitive, dates 0, 1 (Debt)        -    28.29    2.42    115.86      53.54      0.00     53.54




*indicates projects that yield, at best, negative net present value to at least one party. Such projects
will not be implemented.


                                                  44
   E. I0 = 10, I1 = 90, σ = 0.4, θf = 0.6, θg = 0.6

                                        α0M      K0      x0         V     NP V M     NP V C     NP V
     Black-Scholes                         -       -     ∞       90.00          -          -      52.19
     First-best                         1.00       -    3.88    123.11      10.98          -      10.98
     Monopoly                              -       -    2.15    187.29     -0.94*     -3.19*     -4.13*
     Monopoly, No Staging               0.22       -    2.72     23.14      10.85    -23.55*    -12.70*
     Syndicate, date 1                  0.51       -    3.05    178.85       1.98     -0.43*       1.55
     Competitive, dates 0, 1            0.51       -    3.05    178.85       1.98          -       1.55
     Monopoly (Debt)                       -       -    0.00       ∞       -1.00*    -10.00*    -11.00*
     Syndicate, date 1 (Debt)              -   47.39    3.30    177.18       3.14       1.17       4.31
     Competitive, dates 0, 1 (Debt)        -   30.34    3.54    158.73       7.53       0.00       7.53


   F. I0 = 10, I1 = 90, σ = 0.8, θf = 0.6, θg = 0.6

                                        α0M       K0      x0         V    NP V M     NP V C       NP V
     Black-Scholes                         -        -     ∞       90.00          -          -      64.09
     First-best                         1.00        -    3.87    123.15      27.72          -      27.72
     Monopoly                              -        -    1.88    200.74       0.29       7.59       7.88
     Monopoly, No Staging               0.21        -    2.72     23.29      11.29    -22.48*    -11.19*
     Syndicate, date 1                  0.35        -    2.80    197.18       5.01      12.50      17.50
     Competitive, dates 0, 1            0.79        -    3.63    158.20      24.95       0.00      24.95
     Monopoly (Debt)                       -        -    0.00       ∞       -1.00*    -10.00*    -11.00*
     Syndicate, date 1 (Debt)              -   218.35    3.10    229.72       6.51      10.94      17.45
     Competitive, dates 0, 1 (Debt)        -    41.06    3.71    153.95      26.15       0.00      26.15




*indicates projects that yield, at best, negative net present value to at least one party. Such projects
will not be implemented.


                                                  45
Figure 1: Eﬀort functions. As eﬀort increases, the return to eﬀort approaches 1 (100% of
potential value). The marginal cost of eﬀort is positive and increasing. The return and cost
curves depend on parameters θf and θg , which are varied here between 0.2 and 2.2.
                                                                                    150

                                                                                                      2.2   1.8   1.4       1           0.6

                         2.2   1.8   1.4              1           0.6
             1



                                                                  0.4
                                                                                    125




        0.8                                                       0.2


                                                                                    100




        0.6
    Return




                                                                                  Cost




                                                                                         75




        0.4                                                                                                                                   0.4

                                                                                         50




        0.2
                                                                                         25




                                                                                                                                              0.2




             0                                                                           0
                 0   1    2    3     4     5      6       7   8   9     10                    0   1     2    3    4     5       6   7     8   9   10

                                         Effort                                                                       Effort




                                                                             46
Figure 2: Date-1 Net present values are plotted against V1 , the date-1 realization of maximum
potential value. Potential value is V0 = E0 (V2 ) = 150. The lognormal probability density
is plotted for a standard deviation of 0.4. Date-1 investment is I1 = 50. With no costs of
eﬀort, NP V1 = V1 − I1 . When eﬀort is costly, the level and slope of NP V1 decline because
of reduced eﬀort at date 0 (the optimal eﬀort x0 is too low to attain maximum potential
value). The strike value V 1 , which incorporates the cost of date-1 eﬀort, increases from I1
to I1 + g(x1 ) = 70.84.

  NPV1(x0)                                                                           V −I
             400                                                                      1  1




             350

                                                                                    NPV1(x*0)

             300

                            Prob(V )
                                  1
             250




             200




             150




             100



                                                                                    I0 + g*0
              50                                                                    I0




               0
                   0   50
                             |    100   150   200        250   300   350   400    450
                             V1         V                                          V1
                                          0




                                                    47
Figure 3: Net Present Value at date 0 in the first-best scenario. NP V is shown across a
range of standard deviation (σ ∈ [0.1, 1.2]) and eﬀort return (θf /θg ∈ [1/11, 11]) parameters.
The dark surface presents date-0 and date-1 investment levels I0 = I1 = 50 while the light
surface presents I0 = 10, I1 = 90. Potential value is V0 = E0 (V2 ) = 150.




                                              48
Figure 4: A typical plot of ownership shares at date 1 for the entrepreneur (M) and venture
capitalist (C) in the monopoly case in where one venture capitalist provides all stage-0 and
stage-1 financing. Two curves are shown for the venture capitalist. The first αC MAX is the
maximum share at which the entrepreneur will still participate. The second αC     F OC is the
optimal share, at which the entrepreneur is provided with positive NP V and the incentive
for continued eﬀort. The optimal share is lower than the maximum share in the region
where V1 exceeds the strike value V1 . The entrepreneur’s minority share αM declines as V1
increases.

                                                                                     αCMAX
      1

                                                                                     αC
                                                                                      FOC
  α 0.9
                    V
                    1
     0.8



     0.7



     0.6



     0.5



     0.4



     0.3



     0.2



     0.1
                                                                                      αM

      0
           0   50       100   150      200     250     300     350     400     450           500
                                                  V
                                                  1




                                             49
Figure 5: Net Present Value at date 0, plotted for the Monopoly and Monopoly, No Staging
financing scenarios. NP V is shown across a range of standard deviation (σ ∈ [0.1, 1.2])
and eﬀort return (θf /θg ∈ [1/11, 11]) parameters. The dark surface presents non-staged
NP V s while the light surface presents staged NP V s. Figure 5 assumes date-0 and date-1
investment levels I0 = I1 = 50 and potential value of V0 = E0 (V2 ) = 150.




                                           50
Figure 6: Net Present Value at date 0, plotted for the Monopoly and Monopoly, No Staging
financing scenarios. NP V is shown across a range of standard deviation (σ ∈ [0.1, 1.2])
and eﬀort return (θf /θg ∈ [1/11, 11]) parameters. The dark surface presents non-staged
NP V s while the light surface presents staged NP V s. Figure 6 assumes date-0 and date-1
investment levels I0 = 10, I1 = 90 and potential value of V0 = E0 (V2 ) = 150.




                                           51
Figure 7: A typical plot of ownership shares at date 1 for the entrepreneur (M), initial venture
capitalist (C) and syndicate of new investors (S) for the syndicate case. The syndicate
provides financing on competitive terms (NP V = 0) whenever V1 exceeds the strike value
V1 , which is higher than in the monopoly case shown in Figure 4. The syndicate’s optimal
share αSF OC is lower than the maximum share αSMAX at which the entrepreneur would still
participate. The constrained share αS declines as V1 increases, while the ownership shares
held by the entrepreneur and incumbent venture capitalist increase with V1 .

       1

                                                                                        αSMAX
      0.9                                                                                S
                                                                                        αFOC
  α
      0.8
                      V1
                                                                                         C
                                                                                        α
      0.7



      0.6



      0.5



      0.4



      0.3



      0.2

                                                                                        αM

      0.1
                                                                                        αS


       0
            0   50     100     150      200     250      300     350      400     450           500
                                                 V1




                                              52
Figure 8: A typical plot of ownership shares at date 1 for the entrepreneur (M), initial
syndicate (S1) and a second syndicate of new investors (S2) for the wholly competitive case.
The second syndicate provides date 1 financing on competitive terms (NP V = 0) whenever
V1 exceeds the strike value V1 , which is lower than in both the syndicate and monopoly cases
shown previously. The constrained share αS2 declines as V1 increases, while the ownership
shares held by the entrepreneur and incumbent investors increase with V1 . The share held
by the entrepreneur (αM ) is more in parity with incumbent investors’ shares, compared with
the syndicate case.

       1
                                                                                          S2
                                                                                      αMAX

                                                                                      αS2
      0.9                                                                              FOC


  α                  V1
      0.8



      0.7



      0.6


                                                                                       S1
      0.5                                                                             α



      0.4
                                                                                      αM


      0.3



      0.2



      0.1
                                                                                      αS2

       0
            0   50        100   150    200     250     300     350     400      450            500

                                                  V
                                                  1




                                             53
Figure 9: Net Present Value Loss at date 0, relative to first best, expressed as a percentage
of total required investment. Potential value is V0 = E0 (V2 ) = 150. The value loss depends
on the ratio of the return and cost of eﬀort parameters, θf /θg . Lost NP V is plotted for the
monopoly, syndicate, and fully competitive cases, and also for the monopoly case without
staging, in which the monopolist provides upfront financing and sets αC 0 at time 0. Figure 9
presents 4 assumptions on date-0 and date-1 investments and lognormal standard deviation.
In 9a and 9b, I0 = I1 = 50. In 9c and 9d, I0 = 10 and I1 = 90. In 9a and 9c, σ = 0.4 while
in 9b and 9d, σ = 0.8.

  NPV Loss %
 50
               1                                                                        1                                                       Competitive
 45             I = I = 50; σ = 0.4                                                              I = I = 50; σ = 0.8                            Syndicate
                 0 1                                                                              0 1
                                                                                                                                                No Staging
 40                                                                                                                                             Monopoly
              0.8                                                                      0.8
 35
              0.6                                                                      0.6
 30

 25
              0.4                                                                      0.4
 20

 15
              0.2                                                                      0.2

 10
               0                                                                        0
  5
                    0           0.2     0.4          0.6       0.8       1                   0         0.2       0.4            0.6       0.8         1

 50

 45           I 1= 10, I        = 90; σ = 0.4                                           1 I0 = 10, I 1 = 90; σ = 0.8
               0            1

 40
              0.8                                                                      0.8
 35

 30           0.6                                                                      0.6
 25
              0.4                                                                      0.4
 20

 15           0.2                                                                      0.2
 10
               0                                                                        0
  5                 0           0.2     0.4          0.6       0.8       1                   0         0.2       0.4            0.6       0.8         1
  0
      0   1     2       3         4     5        6    7    8         9   10   11   1         2        3      4    5         6         7   8       9       10   11
                                            θr                                                                         θr




                                                                              54
Figure 10: Net Present Value Loss at date 0, relative to first best, expressed as a percentage
of total required investment. Potential value is V0 = E0 (V2 ) = 200. The value loss depends
on the ratio of the return and cost of eﬀort parameters, θf /θg . Lost NP V is plotted for the
monopoly, syndicate, and fully competitive cases, and also for the monopoly case without
staging, in which the monopolist provides upfront financing and sets αC 0 at time 0. Figure 10
presents 4 assumptions on date-0 and date-1 investments and lognormal standard deviation.
In 10a and 10b, I0 = I1 = 50. In 10c and 10d, I0 = 10 and I1 = 90. In 10a and 10c, σ = 0.4
while in 10b and 10d, σ = 0.8.

  NPV Loss %
  50
               40                                                               40                                              Competitive
  45            I0 = I1 = 50; σ = 0.4                                                    I = I = 50; σ = 0.8                    Syndicate
                                                                                         0   1
                                                                                                                                No Staging
  40                                                                                                                            Monopoly
               30                                                               30
  35

  30
               20                                                               20
  25

  20
               10                                                               10
  15

  10
                0                                                                0
  5
                    0             5                  10           15                 0                 5               10             15

  50

  45            I = 10, I = 90; σ = 0.4
               300       1                                                      60 I0 = 10, I 1 = 90; σ = 0.8
  40
               25                                                               50
  35
               20                                                               40
  30

  25           15                                                               30

  20           10                                                               20
  15
                5                                                               10
  10
                0                                                                0
  5                 0             5                  10           15                 0                 5               10             15
  0
       0   1    2       3    4     5         6   7        8   9   10   11   1        2       3     4       5       6   7    8     9     10    11
                                        θr                                                                     θ
                                                                                                               r




                                                                       55
