                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          SUPPORTING “THE BEST AND BRIGHTEST”
                             IN SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING: NSF
                            GRADUATE RESEARCH FELLOWSHIPS

                                          Richard B. Freeman
                                            Tanwin Chang
                                            Hanley Chiang

                                         Working Paper 11623
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11623


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2005




Supported by a grant from the NSF in collaboration with the Council of Graduate Schools (CGS). While
serving as an AAAS/NSF Science and Technology Fellow, Dan Stanzione was instrumental in facilitating
this study from the NSF side. Jason Abaluck of Harvard assisted in preparation of the data. We thank Myles
Boylan of the NSF for leading a thoughtful review of a short version of part of this work given at the AEA
meetings. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Richard B. Freeman, Tanwin Chang and Hanley Chiang. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Supporting “The Best and Brightest” in Science and Engineerign: NSF Graduate Research
Fellowships
Richard B. Freeman, Tanwin Chang and Hanley Chiang
NBER Working Paper No. 11623
September 2005
JEL No.

                                              ABSTRACT
The National Science Foundation's (NSF) Graduate Research Fellowship (GRF) is a highly
prestigious award for science and engineering (S&E) graduate students. This paper uses data from
1952 to 2004 on the population of over 200,000 applicants to the GRF to examine the determinants
of the number and characteristics of applicants and the characteristics of awardees. In the early years
of the program, GRF awards went largely to physical science and mathematics students and
disproportionately to white men, but as the composition of S&E students has changed, larger shares
have gone to biological sciences, social sciences, and engineering, and to women and minorities. The
absolute number of awards has varied over time, with no trend. Because the number of new S&E
college graduates has risen, the result is a sharp decline in the number of awards per S&E bachelor's
graduate. In the 2000s approximately 1/3rd as many NSF Fellowships were granted per S&E
baccalaureate than in the 1950s-1970s. The dollar value of the awards relative to the earnings of
college graduates has also varied greatly over time. Our analysis of the variation in the number and
value of awards and of the characteristics of applicants and awardees finds that:
1. The primary determinant of winning a GRF are academic skills, which greatly impact panel
ratings of applicants. Consistent with efforts to increase S&E diversity, women and minorities have
higher changes of winning an award than white men with similar attributes.
2. The size of the applicant pool varies with the relative value of the stipend, the number of S&E
bachelor's graduates, and the lagged number of awards per graduate. We estimate that for every 10%
increase in the stipend value, the number of applications goes up by 8 to 10 percent.
3. The average measured skill of awardees falls when the number of awards are increased and rises
with the value of fellowships.
4. The supply of applicants contains enough qualified candidates to allow for a sizeable increase in
the number of awards without greatly reducing measured skills.
5. The supply of highly skilled applicants is sufficiently responsive to the value of awards that
increases in the value of stipends could attract some potentially outstanding science and engineering
students who would otherwise choose other careers.

Richard B. Freeman                                     Hanley Chiang
National Bureau of Economic Research                   National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138-5398                               Cambridge, MA 02138-5398
freeman@nber.org                                       hchiang@nber.org

Tanwin Chang
National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138-5398
tanwinc@nber.org
                                 CONTENTS



INTRODUCTION


Section I DETERMINANTS OF GRF AWARDS


Section II THE GRF PROGRAM OVER TIME


Section III SUPPLY RESPONSES OF GRF APPLICANTS


Section IV ALTERNATIVE POLICY SCENARIOS
                                          List of tables

Table 1. Means, Standard Deviations, and Scaling of Scholastic Skill Measures.

Table 2. Linear Probability Model for the Impact of Scholastic and Demographic Variables on GRF
       Awards.

Table 3. Regression Coefficients and Standard Errors For Scholastic and Demographic
Determinants of GRFP Awards and GRFP Panel Rating, 1976-1998.

Table 4. Regression Coefficients for Determinants of Panel Rating, Quality Group, and Award
Offer: 1990-2004.

Table 5. Demographic Correlates of Test Scores, Regression Coefficients and Standard Errors,
       1976 - 2004.

Table 6. Determinants of the Number of GRFP Applicants, 1969-2004.

Table 7. Determinants of Awardee Achievement, 1969-2004.

Table 8. Determinants of the Number of Applicants Scoring Above High Thresholds.

Table 9. Impact of Hypothetical $10 Million Increase in Annual Funding on Selected Outcomes.

Table 10 Hypothetical GRFP Characteristics from Maintaining 1968 Relative Award Availability
       and 2004 Relative Stipend Value.

Table 11. Existing and Hypothetical Allocation of GRFP Awards across Fields in 1997.
                                           List of figures

Figure 1. The number and value of GRF awards vary over time.

Figure 2. The number of awards per S&E baccalaureate has shifted downwards.

Figure 3. Disciplinary distribution over time of Applicants.

Figure 4. Percentage of Applicants Who Gain GRF Awards, Selected Years.

Figure 5. Percentages of Fellows who are Women or URMs.

Figure 6. Average Percentage of Applicants Winning Awards in Selected Time Periods, by Broad
       Demographic Group.

Figure 7. GRF Applications Relative to S&E Bachelor’s Degrees And Relative Value of GRF
       Stipend, 1968 - 2004.

Figure 8. GRF Applications Relative to S&E Bachelor’s Degrees And College Graduate
       Unemployment Rate, 1979 - 2004.

Figure 9A. Mean GRE Quantitative Scores of Awardees And Relative Stipend Value, 1968-2004.

Figure 9B. Mean GRE Verbal Scores of Awardees and Relative Stipend Value, 1968-2004.

Figure 10. Fraction of Bachelors choosing to apply to GRF vs total GRF stipend budget/GDP.

Figure 11. Quality of GRF Applicants on the Margin of Getting an Award.
                                                                                                      1

       Stipends – payments to students as part of their studies – are a major form of income for

graduate students in science and engineering (S&E) and a potential determinant of decisions to

undertake graduate study. Broadly defined to include fellowships, research assistantships, teaching

assistantships, and post-doc awards, stipends account for upwards of 1/4th of the lifetime incomes of

S&E PhDs, depending on field, time to degree, and prevalence and length of post-docs.1

Fellowships are potentially the most attractive stipend because they signal to students that the

granting institution views them as top prospects for success in graduate study and is willing to

support their studies rather than requiring them to work to cover graduate school expenses. In 2001

thirteen percent of full-time graduate students reported that a fellowship or traineeship was their

primary source of graduate support [4]. Slightly more than one-third of those, or approximately 4%

of full-time graduate students, obtained awards from federal government sources [3].

       Since its establishment in 1952, the National Science Foundation’s (NSF) Graduate Research

Fellowship (GRF) has been the US’s premier award for science and engineering graduate students.

NSF’s stated purpose for the Graduate Research Fellowship is to “ensure the vitality of the scientific

and technological workforce in the United States and to reinforce its diversity.” Because NSF

fellowships are limited to citizens or permanent resident aliens, they are a potentially important

policy tool for inducing citizens and residents, including those from underrepresented groups, to

study S&E and thus to raise their representation in the S&E workforce.

       What determines the likelihood that an applicant wins a GRF award? How, if at all, has the

composition of applicants and awardees changed over time? What is the supply response of students


 1
   In the 1990s, about two-thirds of S&E grad students received stipend support of some form and
 thus did not have to rely on loans, personal finances, or money from family and friends as their
 primary means of support [3].
                                                                                                        2

to increases in the number or the amount of fellowships? How might alternative fellowship policies

affect the numbers and measured attributes of awardees? Can we generalize from the response of

students to GRFs to the possible impact of stipends on the supply of students to S&E more broadly?

       This paper uses data from the NSF’s 1952-1993 Cumulative Index (CI) file, its ensuing

updates, and other sources to try to answer these questions. The Cumulative Index plus updated data

provides information on the over 200,000 individuals who applied for NSF graduate fellowships

from 1952 through 2004, including the student’s graduate record exam scores (GREs), grade point

average (GPA), ratings of reference letters, and from 1976 on, the ratings of applicants by review

panels. We supplement these data with information on the earnings of college graduates,

unemployment rates and the sizes of graduating bachelor’s cohorts. Much of our analysis uses time

series fluctuations in the number of GRFs and the amount of awards to provide the exogenous

necessary to identify student supply responses.2

       Section 1 describes the GRF program and how it has changed over time. It finds that the

ratio of GRFs to S&E bachelor’s degrees fell by nearly 75% from the 1950s to the 1990s/2000s; that

the distribution of awards shifted from natural sciences to biological sciences, social sciences, and

engineering, and that women and minorities have gained an increased share of awards.

       Section 2 uses a linear probability model to estimate the characteristics that help an applicant

 2
     The 2002 report on the GRF by WestEd looks at what happens to fellows rather than what
 attracts students to the fellowships. It shows that in the time period leading up to1993 around
 70% of fellows received their baccalaureate from RU1 institutions (as defined by the Carnegie
 Classification), and more than 90% went on to perform graduate work at RU1 institutions. Some
 programs receive a disproportionately high numbers of fellows: 34% of Life Sciences Fellows
 enrolled in 5 institutions. The report shows that 11-years after beginning their PhD program
 NSF Fellows had completion rates of around 70%, which exceeds the overall completion rate for
 entering students; that fellows pursued academic careers more than their peers, and that a slightly
 larger percentage reported having achieved traditional measures of accomplishment during
 graduate school, such as presentations, refereed articles, edited book part, etc.
                                                                                                          3

win a GRF. It shows that the chance of winning depends greatly on GREs, GPAs, and reference

letters operating through panel ratings, and that consistent with NSF’s diversity goal, women and

minorities have higher chances of winning an award than majority men with similar attributes.

       Section 3 assesses the supply response of applicants to changes in the value of the fellowship

It finds that an increase in stipend value increases the number of applicants, including those with

very high skills that NSF is able to raise the average skill of awardees. By contrast, increases in the

number of awards are associated with modest declines in the average quality of awardees.

       Section 4 explores new ways to determine the number and value of GRF awards: increasing

the number and/or value of awards; setting the number and value by indexing them to measures of

the supply of potential applicants and to the monetary attraction of alternatives; and giving awards

by the measured academic and personal characteristics of applicants, irrespective of field.

I. THE GRF PROGRAM OVER TIME

       Congress established the National Science Foundation’s Graduate Research Fellowship

program in 1952 to support the vitality of the scientific and technological workforce in the United

States. The program was open to US citizens only. It gave a $1600 stipend and covered normal

tuition and fees at the institution of choice. The NSF typically supported students for 3 years, but

this was not automatic; students had to reapply each year. The GRF has changed since its inception.

In 1963 it capped the cost-of-education, and in 1972 students were no longer required to reapply

[6]. Today awardees may choose 3 years of support over a 5 year period, and must be pursuing a

research-based graduate degree in an NSF supported field. The fellowship may be used outside the

United States and is portable across institutions. In 1997 the NSF introduced new selection criteria

which put greater weight in its awarding fellowships to “broader impacts" such as integration of
                                                                                                      4

research and education, diversity, benefit to society, and enhancement of scientific and technical

understanding than in the past.

       The number of awards and the dollar value of stipends has changed over time with NSF

budgets and decisions. Figure 1 shows the absolute number of awards and constant dollar value of

the stipends from 1952 to 2004. In the 1950s the NSF gave around 500-600 awards. In the 1960s it

gave around 1000 awards, with a peak of 1373 in 1966. In the 1970s and 1980s the number of

awards fell to around 500, then rose in the late 1980s/early 1990s toward 900-1000. The big jumps

in the value of awards reflect NSF decisions to raise nominal stipend amounts. NSF raised the value

of fellowships in the early 1980s to the late 1980s and again in 1999 to 2004.3 In 1999, the

Committee of Visitor’s (COV) report evaluating the program noted that “the GRF awards are no

longer as attractive as they once were” [2] at $15K per year for 3 years – significantly lower than

comparable fellowships. The COV speculated that this could (at least partially) explain the steady

decline in applicants in the years leading up to 1999 and recommended that the stipend value be

raised to $18K. In the subsequent four years, the value of the stipend rose 83% to $27,500

prompting the next COV (convened in 2003) to worry that the stipend was now too large.

Universities complained about the negative effects of a support gap between NSF fellows and other

students. The 2003 COV recommended that the “NSF thoroughly examine the external

consequences of the $27,500 stipend and what intended and unintended consequences this might

engender.”[1] For the 2005 fiscal year, the stipend has been set at $30,000 with an accompanying

$10,500 cost of education allowance. The roller-coaster behavior of the award amount has


 3
  The gradual declines in the stipend values in years when the NSF has not raised them reflect
 the impact of inflation. The NSF has never reduced the nominal value of awards.
                                                                                                      5

prompted some in the graduate education community to seek a consistent basis for the determination

of stipend levels.

       The absolute number of GRF awards of about 900-1000 in recent years appears comparable

to the levels in the 1950s. Relative to the increased supply of S&E bachelor’s graduates, however,

the number of awards has fallen sharply. In 1952-56 NSF awarded 5.4 GRFs per thousand S&E

bachelor’s degrees. In 2000-2004 NSF awarded 2.2 GRFs per thousand S&E bachelor’s degrees –

a 73% drop. Figure 2, which graphs the number of awards per S&E bachelor’s, shows that the drop

occurred discontinuously around 1970.

Field and demographic distribution of awards

       In the early years of the program, GRF awards went largely to physical sciences and

mathematics and disproportionately to white men. Today, larger shares go to biological sciences,

social sciences, and engineering; and also to women and minorities. Figure 3 shows the huge

change in the distribution of awards among fields. From 1952 to 1956 the physical sciences

obtained 49% of the awards, math received 9% and life sciences obtained 25% compared to 4% in

psychology and social sciences and 13% in engineering. In 2004, by contrast, 15% of awards were

given to the physical sciences, 11% to mathematics and computer sciences, and 27% to life sciences;

30% were given in engineering and 17% in social sciences and psychology.

       Given NSF policy to award approximately the same proportion of applicants among fields,

the shift in awards among disciplines largely reflects a change in the distribution of applications

among disciplines. Consistent with this, figure 4 shows that before 1990 the proportion of

applicants who won awards in the major discipline categories were within a few percentage points of

each other, although Social Science and Psychology were slightly disfavored. This is still the case
                                                                                                     6

after 1990, except that applicants in Engineering and Computer Science have a higher chance of

getting an award due to the process by which the NSF seeks to attract women to these disciplines.

         Turning to the demographic characteristics of awardees, figure 5 shows that the

proportion of women and underrepresented minorities4 winning the GRF has risen sharply since the

program was initiated. The female proportion of awardees climbed from about 5% in the 1950s to

55% of awards in 2004, with considerable variation among fields. Women make up roughly three

quarters of the awardees in Life Sciences, Social Science, or Psychology compared to 20% of

awardees in Physical Science or Computer Science. Around 1960, the female proportion in Life

Science was about 25% while in Physical Science it was around 6%, while there were barely any

female engineering fellows5. To increase the female representation in these fields, NSF set up the

Women in Engineering Program (WENG) in 1990, which became the Women in Engineering and

Computer Science (WECS) program in 1993. This program boosts the number of females by

awarding fellowships to all or nearly all Computer Science or Engineering women in NSF’s quality

group 2, and by making women in quality group 3 also eligible for awards if enough slots are

available.6 The data in figure 4 show that in 2001 applicants in Computer Science and Engineering

had a higher ratio of awards to applicants than other disciplines as a result of this program.

         The data in figure 5 on the proportion of underrepresented minorities (URM) among GRF

fellows starts in 1976 due to lack of ethnicity data before then. The GRF data is further complicated


 4
  Underrepresented Minorities in S&E include African Americans, Hispanics, and Native
 Americans. Asian Americans are overrepresented in science and engineering.
 5
     In 1960 there were few computer science fellows, either male or female.
 6
  As described below, NSF categorizes applicants by group depending on their measured
 scholastic skills. All quality group 1 applicants are offered GRFs, and a sizable proportion of
 group 2 applicants are also given GRFs.
                                                                                                     7

by the development in 1978 of the Minority Graduate Fellowship Program (MGF), which gave

awards solely to underrepresented minorities, and with its dissolution in 1998. The MGF was

officially a separate program, although executed in parallel with the GRF. In 1999, the first program

year since 1975 without the MGF, the NSF emphasized procedural changes in its review panel

process in the hope of maintaining a diverse awardee pool, partly by attracting more applicants

through expanded outreach, and partly via other measures such as insuring a diverse group of

panelists [1]. Combining the fellows from the GRF and the MGF, the URM proportion is around

10% for the early 1980s, and climbed to 30% in 1998, the last year of the program. After that, the

percentage dropped to the GRF-only proportion of around 10%, which is still much larger than the

1% to 2% two decades earlier. The disciplinary variation for URM fellows shows that a large

proportion are in Social Science and Psychology compared to other disciplines.

         The increased diversity in GRFs reflects two factors. First is that as a result of these

programs and efforts, the likelihood that a woman or minority applicant would get an award has

risen. In the first decade of the GRF, the overall award rate7 was 17% while the award rate for

women was 11%, as shown in figure 6. By the mid-1990s the female award rate exceeded the

overall rate. The award rate for URMs in the GRF was low at 3% during the run of the MGF. The

combined rate of URMs in both the GRF + MGF topped 18% from 1994 - 1998, which is actually

greater than the MGF-only award rate, 15.3%, for the same time period8. After the end of that

program, the number of URM awardees per applicants approached the overall rate of awardees per

 7
     “Award rate” is synonymous with “awardee to applicant ratio”.
 8
  The explanation for this result lies in the high incidence of duplicate applications. Data was
 available from 1994 -1998 to match applicants in the two programs, and we found that
 approximately 90% of those who applied for the MGF also submitted an application for the
 GRF.
                                                                                                         8

applicant, though it is still noticeably lower by several percentage points.

       The second and more important reason for the increased diversity of GRFs is that an

increasing share of bachelor’s degrees in science and engineering have gone to women and

minorities. This has raised the proportion of applicants from these groups, which in turn produces a

increased share of awards, coupled with the NSF’s efforts to improve diversity.

II. DETERMINANTS OF GRF AWARDS

       The GRF is a merit-based award. Each year, the NSF assembles a panel of experts to

evaluate and rate applications and arrange them into quality groups. Quality Group 1 (QG1) is the

highest quality group, and all applicants deemed fit for this group are offered the fellowship.

Quality Group 2 (QG2) applicants are regarded as sufficiently meritorious for the fellowship, but not

all in this category will receive the award. Applicants in other quality groups rarely receive the

fellowship, but may receive an “honorable mention” which carries some non-monetary prestige. As

with other aspects of the program, the procedures for determining awardees have evolved.

Presently, panelists meet in groups arranged by discipline for an intensive 2-3 day session, which

includes a briefing on the GRF Program and a calibration exercise using applications from previous

years. The categorization process consists of cycles during which the panelists score the

applications on a scale from 1.00 to 4.99 (lower number indicating higher quality), and then rank

them. In the first cycle, each application is scored by at least two panelists, and then any applicant

ranked below the 64th percentile are put in QG4, and then no longer considered for the fellowship.

Remaining applications are then scored by a 3rd panelist before being re-ranked. Approximately

55% of the awardees are from QG1, all of whom receive an award. Virtually all of the remaining

awards are from QG2, with approximately 60% of QG2 applicants offered the fellowship [8]
                                                                                                         9

       From the 1998 program year to the present, NSF has instructed panelists to evaluate

applications based on the two broad criteria common to NSF solicitations: intellectual merit and

broader impacts. The panelists are given rating sheets upon which intellectual merit is broken down

into sub-criteria: GPA, GRE scores, references, proposed research, and previous research

experience. Broader impacts are based on: integration of research and education, diversity, benefit

to society, and enhancement of scientific and technical understanding. The NSF emphasizes a

comprehensive concept of merit, and advises panelists to avoid placing too much emphasis on the

easily quantifiable quality measures such as GRE scores and GPA. In the latest program years, GRE

scores are not required on the GRF application. Further, there is a new emphasis on the value of

leadership skills in NSF fellows [1]. It is possible that future applicants will be asked to provide

evidence of leadership potential, and future panelists will include this in their assessment of merit.

       Since the NSF recognizes the value of a diverse workforce, the program implements

measures to insure representation in geography, demographics, and discipline. Specifically, the

applicants from Quality Group 2 who receive the fellowship are chosen based on an algorithm that

includes their rank within QG2, but also considers other factors. The key policy with respect to

discipline is that NSF allocates the number of QG1 and QG2 positions to review panels on the basis

of the disciplinary distribution of all applicants and the number of awards NSF plans to offer.

Regression analysis

       To see how the selection procedure uses the information on student skills to determine which

applicants win awards, we estimated linear probability models in which the dependent variable is the

0/1 measure of obtaining an award and the explanatory variables consist of measures of student

skills from the NSF’s Cumulative Index dataset . The CI has recorded the scores that a panelist gives
                                                                                                         10

to an application starting in 1976, but does not record assessments of the sub-criteria, which limits

our choice of measures largely to the quantitative and verbal GRE scores, the GPA, and the scoring

of reference letters. Table 1 lists the measures of scholastic skills in the data and gives their mean

values and standard deviations, as well as the overall mean of the probability of winning the GRF

award, and the scales used to measure each quantity. GRE scores are coded on a 200 to 800 scale;

the GPA uses a 4 point scale; Panel Ratings9 were originally coded on a scale of 100 to 600, with

lower score representing higher quality; reference scores were originally scaled from 10 to 70, also

the lower the better. The panel ratings and reference scores changed scales at various times in GRF

history. To deal with this, we normalized the panel and reference data such that they have zero

mean and standard deviation of one in the applicant pool of each year. We also reverse-coded the

actual panel and reference scores, so that increases in all variables imply a more favorable situation.

Regression coefficients for GRE scores are sometimes reported in tables with the scores scaled as

GREQuant/100 or GREVerbal/100, which effectively puts the them on a 2 to 8 point scale.10

         Table 2 records linear regressions of the impact of scholastic attributes, demographic factors,

and field dummies for nearly the full data set from 1955 to 1998, which lacks measures of minority

status, panel scores, and reference letters; and for the 1976-1998 period when we have data on those

measures as well as the others. The column 1 and 2 regressions do not include the panel rating,

while the column 3 regression includes the panel rating. The column 1 estimates show that over the

entire period, GRE Quantitative, GRE Verbal, and GPAs have sizable and significant effects on the

 9
  In the original Cumulative Index dataset, each applicant may have more than one panel rating if
 more than one panelist reviewed the application. An average panel rating trivially generated for
 each applicant. In this paper, “panel rating” means “average panel rating”. Similarly,
 “reference score” is synonymous with “average reference score”.
 10
      This allows us to report coefficients concisely as 0.XX rather than 0.00XX.
                                                                                                       11

probability of obtaining the GRF. A 100 point increase in Verbal GRE score raises the probability

of award by 6.4%. This might not seem large, but since just 13.5% of applicants get an award this

raises the probability of getting an award by nearly 50%. In addition the calculations show that

women and minorities have higher chances of getting an award than other applicants. The field

dummy variables show some variation in the probability of getting an award among fields.

Engineering , life science, and earth/atmospheric science have significantly higher probabilities of

getting an award while mathematics has a lower one compared to the omitted social science group.

       The results in column 2, which include the measure of the quality of references and dummy

variables for gender and minority status for the period 1976 to 1998 are similar: GREs, the GPA,

and the reference scores are key determinants of the probability of getting an award, while women

and minorities have a higher probability of gaining awards. The dummy variables for fields show

moderate disciplinary variation. Column 3 adds the panel rating to the list of variables. Since the

NSF panels weigh heavily the effect of GREs, GPAs, and reference scores in deciding which

applicants should be given awards, inclusion of the panel rating alters the estimated coefficients

markedly. The coefficients on factors on which panels place most weight in their evaluation fall

relative to those that enter less highly in the panel rating. The GRE quantitative score and the GPA

obtain negative coefficients conditional on the panel rating, implying that the panels weigh those

factors especially heavily in their ratings. In addition, conditional on the panel ratings the field

dummies become large and significant relative to the omitted social science group. This presumably

reflects the initial allocation of the number of QG1 and QG2 positions on the basis of the

disciplinary distribution of applicants, which leads panels in the quantitative and physical sciences to

give lower ratings than those in the social sciences to applicants with comparable measured
                                                                                                         12

scholastic skills. From this perspective, the estimated positive coefficients on the field dummies in

table 1 are a “correction” that takes account of the attributes of applicants in these fields.

       Consistent with this interpretation, table 3 shows that panel ratings are indeed lower for

applicants with the same measured scholastic skills in physical sciences than in the social sciences.

For instance, the regression shows that an applicant in chemistry obtains a -0.198 lower panel rating

than an applicant in the omitted social science group with the same GREs, GPA, reference score and

demographics. The rank correlation of the ordering of fields between the table 3 estimates of the

panel ratings and the ordering of fields in the column 3 of table 2 is -0.92 (inclusive of the omitted

group). Thus, the modest estimated impacts of fields in columns 1 and 2 of table 2 reflect two

offsetting factors: lower panel ratings in physical sciences but an offsetting higher probability of

getting an award conditional on panel ratings in those disciplines.

The effect of demographics

       As noted, the table 2 regressions for obtaining a GRF show that women and minorities have

a greater probability of getting an award than do majority men with similar measured scholastic

skills. This is consistent with the goal of increasing the diversity of the S&E work force. The table

3 regression of the panel ratings on scholastic skills and demographic characteristics show, however,

that panels give lower scores to women than to majority men with the same measured attributes

while they give higher scores to minorities than to majority men with the same measured attributes.

Since the probability of getting an award is higher for both women and minorities than for majority

men, the difference in coefficients in panel ratings suggests that the process of taking account of

diversity differs between the two groups.

       To unpack this difference, we estimated a recursive model. First, we related the panel scores
                                                                                                    13

and the probability of being assigned to groups 1 and 2 to demographic characteristics. Then we

examined the probability of getting an award conditional on being in groups 1 and 2 and on the

panel rating. Table 4 gives the results of this analysis for 1990-97 and 1998-2004. The data for

1990-97 includes measures of GRE scores, GPA, and a measure of the quality of reference letters.

The 1998-2004 data do not include GPA or the quality of reference letters, and cover the period

when NSF revised its merit criteria. Column 1 shows that in 1990-97 women received a slightly

lower score than men from review panels while there is no noticeable difference in panel ratings

between minorities and the majority group. Women also were less likely to be assigned to quality

groups 1 and 2 than men, while by contrast minority applicants were more likely to be assigned to

those groups. Among persons in groups 1 and 2, and conditional on panel ratings, women were

much more likely to obtain awards than men while minority applicants had a modestly higher

probability of obtaining awards. Thus, the higher probability of women getting awards occurs at the

last stage, presumably in part because the WECS (WENG) program boosted the chances that women

in quality group 2 would get GRFs, whereas the higher probability of minorities getting awards

occurs because panels were more likely to assign them into groups 1 or 2.

       The 1998-2004 regressions show a very different pattern, indicating that the change in NSF’s

policies in awarding GRFs had a substantial effect on the awards process. Column 4 shows that

panels give both women and minorities higher ratings in 1998-2004 than in 1990-97. Column 5

shows that panels are more likely to assign them to quality groups 1 or 2 than in 1990-97. The

coefficient on being female in column 6 shows that, conditional on being in groups 1 or 2, the boost

given to women in the probability of getting an award was more moderate in 1998-2004 than in

1990-97, presumably because they were getting higher panel ratings and having a higher chance of
                                                                                                       14

being assigned to quality groups 1 or 2. By contrast, the coefficient on being minority in column 6

is nearly identical to the coefficient in column 3. Finally, panel ratings have a stronger impact on

awards in 1998-2004 than in 1990-1997. In sum, table 4 provides evidence for the change in NSF’s

emphasis that was enacted, at least partly, to increase diversity in S&E fields.

       Finally, table 5 uses a regression model to examine the GRE scores of applicants with

different demographic characteristics from 1976 to 2004 – a period in which the proportion of

applicants who were women or minority increased substantially. In 2004 there were 8,939

applicants, of whom 46% were women and 10% underrepresented minorities. In 1976, there were

5366 applicants of whom 30% were women and 4% were underrepresented minorities To the extent

that increased numbers of applicants draw persons with decreasing measured scholastic skills, one

would expect that the increased proportion of women and minorities would reduce the average

scores of those groups.

       The coefficients and standard errors on the demographic variables in the table show the

opposite pattern, particularly for GRE quantitative scores. The scores of both women and minority

applicants rise relative to those of majority men, though both groups still score lower. The

coefficient on the dummy for women rises from -41.7 in 1976-83 to -28.9 in 1999-2004. The

coefficient on being black rises from -175.9 in 1976-84 to -100.1 in 1999-2004. The negative

coefficient on being Hispanic changes less evenly but is lower in 1999-2004 than in 1976-1983,

while that for other minorities shows little change. The regression coefficients for GRE verbal

scores tell a similar story, with the exception that women applicants go from having the same verbal

scores as men in 1976-83 to a modest 7.2 lower score in 1999-2004. The coefficient for being black,

however, advances steadily from -168.7 to -100.4. Overall, the results show that the increased
                                                                                                        15

proportion of female and minority GRFs was associated with generally improved measured skills.

The implication is that the GRF program is attracting increasingly qualified women and minorities.

III. SUPPLY RESPONSES OF GRF APPLICANTS

       The NSF has two policy levers that can affect the supply of applicants to the GRF program

and, given the process of granting awards, that can determine the measured skills of awardees: the

dollar amount of the awards and the number of awards.

       Increasing the dollar value of awards should increase the number of applicants. It could

increase or decrease the average measured skill of applicants depending on whether they come

largely from persons with the highest skills or from those with lower skills. But given the process of

selecting awardees, increases in the value of awards should increase the average skill of awardees as

long as the increased value of awards attract some persons with high skills. In this case, review

panels would be expected to select high skill candidates from the pool of newly attracted persons

over less skilled candidates that they would have selected from the smaller initial pool of applicants.

       Increasing the number of awards, by contrast, is likely to reduce the measured quality of

awardees since it means accepting applicants who would otherwise be rejected. The key issue here

is the extent to which the increase in numbers reduces quality, which depends on whether the pool of

similarly skilled applicants on the margin of acceptance is large or small. If there is a large pool,

increased numbers of awards will reduce measured skills modestly. If theres is a small pool,

increased number of rewards could reduce measured skills substantially.

Number of applicants

       To examine the link between the value of stipends and the pool of GRF applicants, we

calculated a relative value of stipends by taking the ratio of the dollar value of GRF awards to the
                                                                                                       16

average annual earnings of college graduates aged 21-2511 and contrasted this with the relative

number of applicants by dividing the number of applicants by the number of S&E bachelor

graduates. As figure 7 shows the two series track each other closely. For example, the sharp

increase in the stipend value in the 1980s, when NSF increased stipend amounts from $3900 (1979)

to $14,000 (1991) is matched by a large rise in the number of applicants relative to S&E bachelor’s

graduates. By contrast, from 1991 to 1999 the relative value of stipends fell, as the nominal stipend

amount rose by $1000 while college graduate earnings rose by about $7600; and the relative number

of applicants fell. Since 1999 the nominal amount of the stipend has doubled, and the number of

applications has nearly doubled as well.12

         Another factor that might affect the decision to seek a GRF and go on in graduate school is

the ease of finding work with a bachelors degree, which varies with the business cycle. Figure 8

compares the relative number of applicants to the unemployment rate of college graduates13. Since

the late 1980s, the size of the GRF applicant pool has moved countercyclically: a weak labor market

for college graduates generated a higher number of applicants as a share of bachelors degrees. But

in the early to mid-1980s, the unemployment rate fell while the number of applicants rose,

presumably in part because of the increase in stipend amounts shown in figure 7. Thus, figure 8

suggests that unavailability of jobs for recent college graduates is a secondary factor influencing the


 11
   We estimated the college graduate earnings from the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series
 (IPUMS) of the March Current Population Survey. College graduates include those who obtain
 degrees higher than a bachelor’s degree, but the age range is restrictive enough to exclude most
 doctorate recipients.
 12
   Bachelor’s degree data for 2002-2004 are extrapolated because actual figures are not
 available. The key to the change in the ratio of applicants to bachelor’s graduates is that the
 number of applicants jumped from 4852 in year 1998 to 8939 in year 2004.
 13
      Estimated from the annual Current Population Survey (CPS) Outgoing Rotation Group
                                                                                                        17

decision to apply for a GRF stipend.

       Taking the analysis a step further, we amalgamated the data on GRF fellowships into nine

major fields14 by year from 1952 to 2004, to obtain a cross-field time series panel with 477

observations. Using this sample, we did a multivariate regression analysis of the determinants of the

number of GRF applicants in each field and year. Since the NSF changes the stipend value in

particular years by policy decision rather than changing it annually depending on the previous years’

labor market, we take these changes as exogenous and use least squares to estimate the effect of

relative stipend values on the relative number of applicants. To control for field differences and

changes in market conditions by field over time, the regressions include field dummy variables and

separate time trends for the nine fields. In addition, the regressions include the number of bachelor’s

degrees earned in the nine fields in the previous year.15

       Table 6 displays the regression results. The basic specification in column 1 shows that a

larger number of bachelor graduates in a field generates a larger number of applicants from that

field; and that stipends in the previous year have a strongly positive effect on applications, with a

near unitary elasticity. Column 2 adds to the set of explanatory variables the unemployment rate

among college graduates 21-25 years of age, as an indicator of the availability of alternative jobs for

those contemplating going directly to the job market. The sample size shrinks because the

unemployment variable is only available starting in 1979. Consistent with figure 8, the

unemployment rate has a positive effect on the number of applications in column 2. In column 3 we
 14
   The nine fields are: Chemistry, Computer Science, Earth/Atmospheric Science, Engineering,
 Life Science, Mathematics, Physics, Psychology, and Social Science. The availability of
 earnings data for college graduates and degree data by field limits the sample to 1968-2001.
 15
   We recognize that students may apply for a GRF in a different field than the field in which
 they earned their undergraduate degree, but still regard the number of undergraduate degrees as a
 reasonable indicator of interest in the field.
                                                                                                        18

replace the unemployment rate of 21-25 year olds with the unemployment rate for all college

graduates regardless of age, on the assumption that this variable has less measurement error since it

is calculated for a larger sample. The effect of unemployment nearly doubles: a one percentage

point rise in the unemployment rate raises the GRFP applications by just over 10%. Finally, in

column 4 we include a measure of the relative availability of awards by field -- the number of

awards divided by the number of bachelors graduates in the field lagged one period. This shows that

more students apply when the probability of obtaining an award is perceived to be higher.

       In sum, the regression specifications in Table 6 show that the number of GRF applications

responds substantially to the relative value of the stipend and to the perceived availability of awards.

For every 10% increase in the stipend value, the number of applications goes up by 8 to 10 percent.

Measured skills of awardees

       To see how the value of stipends affects the measured achievement of GRF awardees, we

compare the GRE scores and GPAs of awardees over time and across fields. Figures 9A and 9B

provide a first indication that stipend values affect the qualifications of the awardees. Figure 9A

shows that the average GRE quantitative score of awardees has been higher when the relative

stipend value is higher. Figure 9B plots shows a similar relation between stipend values and average

GRE verbal scores of awardees. The time series of raw verbal scores trended downward beginning

in 1987, so we examined the time series of GRE verbal scores adjusted for trend, as well as the raw

time series. The trend adjusted series shows a rise in scores with the large increases in relative

stipend values in the first half of the decade, and a subsequent fall in verbal scores throughout the

1990s. However, the continuing decline in GRE verbal scores through the late 1990s/ early 2000s

cannot be explained by the evolution of stipend values, which are rapidly rising during this time.
                                                                                                       19

       To quantify the pictures in the figures, we regressed measures of the scholastic qualifications

of awardees on the number and value of GRF awards, using a cross-field time series regression

framework similar to that in Table 6, with field fixed effects and field-specific time trends included

in all regressions. Table 7 gives the results of this analysis. The first row of coefficients shows that

the number of awardees has a significant but quantitatively modest negative effect on the measures

of quality. A 10% increase in the number of awards is associated with a decline in average

quantitative GRE scores by 1.1 points and a decline in verbal GRE scores by 2.2 points on the 200 to

800 GRE scale, and a drop in average GPA by 0.009 points (on a 1 to 4 scale). These findings are

consistent with the notion that as the number of fellowships increases, the review panels move down

the measured scholastic skill distribution to give stipends to marginal awardees who are less

outstanding than those winners far from the margin. The second row of coefficients in Table 7

shows that, with the number of awards fixed, increases in the relative value of fellowships increases

two of our measures of the skill of awardees, but has no discernible effect on the third measure. An

increase in the relative value of the stipend by 10% raises the average quantitative GRE score by 2.9

points and raises the average verbal GRE score by 3.5 points. However, the average GPA of

awardees appears invariant to the stipend values.

       Overall, the table 7 results on the GRE scores suggest that at least some of the students on

the margin of applying for a GRF fellowship are high-achieving students who can be drawn away

from other career or academic opportunities through the prospect of larger awards. In the context of

the occupational choice model of A.D. Roy (1951)16, these results imply a positive correlation


 16
  A.D Roy “Some Thoughts on the Distribution of Earnings,” Oxford Economic
 Papers Vol. 3, 1951, pp. 135-14
                                                                                                       20

between ability in science and engineering and ability in alternative careers: the able S&E students

who are drawn into the GRF Program by higher stipends perform well on general measures of

achievement (i.e., GRE scores) that are associated with success in other occupations.

       To test this interpretation, we regressed the number of applicants with relatively high

measured skills (defined as those scoring 770 or over on the GRE quantitative exam, 680 on the

verbal GRE, and those with GPAs above 3.88 on a 4 point scale) on the relative value of stipends

and the number of awards given. By controlling for the number of awards, we get a measure of the

relative number of applicants with high skills, which should largely determine the measured skills of

awardees. Column 1 of Table 8 shows that a 10% increase in the stipend value raises the number of

applicants with 770 or over on the quantitative GRE by 12.2%. Column 2 shows a comparable

increase in the number of applicants with 680 or over on the verbal GRE. The column 3 regression

gives a 0.448 impact of stipend values on the number of students with very high GPAs17.

       In sum, higher stipend values incentivize enough high-achieving students to seek GRF offers

to enable the NSF selection procedure to increase the measured skills of awardees when stipend

values are higher.

The Economic Supply Link

       Overall, our results show that the resources NSF allocates to stipends, through the number of

awards and their value, affects the supply of applicants, both in terms of numbers and measured

scholastic skills. As a summary of the economic supply link, we have graphed in figure 10 our

 17
    We also estimated models with the log of the number of applicants in the regression. This
 gave smaller positive coefficients to the relative stipend value in the regressions for the number
 of applicants with high math and verbal GREs, because the number of applicants is dependent on
 stipend values and associated with the number of applicants with high scores. It also raised the
 number with high GPAs, but conditional on the number of applicants, the relative value of
 stipends were modestly negatively associated the number of applicants with high GPAs.
                                                                                                      21

measure of the supply of students seeking GRFs – the number of applicants relative to the number of

S&E baccalaureates – and a measure of NSF’s stipend budget (the number of awards offered in a

particular year multiplied by the stipend amount) relative to GDP, which we take as the broadest

possible measure of other economic activity. The stipend budget is an indicator of national

resources spent to make graduate S&E study more financially attractive, whereas GDP represents

national resources broadly. The tight link between the two series gives the bottom line message: if

the US wants more applicants for S&E fellowships and thus potentially more graduate students and

PhDs in these fields, the country has to spend more money on this objective.

IV. Alternative Policy Scenarios

       The analyses thus far have shown that the two policy levers – numbers of GRFs and the

dollar value of the awards -- affect the number and measured skills of persons seeking GRF awards

and that coupled with NSF selection procedures, they determine the measured skills of awardees. In

this section, we consider three scenarios that assess the way changes in the mode of determining

stipend policy could affect the supply of students seeking and obtaining GRFs.

       1. Agency determined changes in the number and value of awards.

       2. Granting awards and setting values through fixed rules rather than policy discretion.

       3. Allocating the number of quality group 1 and 2 positions among disciplines on the basis

       of quantifiable academic skills of applicants rather than on the number of applicants.

1. Agency Determined changes in stipend numbers and values

       For this scenario, we assume that the goal of fellowship policy is to increase the number of

the “best and brightest” pursuing S&E graduate studies, and that both the numbers and qualifications

of GRF awardees contribute to the goal, as described in the appendix model. The agency is assumed
                                                                                                       22

to face a fixed budget constraint, to reflect alternative uses of resources. Our finding that increasing

the number of awards reduces average quality while increasing the value of awards raises quality

and the budget constraint yields an interior solution that depends on the supply response of students

to numbers of awards and to the stipend amount. The critical factor that determines whether it is

better to give more awards or raise stipends are the characteristics of applicants who are on the

margin of winning awards.

       There are two ways to estimate the impact of changes in awards on the margin to the

measured attributes of awardees. The first is to regress average GREs or other indicators of

academic skills on the number of awardees, as we did in table 7, where the estimates suggested that

average skills were not that sensitive to increased numbers of awards. The second way to assess

skills on the margin is to go back to the micro records on individual attributes and rank applicants by

the probability that they would get an award and then to examine the characteristics of those who

would be given awards on the margin. To do this, we estimated the probability of getting awards in

2004 and then computed the quantitative and verbal GRE scores and GPA for awardees with the

lowest probabilities in bins of fifty persons. We also estimated the average GRE and GPA for non-

awardees with the highest probabilities of having gained an NSF, again in groups of 50. The

difference in attributes between these non-awardees and the awardees in the lowest group reflects

the potential change in quality from increasing the number of awards.

       Figure 11 displays the results of our calculations in terms of the attributes of awardees and

non-awardees. Persons in group 1 are awardees with the highest probability of getting an award.

Persons in group 2 are awardees with the next highest probability of getting an award, and so on.

Group five consists of awardees in the lowest probability group of getting an award. Groups 6-10
                                                                                                     23

consist of persons who did not get an award, with those whom we estimated as most likely to get an

award placed in group 6, followed by persons with less likelihood of getting an award in groups 7 -

10. The figure shows that there is very little difference in the GRE Quantitative measures around

the cutoff point between groups 5 and 6. This indicates that the number of awards could have been

increased along a substantial margin without greatly reducing quality, or could have been reduced

along a substantial margin without greatly increasing quality. But the figure does show a noticeable

drop in GRE Verbal scores between the marginal awardees and the marginal non-awardees. In part,

this reflects the fact that while our model does a good job of predicting who gets an award, the errors

in the model are for persons along the margin.

       Table 9 simulates what would happen if NSF has $10 million additional funding to spend

and divided the spending in three different ways: by increasing the number of awards, by increasing

the value of awards, and by spending half of the additional money on increasing the number and half

on increasing the value. Spending all of the money on increasing the number of awards at current

stipend amounts would add 333 awardees and would give awards to person with modestly lower

GRE quantitative and verbal scores than current awardees – 4.9 points lower in the quantitative GRE

and 29.0 points lower in the verbal GRE. Since NSF gave 1020 awards, the impact of the lower

scores for the 333 awardees on the average for all awardees is considerably smaller. Spending all of

the money on increasing stipend values would raise awards by 32.7% and would change the overall

mean GRE scores of awardees modestly. If such a large increase in stipends were to attract more

able persons, this improved quality does not readily show up in the GRE measures. Finally, dividing

the $10 million dollars between additional awards and higher valued stipends would increase the

number of awards by 146. The increased stipend attracts just enough higher scoring applicants to
                                                                                                      24

offset the mean quality decrease associated with more awardees. The result is virtually no change in

the average measures of awardee skills.

       It is easy to use our analysis to simulate the outcomes of other hypothesized changes in the

NSF stipend budget and its allocation between numbers of awards and stipend values.

2. Using Fixed Rules to Determine the Number and/or Value of Stipends

       An alternative way to set the number and/or value of stipends is to use a fixed rule to set

them. Monetary economists and officials have often discussed using fixed rules to set the growth of

money supply. Some central banks target a range of rate of inflation as their goal while others focus

on keeping interest rates within some band. Fixed rules increase social security payments with

inflation and have been proposed to raise minimum wages with inflation rather than through

legislative means. If policy-makers chose a given adjustment rule, the value or number of stipends

would increase according to the rule.

       There are diverse rules that policy-makers could use to set stipend values and the numbers of

stipends. Taking the value of stipends, one possible rule would be to set stipends as a percentage of

alternative earnings in the labor market, such as the earnings of young college graduates. Another

would be to make stipends a given percentage of the earnings of doctorates. Yet another would be

to adjust stipends to measures of employment opportunities, such as unemployment rates or, given

low rates of joblessness among S&E doctorates, the length of time to obtaining a job upon

completion of a PhD, or to the growth of R&D spending. Since any single indicator would be

subject to measurement error, perhaps the most sensible target would be a weighted average of

indicators: stipends would rise/fall as the average of the indicators increased or decreased.

       To set the number of stipends by a fixed rule, policy-makers could simply make them a given
                                                                                                        25

proportion of the number of BS graduates, thereby assuring students in different cohorts the same

probability of gaining a stipend. When the supply of S&E baccalaureates increased, so too would

stipend availability. Alternatively one could use the same set of weighted indicators for setting the

number of stipends as for setting the value of stipends.

       To get some sense of how a fixed rule would set the value and number of GRF stipends, we

have simulated what would happen to the number of awards and measured scholastic achievement of

GRF awardees under two conditions: (1) that NSF fixed the number of awards at 0.41% of S&E

bachelor’s degrees, the level in 1968, before the ratio of awards to bachelor’s graduates began to

fall; and (2) that NSF set stipends at the 2004 ratio of the value of stipends to the earnings of young

college graduates from the CPS, 115.8%. By setting numbers using a high awards per S&E

baccalaureate and setting values at a high value to earnings of young college graduates, we get an

upper bound on how a set of fixed rules would affect the supply of applicants to the field. Table 10

shows what would have happened from the 1970s to the 2000s if these fixed rules had been

employed. The greater number of awards would have lowered measured scholastic skills, but the

higher value of awards would have attracted enough applicants with greater skills to allow NSF to

raise average quality. Bottom line, these rules would have given awards to a larger number of

persons and, given our supply equations, would have raised the average quality of awardees, as well.

       Alternative sets of rules would, of course, give different outcomes.

3. Equilibrating quality across disciplines.

       Our final policy scenario considers what might happen if NSF changed its charge to panel

committees from giving awards in approximately the same proportion to the number of applicants

among fields to giving awards in a pure “measured scholastic” achievement, irrespective of the
                                                                                                          26

number of applicants from different fields. Thus, if physics received 100 applicants, all of whom

had higher GREs, GPAs, and so on than, say social science, which had 500 applicants, all 100

physics applicants would receive awards before any social science applicant would receive an

award. To see how awards would be given among disciplines under those hypothetical system, we

estimated a linear probability regression of actual award receipt on GRE Quant, GRE Verbal, GPA,

reference score (normalized), female indicator, and minority indicator in 1997, the last year for

which we had a full set of scholastic qualification measures. In 1997, NSF awarded 850 GRFs, so

under the hypothetical system, the applicants with the highest 850 predicted probabilities would be

offered an award. Since physical science and mathematics and computer science students have the

skills to shift to other fields and do well while students in the social sciences, psychology, and life

sciences cannot easily shift into the physical and mathematical sciences, we anticipated that this

change in policy would benefit the “harder” sciences.

       The calculations summarized in table 11 tell a different story. Column 1 gives the number

and percentage of applicants in each field in 1997. Column 2 gives the number and percentage of

awardees in each field. The percentages of awards by discipline differ moderately from the

percentages of applicants by discipline, with engineering gaining more awards and life sciences

gaining fewer awards, due in part to the WECS program. Column 3 gives our hypothetical

distribution of awards by discipline on the basis of the measured scholastic attributes. The table note

shows the coefficients of the equation used to generate the hypothetical distribution. It gives equal

weight to the quantitative GRE and verbal GRE and a relatively heavy weight on the measure of

references.

       The hypothetical distribution shows some differences from the 1997 actual distribution of
                                                                                                        27

awardees among natural science fields: mathematics, chemistry, and physics /astronomy gain a few

awards while earth and atmospheric sciences and life sciences get fewer awards. The biggest

change, however, is between engineering and the social sciences and psychology. Engineering loses

a substantial number of awards, where social sciences and psychology gain. Why? The social

sciences have the highest mean verbal scores whereas engineering has the lowest mean verbal

scores. The social sciences and psychology score best on the reference letters. The GRE

quantitative scores favor the physical and mathematical sciences, including engineering, but a larger

proportion of students obtain top scores in the GRE quantitative test than in the GRE verbal test,

which puts a bound on the extent to which our hypothetical allocation gives awards to those fields.

Conclusion

       Stipends to US citizens/residents are a natural policy tool for increasing the incentive for

Americans to enter S&E fields without directly impacting the flow of talent from overseas. Analysis

of NSF Graduate Research Fellowships suggests that raising the value of awards increases the

number of applicants and quality of awardees while giving more awards increases the number of

awardees, by definition, with only a modest reduction in measured academic skills. Because the

analysis is limited to a single stipend program, it is uncertain whether the finding that the number of

applicants responds to the relative value and relative number of stipends can be extrapolated to the

market for graduate students as a whole. To the extent that changes in NSF fellowship policy induce

changes in the policies of other stipend-granting groups, we suspect that the qualitative results, at

least, can be extrapolated to the broader market. At the minimum, the results are consistent with the

notion that more and better-paying stipends could raise the number of native-born/residents choosing

S&E fields broadly. To go further than that would require a more extensive analysis of the decision
                                                                                               28

of students to pursue S&E graduate studies as opposed to other options (as opposed to simply

applying for the GRF) and a careful study of the responses of universities, other government

agencies, and non-profit groups to NSF stipend policies.
                                                                                                  29

                                         REFERENCES:

[1] “Committee of Visitors (COV) Report for the National Science Foundation( NSF) Graduate

Research Fellowship Program (GRFP)”, June 17-18, 2003; Members: Mason, Agonafer, Givens,

Jones, Petrochenkov, & Vollmer.

[2] “Report of the Committee of Visitors, National Science Foundation, The Graduate Fellowship

Program”, June 17-18, 1999, Members: Taylor, Denson, Flores, Gern, Sullivan, Syverson.

[3] National Science Board, “Science and Engineering Indicators 2004". Two volumes. Arlington,

VA: National Science Foundation, Appendix Table 2-15

[4] NSF, Division of Science Resource Statistics, “Graduate Students and Postdoctorates in Science

and Engineering: Fall 2001", Tables 39, 40.

[5] NSF, Graduate Research Fellowship Program (GRFP) Program Solicitation, NSF 04-615.

[6] WestEd, "National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship Program: Final

Evaluation Report”, September 2002

[7] Richard B. Freeman, “Fellowship Stipend Support and the Supply of S&E Students: NSF

Graduate Research Fellowships”, Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association,

Philadelphia PA, January 7-9, 2005

[8] NSF Division of Graduate Education, “Guideline for Panelists. In the Review and Rating of

National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship Applications,” Program Year 2002.

[9] National Science Foundation, Division of Science Resources Studies, Science and Engineering

Degrees: 1966-98, NSF 01-325, Author, Susan T. Hill (Arlington, VA 2001).

[10] Sheppard, Rutledge, & Johnson, “Merit Criteria, Eligibility and Diversity in the NSF Graduate

Fellowships”, Proc. of the 2001 Amer. Soc. for Eng. Educ. Annual Conference and Exposition,
                                                                                                30

American Society for Engineering Education.

[11] Joan Burrelli, “A comparison of the early career characteristics of NSF fellows and non-

fellows”, (2002) National Science Foundation

[12] NSF, “Scientific and Technical Manpower Resources: Summary Information on Employment

Characteristics, Supply and Training”, (1964) NSF 64-28

[13] Ruggles, Sobek, Alexander, Fitch, Goeken, Kelly Hall, King, and Ronnander. Integrated Public

Use Microdata Series: Version 3.0,. Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota Population Center (2004)
                                                                                                    31

                           Appendix A: Model of Optimal Stipend Policy

        As a starting point for analyzing stipend policy, we consider the choices and constraints
faced by an abstract granting agency. We assume that the granting agency cares about the number
of awards (N) that it grants each year and the average quality (Q) of the students who receive the
awards. The real-world analogue is that the NSF would like to support as many students as possible
for graduate study in S&E, but at the same time the NSF would like its fellowship recipients to be as
high-achieving as possible. The agency thus seeks to maximize
(1)             U = aN + (1 – a)Q ,
a weighted average of N and Q where a is the weight placed on numbers. The agency has two policy
levers to do this: the numbers of stipends (N) and the annual value of stipends (V). The agency
faces a budget constraint
(2)             NV = K
where K is the (fixed) total annual budget allocated to stipends.
The agency’s choice of N and V affects the quality of awardees. Average recipient quality is
modeled as
(3)             Q = Q(V, N, other factors).
where Q/ V > 0 because higher-valued stipends are able to attract higher-achieving candidates who
would otherwise have pursued alternative fields and careers or seek other fellowships. We also
expect that Q/ N < 0: average quality of the awardees declines with the number of awards because
the highest-achieving students are generally the first to obtain awards. The optimal policy in this
model, derived from maximizing the objective (1) subject to the constraints (2) and (3), is
characterized by the following condition:

                       ∂Q           ∂Q V
(4)    a = (1 − a) −      + (1 − a)
                       ∂N           ∂V N

        The optimal policy is to equate the marginal benefit and marginal cost of funding another
student. The marginal benefit, given on the left hand side of (4), is simply the subjective value (a)
that the agency places on being able to support an additional student. The marginal cost, on the right
hand side, consists of two terms. The first term denotes the marginal decrease in quality resulting
directly from giving more awards. The second term reflects the fact that, in the face of a fixed
budget, a larger number of awards necessitates a lower annual stipend value, which in turn lowers
the average quality of awardees.
        This model suggests that the relationship between stipend values and awardee quality is of
central interest. How do higher stipend values bring higher-achieving students into the GRFP
program? The main mechanism underlying this relationship is that higher stipend values attract a
larger applicant pool, and at least some of the additional applicants are highly able candidates who
are pulled away from alternative careers (or from immediate entry into the labor market).
Essentially, larger applicant pools allow the agency to be more selective in granting awards. Thus, it
is also of interest to examine the factors that determine the number of applicants to the GRFP
program. We model the number of applicants (A) as
(5)              A = A(N-1, V, Other factors)
                                                                                                    32

where N-1 is the number of awards granted in the previous year. We predict that A/ V > 0 and A/
N-1 > 0; that is, more students apply when stipend values increase and when the perceived
probability of receiving an award rises. Other factors predicted to influence the applicant pool
include the attractiveness of alternative careers, as discussed in the next section.
Thus, equations (1) through (5) capture the quality-quantity choice facing a stipend-granting agency:
to spend its budget on funding many students versus funding a few “superstars.” Since
identification of stars is difficult in most disciplines, the choice is in fact more complex. The key
behavioral relations to be empirically estimated are: the change in the quality of students as the
number of awardees is increased; the change in quality in response to the value of stipends; and the
change in the number of applicants as stipend values rise. If the agencies responsible for stipend
policy optimizes as in this model, then the preceding model reflects the basic tradeoffs factoring into
the agencies’ decisions. In this case the number and monetary value of GRFP fellowships cannot be
assumed to be exogenous for the purposes of estimating behavioral relationships. On the other hand,
if the number and value of GRFP fellowships depend on vagaries of budgeting, then adjustments to
the number and value of stipends constitute “natural experiments” for assessing the effect of stipend
policy.
                                                                                                             33



                               NSF Graduate Research Fellowship Program (1952 - 2004)
                                             30
                                                                                                 3000
      Thousands of Constant Dollars (2003)




                                             25
                                                                                                 2500
                                                                  Annual Stipend Amount
                                             20
                                                                                                 2000




                                                                                                        # of People
                                             15
                                                                                                 1500


                                             10                                  Awardees
                                                                                                 1000


                                             5                                                   500


                                             0                                                   0
                                             1950   1960   1970      1980      1990       2000




Figure 1. The Number and Value of GRF Awards Vary Over Time.

Source: NSF, Division of Graduate Education, Cumulative Index of the GRF Program and related
datasets.
                                                                                                                              34


             GRF Awardees as Proportion of S&E Bachelors (1952 - 2004)
                                500                                                 8




                                                                                        GRF Awardees per Thousand Bachelors
                                                                Bachelors           7
                                400
   Thousands of S&E Bachelors




                                                                                    6


                                300                                                 5

                                                                                    4

                                200                          Awardees               3

                                                                                    2
                                100
                                                                                    1

                                  0                                                 0
                                 1950   1960   1970   1980   1990       2000


Figure 2. The Number of Awards per S&E Baccalaureate Has Shifted Downwards.

Source: NSF-DGE, Cumulative Index and related Datasets. Bachelor’s degree data tabulated by
National Science Foundation/Division of Science Resources Studies; data from Department of
Education
                                                                                                                    35



       100%
                                       Mathematics
                                                                                Computer Science


        80%
                            Physics
                                                               Geoscience

                                                                                   Engineering
        60%              Chemistry




        40%
                                                                                Life Science



        20%
                                                                                 Social Science


                                                                                        Psychology
         0%
          52

                 55

                    58

                           61

                                  64

                                     67

                                            70

                                                   73

                                                          76

                                                             79

                                                                    82

                                                                           85

                                                                              88

                                                                                     91

                                                                                            94

                                                                                                 97

                                                                                                        00

                                                                                                               03
        19

               19

                  19

                         19

                                19

                                   19

                                          19

                                                 19

                                                        19

                                                           19

                                                                  19

                                                                         19

                                                                            19

                                                                                   19

                                                                                          19

                                                                                               19

                                                                                                      20

                                                                                                             20
Figure 3. The GRF Disciplinary Distribution Over Time of Applicants.

Source: NSF, Division of Graduate Education, Cumulative Index of the GRF Program and related
datasets.
                                                                                               36




       18%
                                                                    All
       16%

       14%
                                                                    Math & Physical
       12%                                                          Science
       10%
                                                                    Life Science
        8%

        6%                                                          CompSci &
                                                                    Engineering
        4%

        2%                                                          Social Science &
                                                                    Psychology
        0%
                1952-1969        1970-1989       1990-2004


Figure 4. Percentage of Applicants Who Gain GRF Awards, Selected Years.

Source: NSF, Division of Graduate Education, Cumulative Index of the GRF Program and related
datasets.
                                                                                               37




        60%


        50%


        40%


        30%


        20%


        10%


          0%
            1950         1960        1970         1980        1990        2000
                Women                URM (GRF Only)                URM (GRF + MGF)



Figure 5. Percentages of Fellows Who Are Women or URMs.

Source: NSF, Division of Graduate Education, Cumulative Index of the GRF Program and related
datasets.
                                                                                            38



      20.0%
      18.0%
      16.0%
      14.0%
      12.0%
      10.0%
       8.0%
       6.0%
       4.0%
       2.0%
       0.0%
                1952-63     1964-75     1976-87     1988-93     1994-98     1999-04
               All      Women         URMs in GRF Only          URMs in GRF + MGF



Figure 6. Average Percentage of Applicants Winning Awards in Selected Time
Periods, by Broad Demographic Group.

Source and Note: Data on ethnic demography only available beginning in 1976. From 1994 - 1998
the available data allows the identification of duplicate applicants to both the MGF & GRF. To
calculate “URMs in GRF + MGF” the total number of unique fellows in either program was divided
by the total number of unique applicants. The final year of the MGF program was 1998. NSF,
Division of Graduate Education, Cumulative Index of the GRF Program and related datasets.
                                                                                                                                   39



                                      Figure 7. GRFP Applications Relative to S&E Bachelor’s
                                      Degrees And Relative Value of GRFP Stipend, 1968-2004

                                      0.035                                                            1.2
      Applicants/Bachelor's Degrees




                                       0.03                                                            1




                                                                                                             Stipend/Alternative
                                      0.025
                                                                                                       0.8
                                       0.02
                                                                                                       0.6
                                      0.015
                                                                                                       0.4
                                       0.01
                                      0.005                                                            0.2

                                         0                                          0
                                         1964 1969 1974 1979 1984 1989 1994 1999 2004
                                                Applications/Bach Degrees   Stipend/Alternative Wage




Source: NSF, Division of Graduate Education, Cumulative Index of the GRF Program and related
datasets. Bachelor’s degree data tabulated by National Science Foundation/Division of Science
Resources Studies; data from Department of Education.
                                                                                                                                40




                                       Figure 8. GRFP Applications Relative to S&E Bachelor’s
                                         Degrees And College Graduate Unemployment Rate,
                                                             1979-2004
                                       0.025                                                      4
      Appplicants/Bachelor's Degrees




                                                                                                  3.5




                                                                                                        Unemployment Rate (%)
                                        0.02
                                                                                                  3
                                       0.015                                                      2.5
                                                                                                  2
                                        0.01                                                      1.5
                                                                                                  1
                                       0.005
                                                                                                  0.5
                                          0                                                       0
                                          1979     1984       1989         1994      1999      2004
                                                     Applicants/Bach Degrees      Unemp Rate




Source: NSF DGE, Cumulative Index of the GRF Program and related datasets. Bachelor’s degree
data tabulated by National Science Foundation/Division of Science Resources Studies; data from
Department of Education. Unemployment data from estimated from the annual Current Population
Survey (CPS) Outgoing Rotation Group, Bureau of Labor Statistics.
                                                                                                               41




                 Figure 9A. Mean GRE Quantitative Scores of Awardees
                         And Relative Stipend Value, 1968-2004

                 800                                                            1.2




                                                                                      Stipend/Outside Salary
                 780                                                            1

                                                                                0.8
     GRE Score




                 760
                                                                                0.6
                 740
                                                                                0.4
                 720                                                            0.2

                 700                                                           0
                   1965      1975           1985            1995            2005
                             GRE Quan       Stipend/Outside Salary



Source: NSF DGE, Cumulative Index of the GRF Program and related datasets. Salary data
estimated from the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) of the March Current
Population Survey.
                                                                                                                42




                    Figure 9B. Mean GRE Verbal Scores of Awardees and
                              Relative Stipend Value, 1968-2004

                   720                                                           1.2
                   710




                                                                                       Stipend/Outside Salary
                   700                                                           1
                   690
      GRE Scores




                                                                                 0.8
                   680
                   670                                                           0.6
                   660
                   650                                                           0.4
                   640                                                           0.2
                   630
                   620                                                          0
                     1965          1975        1985          1995            2005
                      GRE Verbal      Detrended Verbal    Stipend/Outside Salary


Source: NSF DGE, Cumulative Index of the GRF Program and related datasets. Salary data
estimated from the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) of the March Current
Population Survey.
                                                                                                                                 43

      Units for Stipend Budget: Dollars per $10 Million GDP Dollars


                                                                      50

                                                                      45

                                                                      40

                                                                      35

                                                                      30

                                                                      25

                                                                      20

                                                                      15

                                                                      10

                                                                       5

                                                                       0
                                                                       1950   1960        1970      1980       1990       2000

                                                                                     Applicants per 1000 S&E Bachelors
                                                                                     Stipend Budget (Normalized by GDP)




Figure 10. Fraction of Bachelors Choosing to Apply to GRF vs. Total GRF Stipend
Budget/GDP.


Source: NSF DGE, Cumulative Index of the GRF Program and related datasets. Data on the Gross
Domestic Product (GDP) from the Bureau of Economic Analysis, an agency of the U.S. Department
of Commerce.
                                                                                                   44

         800

         750

         700
                                                                                GRE Quant
                                                                                GRE Verbal
         650

         600

         550
               1     2     3     4      5     6      7     8     9     10



Figure 11. Quality of GRF Applicants on the Margin of Getting an Award.


Source and Notes: All persons to the left of the line were given awards. All persons to the right of
the line did not get awards. The numbers relate to groups of 50 persons, ordered by the estimated
probability they would win an NSF award. The 5th group consists of 50 awardees with the lowest
probability of getting an award, the 4th group consists of 50 awardees with the next lowest
probability, and so on. The 6th group consists of the 50 non-awardees with the highest probability of
getting an award. The probabilities are predicted values from an OLS regression of an award receipt
dummy variable on panel rating, female dummy, underrepresented minority dummy, and eight field
dummies.
                                                                                                                                                  45

Table 1: Means, Standard Deviations, and Scaling of the Quantitative Measures of Applicant Scholastic Skills




       Summary for Key Data in Total Time            Records           Overall Award
          the GRF Datafiles     Period                                    Rate
                                       1952 - 2004     271,391              13.50%
                            Data
                                         Mean            STD              Full Range                               Notes
                          Available
                         1976 - 1993      328               115             100 to   600
                                                                                            For analysis, Panel Ratings and Reference Scores
                         1994 - 1998      315               118             100 to   600
        Panel Ratings                                                                       will be normalized such that they have mean zero
                            1999          3.11             1.02            1.00 to   6.00
                                                                                            and standard deviation one in the applicant pool of
                         2000 - 2004      2.90             0.85            1.00 to   4.99
                                                                                            each year. These variables are also recoded such
                         1954 - 1993      24.2              8.7              10 to   70
       Reference Score                                                                            that higher values denote better ratings.
                         1994 - 1998      1.91             0.65               1 to   7
         GRE Quant       1952 - 2004      691               100             200 to   800
                                                                                              Values in original dataset above 800 set to 800
         GRE Verbal      1952 - 2004      606               104             200 to   800
           GPA           1955 - 1998      3.49             0.40               1 to   4      Full Range (0 to 3) before 1971, values shifted by +1
                         1976 - 2004                     (1, 2, 3, 4, 5)
                         1981 - 1987              (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9)
           Ethnicity
                         1988 - 2000             (A, B, C, D, E, F, H, I, J)
                         2000 - 2004                    (t, f) or (y,n,b)                     a separate variable codes each ethnic category
                         1952 - 2000                          (m, f)
           Gender
                         2001 - 2004                        (m, f, b)                            value of "b" indicates "decline to answer"

Source: NSF, Division of Graduate Education, Cumulative Index of the GRF Program and related datasets.
                                                                                           46


Table 2. Linear Probability Model for the Impact of Scholastic and Demographic
Variables on GRF Awards.

                                                     Offered Award
                                           1955-98       1976-98      1976-98
             Panel Rating                                               0.170
                                                                      (0.001)
             Reference Score                0.082         0.074        0.022
                                           (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.001)
             GRE Quant/100                  0.034         0.035        -0.010
                                           (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.001)
             GRE Verbal/100                 0.060         0.066        0.019
                                           (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.001)
             GPA                            0.089         0.095        -0.010
                                           (0.002)       (0.003)      (0.003)
             Female                                       0.033         0.037
                                                         (0.002)      (0.002)
             Minority                                     0.087         0.077
                                                         (0.004)      (0.003)
             Field Effects:
               Chemistry                    -0.003         0.011       0.045
                                           (0.003)       (0.004)      (0.004)
               Computer Science             -0.007         0.009       0.115
                                           (0.004)       (0.005)      (0.005)
               Engineering                   0.022         0.048       0.093
                                           (0.003)       (0.004)      (0.003)
               Earth/Atmospheric             0.033         0.034       0.049
                                           (0.004)       (0.005)      (0.005)
               Life Science                  0.037         0.034       0.040
                                           (0.002)       (0.003)      (0.003)
               Math                         -0.019        -0.012       0.051
                                           (0.003)       (0.005)      (0.005)
               Physics/Astronomy            -0.030        -0.006       0.060
                                           (0.003)       (0.005)      (0.004)
               Psychology                   0.000         0.005        0.018
                                           (0.003)       (0.005)      (0.004)
               Social Science

             Year Effects                    Yes          Yes          Yes
             Observations                  207498        107658       107597
             R-squared                      0.198        0.1793       0.2731

Source: NSF, Division of Graduate Education, Cumulative Index of the GRF Program and related
datasets.
                                                                                           47



Table 3 . Regression Coefficients and Standard Errors For Scholastic and
Demographic Determinants of Average Panel Rating, 1976-1998.


                                       Average Panel Rating
                                             1976 - 1998
                    Reference Score               0.304
                                                (0.002)
                    GRE Quant/100                 0.268
                                                (0.003)
                    GRE Verbal/100                0.279
                                                (0.002)
                    GPA                           0.614
                                                (0.006)
                    Female                       -0.024
                                                (0.004)
                    Minority                     0.057
                                                (0.007)
                    Field Effects:
                      Chemistry                  -0.198
                                                (0.009)
                      Computer Science           -0.629
                                                (0.010)
                      Engineering                -0.263
                                                (0.007)
                      Earth/Atmospheric          -0.092
                                                (0.011)
                      Life Science               -0.038
                                                (0.006)
                      Math                       -0.367
                                                (0.010)
                      Physics/Astronomy          -0.386
                                                (0.009)
                      Psychology                -0.079
                                                (0.009)
                      Social Science

                    Year Effects                 Yes
                    Observations                107597
                    R-squared                   0.6079



Source: NSF, Division of Graduate Education, Cumulative Index of the GRF Program and related
datasets.
                                                                                                     48

Table 4. Regression Coefficients for Determinants of Panel Rating, Quality Group,
and Award Offer, 1990-2004.

                                1990 - 1997                              1998 - 2004
                                                  Award                                  Award
                                 Assigned                                 Assigned
                                                conditional                            conditional
                   Panel Rating   Quality                   Panel Rating   Quality
                                                 on being                               on being
                                Group 1 or 2                             Group 1 or 2
                                               group 1 or 2                           group 1 or 2
                         1             2            3            4            5             6
   Female             -0.012        -0.021        0.38         0.135        0.024         0.25
                     (0.006)       (0.003)       (0.014)      (0.009)      (0.004)       (0.012)
   Minority           -0.003        0.076         0.072        0.161        0.091         0.073
                     (0.009)       (0.004)       (0.041)      (0.015)      (0.006)       (0.021)
   Panel Rating                                   0.275                                   0.546
                                                 (0.039)                                 (0.028)
   Quant/100          0.263         0.035                      0.334        0.081
                     (0.004)       (0.002)                    (0.007)      (0.003)
   Verbal/100         0.235         0.074                      0.285        0.093
                     (0.003)       (0.002)                    (0.005)      (0.002)
   GPA                0.634         0.118
                     (0.010)       (0.004)
   Reference          0.289         0.093
                     (0.003)       (0.002)
   Field Effects       Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes
   Year Effects        Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes
   Observations      47821         47851          4904         41404       41404          5695
   R-squared         0.5882        0.2109        0.1445        0.215       0.0901        0.1574




Source: NSF, Division of Graduate Education, Cumulative Index of the GRF Program and related
datasets

Note: For comparison with the 1998-2004 analyses, we estimated the 1990-97 equations excluding
GPA and reference scores. The coefficients (standard error) on the dummy for female barely
changed: it was -0.012 (.006) in the panel rating equation and -0.026 (.003) in the equation for
being assigned to group 1 or 2. For minorities, the coefficient on the dummy for minority status in
the panel rating become -0.241 (.011). The implication is that GPA and reference scores for
minority applicants were much lower than for others. But the probability of being assigned to
group 1 or 2 gave to minorities a positive, though smaller, coefficient than in the table, .018(.003)
                                                                                                                49



                                                                                                         !""#



                        GRE QUANTITATIVE TEST SCORES               GRE VERBAL TEST SCORES
                   1976-1983 1984-1991 1992-1998 1999-2004 1976-1983 1984-1991 1992-1998 1999-2004
    Female            -41.7     -36.3     -35.8     -28.9      0.0       -10.6    -16.1      -7.2
                       (1.0)    (0.9)     (0.8)      (0.8)    (1.2)      (1.0)     (1.0)    (1.0)
    Black            -175.9    -166.5    -146.3    -100.1    -168.7     -160.1   -146.5    -100.4
                       (3.2)    (1.8)     (1.4)      (1.9)    (3.8)      (2.1)     (1.7)    (2.4)
    Hispanic          -77.5     -98.0     -87.1     -54.7     -80.5     -107.8    -95.9     -70.6
                       (3.5)    (2.0)     (1.5)      (1.7)    (4.2)      (2.3)     (1.9)    (2.2)
    Other Minority    -49.2     -73.9     -69.1     -44.7     -41.0      -69.8    -60.7     -38.7
                       (8.1)    (4.1)     (3.1)      (3.4)    (9.5)      (4.9)     (3.8)    (4.4)
    Field Effects      Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes      Yes       Yes
    Year Effects       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes      Yes       Yes
    Observations     30213     41045     41804     36658     30213      41045    41804     36659
    R-Squared       0.3256     0.3688   0.3778    0.2536     0.116     0.1868   0.2273    0.1279


Source: NSF, Division of Graduate Education, Cumulative Index of the GRF Program and related datasets.
                                                                                                      50



Table 6: Determinants of the Number of GRFP Applicants, 1969-2004


                                                        Dep Var: ln(applicants in academic field in
                                                                       current year)
                                                         (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)

  Log(Bachelor's Degs) by Field in Current Yr            0.195       0.304       0.298       0.516
                                                        (0.057)     (0.063)     (0.062)     (0.066)
  Log(Stipend/Outside Salary) in Previous Yr             0.996       0.916       0.852       0.772
                                                        (0.084)     (0.060)     (0.059)     (0.056)
  Unemp Rate for College Grads Age 21-25                             0.049
                                                                    (0.013)
  Unemp Rate for All College Grads                                               0.104       0.094
                                                                                (0.024)     (0.022)
  Log(Awards/Bachelor's Degs) by Field in Previous Yr                                        0.349
                                                                                            (0.054)
  Field Effects                                          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
  Field x Time Trend                                     Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
  Observations                                            324        234          234         234
  R-squared                                             0.8931      0.955       0.9561      0.9634




Source: NSF, Division of Graduate Education, Cumulative Index of the GRF Program and related
datasets, as described in text. Outside salary are earnings of college graduates aged 21-25. Outside
salaries and unemployment rates from Current Population Survey.
                                                                                                       51




Table 7. Determinants of Awardee Achievement, 1969 - 2004


                                         GRE Quant GRE Verbal      GPA


        Log(Number of Awards) by           -10.6       -21.8      -0.087
        Field in Current Yr                (1.80)     (3.30)       (0.01)

        Log(Stipend/Outside Salary) in      29         35.4       -0.007
        Previous Yr                         3.3        6.1         0.017

        Field Effects                       Yes        Yes         Yes
        Field x Time Trend                  Yes        Yes         Yes
        Observations                        324        324         270
        R-squared                          0.8943     0.684       0.7354




Source: Tabulated from NSF, Division of Graduate Education, Cumulative Index of the GRF Program
and related datasets, as described in text. Outside salary are earnings of college graduates aged 21-25,
tabulated from Current Population Survey.
                                                                                                       52

Table 8. Determinants of the Number of Applicants Scoring Above High Thresholds

                         Log(Applicants with   Log(Applicants with   Log(Applicants with
                         GRE Quant > 770)      GRE Verbal > 680)        GPA > 3.88)
                                 (1)                   (2)                   (3)

Log(Stipend/Outside             1.221                 1.276                 0.448
Salary) in Previous Yr         (0.104)               (0.086)               (0.100)

Log(Number of Awards)           0.539                 0.664                 0.512
by Field in Current Yr         (0.090)               (0.074)               (0.077)

Field Effects                    Yes                  Yes                   Yes
Field x Time Trend               Yes                  Yes                   Yes
Observations                      261                  261                   207
R-squared                       0.9101               0.9097                0.9235



Source: Tabulated from NSF, Division of Graduate Education, Cumulative Index of the GRF Program
and related datasets, as described in text. Outside salary are earnings of college graduates aged 21-25,
tabulated from Current Population Survey.
                                                                                                                                             53



         $            %&              ' "(          $            )    * +*           ,             ,*               !""# -& )          .
/       +*

                            CHANGE IN         % CHANGE IN      DIFFERENCE BETWEEN MEAN QUALITY
                                                                                                CHANGE IN OVERALL MEAN QUALITY OF
                         ANNUAL NUMBER       RELATIVE VALUE       OF EXTRA AWARDEES AND MEAN
                                                                                                            AWARDEES
                          OF AWARDEES          OF STIPEND         QUALITY OF ORIGINAL AWARDEES
                                                                   GRE Quant         GRE Verbal    GRE Quant        GRE Verbal
                                (1)                (2)                 (3)              (4)           (5)               (6)
ALL EXTRA FUNDS TO
INCREASING NUMBER              333                0.00%               -4.9                -29                -1.2               -7.1
OF AWARDS

 ALL EXTRA FUNDS TO
INCREASING VALUE OF             0                32.70%               N.A.               N.A.                8.2                 10
      STIPENDS

 HALF TO ADDITIONAL
AWARDS AND HALF TO             146               14.30%               N.A.               N.A.                3.3                0.7
  HIGHER STIPEND


Notes: Non-awardees in 2004 were ranked by their predicted probability of award receipt; see text for details. For a given increase of N in the
number of awards, columns 3 and 4 are calculated by subtracting the mean quality of the actual 2004 awardees from the mean quality of the
top N non-awardees. In column 5 (6), the change in the overall mean quality induced by more awardees is calculated by multiplying column 3
(4) by N/(1020+N), given that 1020 awards were actually granted in 2004. The change in the overall mean quality induced by higher stipend
values is calculated from the coefficients in column 1 (3) of Table 7. The change in overall mean quality induced by both more awards and
higher stipend values is the sum of the two preceding changes.
                                                                                                                                                54

        " %&               0 +1                          (                  2        . )3        ).          &          !""#        .
4 *

                 ACTUAL PROGRAM CHARACTERISTICS
                                                                                HYPOTHETICAL PROGRAM CHARACTERISTICS
                           (Annual Averages)
                   Awards As                                              Change in Awardee      Change in Awardee
  Period                      Stipend as Average Quality of                                                              Predicted Quality of
                   % of S&E                                               Quality from Actual    Quality from Actual
            Awards             % of Alt.       Awardees          Awards                                                       Awardees
                      Bach                                                Due to More Awards    Due to Higher Stipend
                                Wage
                    Degrees                Quant     Verbal                Quant      Verbal     Quant       Verbal       Quant      Verbal
1968-1971    921     0.35%     55.70%      745.2     692.8        1082      -1.7        -3.5      21.2        25.9        764.7      715.2
1972-1975    511     0.16%     66.00%        751     693.8        1285      -9.8       -20.1      16.3        19.9         751       693.8
1976-1979    504     0.17%     55.00%      753.1     703.6        1237      -9.5       -19.6      21.6        26.3        765.2      710.4
1980-1983    460     0.15%     56.30%      746.9     693.1        1261     -10.7        -22       20.9        25.6        757.1      696.6
1984-1987    520     0.16%     82.00%      759.6     696.5        1342     -10.1       -20.7       10         12.2        759.6       688
1988-1991    807     0.25%     92.20%      766.3     692.9        1330      -5.3       -10.9       6.6         8.1        767.7      690.1
1992-1995    794     0.22%     84.50%        762     681.2        1493      -6.7       -13.8       9.1        11.2        764.4      678.6
1996-1999    820     0.21%     72.10%      751.1     660.3        1580       -7        -14.3      13.8        16.8        757.9      662.8
2000-2004    915     0.23%     93.40%      753.2     633.9        1640      -6.2       -12.7       6.3         7.6        753.3      628.8


Notes: “Hypothetical” characteristics denote those predicted to prevail if awards as % of S&E bachelor’s degrees had been maintained at
0.41% (its 1968 value) and stipend as % of alternative wage had been maintained at 115.8% (its 2004 value). Hypothetical changes in GRE
Quant and GRE Verbal are based on coefficients in columns 1 and 3 of Table 7. In the calculations, actual numbers of bachelor’s degrees in
2002-2004 were imputed from 2000-2001 field-specific growth rates in earned bachelor’s degrees, and actual alternative wage in 2004 was
imputed from 1983-2003 growth rate in salary of 21-25 yr olds with bachelor’s degrees.
                                                                                                                        55

Table 11. Existing and Hypothetical Allocation of GRFP Awards across Fields in 1997


                                Number of Candidates                                   Mean Applicant Quality
                               (Percent in Parentheses)
Field                    Applicants Awardees Awardees                       Quant       Verbal       GPA    Reference
                                      Actual    Hypothetical
Chemistry                     358             57               69            709          586        3.66     -0.05
                             (7.0)          (6.7)            (8.1)
Comp Sci                      261             47               46            730          600        3.66     -0.02
                             (5.1)          (5.5)            (5.4)
Engineering                  1212            252              184            728          573        3.67       0.05
                            (23.6)         (29.6)           (21.7)
Earth/Atmos                   194             32               25            690          603        3.57     -0.05
                             (3.8)          (3.8)            (2.9)
Life Science                 1502            210              198            686          605        3.54     -0.09
                            (29.3)         (24.7)           (23.3)
Math                          242             41               59            747          614        3.69     -0.12
                             (4.7)          (4.8)            (6.9)
Physics/Astro                 330             58               62            749          632        3.72     -0.26
                             (6.4)          (6.8)            (7.3)
Psychology                    331             48               63            653          615        3.57       0.27
                             (6.4)          (5.6)            (7.4)
Social Sci                    698            105              144            667          642        3.60       0.19
                            (13.6)         (12.4)           (16.9)
Total                        5128            850              850            702          604        3.62       0.00
                           (100.0)        (100.0)          (100.0)

Notes: Awards under the “hypothetical” system are allocated as follows. A linear probability regression
of actual award receipt on GRE Quant, GRE Verbal, GPA, reference score (normalized), female
indicator, and minority indicator was used to predict the probability of being offered an award in 1997.
Under the hypothetical system, applicants with the highest 850 predicted probabilities are designated as
being offered an award.

Regression with robust standard errors

Number of obs = 4566
R-squared = 0.1772
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
           gotaward             |           Coef.               Std. Err.              t
           quant/100            |          .0541323             .0062852              8.61
           verbal/100           |          .0582354             .0056672              10.28
           gpa                  |          .1265555             .0153695              8.23
           refscore             |          .0879098             .0050868              17.28
           female               |          .059188              .011009               5.38
           minority             |          .0319515             .0126827              2.52
           _cons                |          -1.04754             .0670683              -15.62
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
