                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             VARIABLE EARNINGS AND NONLINEAR TAXATION



                          Robert Moffitt

                        Michael Rothschild


                      Working Paper No. 1163




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCR
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                            June 1983




We are indebted to Gary Chamberlain and Eugene Sinolensky for helpful
discussions, to Peter Gottschalk for graciously performing special
tabulations for us and to the National Science Foundation and the
Institute for Research on Poverty research support. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Taxation.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                 NBER Working Paper #1163
                                                 June 1983



                   Variable   Earnings   and Nonlinear Taxation


                                     ABSTRACT




    We explore the interaction between two facts. The first is that income is

variable; the second is that the tax and transfer system transforms before tax

income into after tax income in highly non—linear ways. The effect is to penal-

ize (and reward) income variability in a manner which is both substantial and

capricious.


                                                    Robert Moffitt
                                                    Department of Economics
                                                    Rutgers University
                                                    New Brunswick, NJ 08903
                                                    (201) 932—7363

                                                    Michael Rothschild
                                                    Economics Department
                                                    University of Wisconsin
                                                    Madison, WI 53711
                                                    (608) 263—3880
                                         1


   The earned income tax credit (EITC) is a refundable tax credit on the ear-

nings of families with dependents. It operates as an earnings subsidy and is

intended to encourage labor market participation. In 1982 the subsidy paid to

an eligible family with an earned income of $7500 was about $250. In this

paper, we show that, at least in one extreme case, the EITC provides instead

an incentive to leave the labor market of about $800 to a family with expected

income of the same $7500.

    This seems a dramatic example of Milton Friedman's dictum that government

policies accomplish exactly the opposite of what they are intended to

accomplish. It is thus appropriate that another of Friedman's theories, the

permanent income hypothesis, should provide the simplest (but not the only)

explanation of how the EITC (and other aspects of the tax and transfer system)

should discourage work.

    One of the main premises of the permanent income hypothesis is that income

is variable. Another is that income earners are (and policymakers and social

critics should be) more concerned with permanent or expected income than with

particular realizations of the random process which generates annual income.

Yet taxes are levied on current income. Since tax and transfer systems are non-

linear, they can substantially affect the transformation of random current

income into after tax expected income.

    In this paper, we show that the current system of taxes and transfers in the

United States has substantial and capricious effects on the transformation of

current pretax income into permanent after tax income.   We examine not only

the EITC but also the federal income tax in general and transfer programs such

as AFDC (Aid to Families with Dependent Children) and Social Security. Not

all of these tax and transfer programs discourage work. For example, for
                                        .2

 families with an expected income of $5,000 who are eligible for the AFDC

 program, the tax and transfer system provides a work subsidy of almost

 $2,000.

     The mechanism which causes these effects is straightforward. Since income

 is variable we may write




 where Y is expected (or, in Friedman's terms, permanent) income and     represents

 the transitory variation in income.'    Taxes are levied on current income y,

rather than expected income Y. The tax and transfer system transforms current

income y into after—tax income x. We can write this in general form as

           x =   B(y).
Expected after tax income is E[B(y)]. If we assume individuals base their

labor supply decisions on expected after—tax income, the shape of the schedule

B(.) determines how the tax and transfer system rewards or punishes variabi-

lity. If B(.) is concave, as it will be if the tax system is progressive,

then Jensen's inequality implies that the tax system will penalize variabi-

lity. If BC.) is convex, as it will be if the tax system is regressive, then

the tax system will reward risk. The tax and transfer system in the U.S. is

not consistently progressive or regressive. The EITC example given above (and

presented in more detail in Section III below) is an example of income

variability occurring in a region where B(.) is concave. In the AFDC

example, income variability occurred in a region where B(.) is convex.

   We now discuss how to assay the magnitude of the effect we are examining.

The certainty equivalent after-tax income y is defined as the solution to
                                       3


          B(y) = E[B(y)].


We measure the effect of the tax system on variability by the ratio


          R =

If   the tax system is linear, R will be equal to unity. Under a progressive

tax system, B(.) will be concave and R will be less than unity. Under a

regressive tax system R will be greater than unity. The tax and transfer

system in the United States is neither convex nor concave (see Haustnan (1983)

and Moffitt (1982)); there can be no general presumption that R is greater

or less than unity. We present calculations below which suggest that for

reasonable estimates of the size of the variable component of income, R ranges

from .78 to 1.38 for individuals with different tax statuses and different

levels of expected income.

     Before we present these estimates it is worthwhile trying to think about

what R measures. At high income levels it is simply a way of measuring the

extent to which the tax system encourages or discourages risk taking.   However

in thIs paper we focus on the poor. We do so for two reasons. First, as

discussed in the next section, the amount by which R deviates from unity is

determined by two things; the size of the kinks in the tax system and the

amount by which income varies. In section III we present evidence which

suggests that in the U.S. the tax and transfer systems combine to produce a

very kinky tax system at low levels of income and that the earnings of the

poor are quite variable. These two factors interact to produce values of R

which differ significantly from unity. Our second reason for focusing on the

poor is that for them R may be given a more dramatic interpretation than the

mere encouragement or discouragement of risk taking. For many of the poor,
                                      4


welfare and equivalent activities such as participation in training programs

offer an income stream that is far more certain than that obtainable from

participation in the labor market. R measures the ratio between expected

income available in the labor market and the equivalent certain income which

would make withdrawal from the labor market attractive. A low R ——   associated

with progressive taxes —— discourages labor market participation. A high R

encourages it. Under this interpretation, an R of .8 means that a welfare

program which offers certain income equal to 80% of expected (before—tax)

income is as attractive as participation in the labor market. Alternatively,

a guaranteed public jobs program at the same certain wage would be more

attractive than private—sector employment.

    An unrealistically simple model underlies the discussion of the preceding

paragraph. We wrote as if the labor supply decision for an individual were

equivalent to deciding once a year whether or not to participate in a lottery.

If he does participate in the labor market he draws his annual labor market

income from a distribution with known characteristics and anticipates a net

gain of E[B(y)]. If he chooses not to participate he gets a certain income

of, say y. In making his labor supply decision he compares these two quan-

tities and chooses to enter the labor market only if E[B(y)] > y. This story

is wrong for at least three reasons. First, the labor supply decision is made

continually through the year; individuals drop in and out of the labor market

and adjust their hours of work (when they can). Second, the benefits to be

gained from not participating in the labor market are not certain; eligibility

criteria and program benefits change. Third, we have assumed individuals are

risk neutral. Taking these factors into consideration seems quite difficult.

One of the contributions of this paper is the simple analytic formula of
                                          5


 equation (1) below which relates R to the variability of income and the cur-

 vature of the tax system. We do not know how to modify this formula to take

 these factors into account. It seems likely that a more realistic model of

 labor supply and of welfare programs would reduce the size and significance of

 the effects we report; abandoning risk neutrality would increase them.


 II. How Different is R From Unity? Theoretical Results.

       The magnitude of the effect we are looking at depends on the variability

 of income and the shape of the tax system. In this section we present

calculations which show those parameter combinations that will produce

an R which is much different than unity. Our calculations are based on the

following observation which is proved in Appendix A. For a given probabi—

lity distribution of income F(s), the progressive tax system with maximal

marginal tax rate t which minimizes R is that which taxes all income above y

at rate T and leaves all income below y untaxed. (Of course, y is not inde-

pendent of the tax system; it Is the solution to B(y) = E[B(y)]). The R mini-

mizing tax system is a linear tax system with a single kink, a form of taxation

often advocated because of its simplicity.3

      If income is lognormally distributed then there is a simple analytic

relationship (derived in Appendix B) between the marginal tax rate, t, the

coefficient of variation, c, and R:


(1)       T = (1-R)/[(l-((log R -     cJ2)/cl)) - R(1 -   ((log R   +


where () is    the cumulative distribution function of a standard normal random

variable and     = log(lc2). Table 1 gives the results of calculations which

use this formula. In interpreting this table It is well to keep in mind that
                                        6



 it represents extreme cases. If income is log normally distributed with a

 coefficient of variation equal to unity and if the highest marginal tax rate

 is 51%, then the minimum value which R can assume is .8. R will attain this

value only if the tax system has a single kink, leaving all income less than

   untaxed and taxing all income greater than y at a rate of 51%.

Furthermore only persons with a level of expected income equal to y will have

an R of .8; other persons with a different permanent income (but with current

income log normally distributed with the same coefficient of variation) will

have an R between .8 and 1. If the tax system has several brackets (but the

top bracket is 51%) then R is larger than .8.

    We choose the lognormal for use in Table 1 for three reasons. First,

the lognormal permits us to obtain Table 1 analytically. Second, empirical

work on earnings commonly uses the log of earnings as a dependent variable;

it often assumes that earnings are lognorniaiiy distributed. As a consequence

most empirical reports of the variability of earnings are estimates of the

variance of log earnings, a2. If earnings are lognormally distributed, there

is a simple analytic relationship between this parameter and the coefficient

of variation, c:


              c = (exp(a2) —   1)1k.

Since we measure variability of earnings by c, this correspondence is useful.

Finally, experiments with exponential, binomial, and truncated normal distri-

butions suggest that the results of table 1 are robust; if the mean and

variance of income are held constant, the first significant digits of the

entries in table 1 do not, for the most part, change when the table is re-

calculated using these distributions.

   Table 1 shows that if income is variable, kinks of moderate size could make
                                      7



R small for some people. Kinks, that is, changes in marginal tax rates, of the

 order of .24 or .44 are, at minimum, necessary to produce reasonably low R's.

In the next section we present calculations for the United States which suggest

that for some people R is as low as .78; for others it is as high as 1.38.


III. How Different is R from Unity? Estimates of the Effects of Current United
        States Tax and Transfer Programs.


    In the previous section we have shown that, in the worst case, a single—

kink tax system would have to have a marginal tax rate of more than .24 to

generate an R of .90. In this section we calculate the ratio R for several

major tax and transfer programs in the U.S. to see if the kinks in those

programs can generate an R more than .10 or so away from one. We shall assume

that the log of earnings is normally distributed with mean p and variance a2.

Expected income is given by Y = exp(p + i/ a2). As we have observed above, a is

determined by the coefficient of variation, c. We shall perform our calcula-

tions for different values of expected income, Y, and c.

    Since some of the largest kinks in the tax and transfer system occur near

the bottom of the income distribution, we shall pick several low values of Y.

But which values of c to examine is not as obvious. Cross—section earnings

regressions, such as those of Mincer (1974), provide values of c (calculated

from the estimated variance of log earnings) in the neighborhood of .60—.90.

However, it could be argued that cross—sectional variation exaggerates the

variation in transitory income for a single individual because of heteroge—

neity across individuals. Many authors have instead estimated earnings equations

from panel data; such a procedure yields an estimate of the variance in ear—
                                      8

nings for the same individual over time. Most studies have done so with some

sort of error components structure —— see Lillard and Willis (1978) for one

example and MaCurdy (1982) for a more recent one with a very general structure

for the error term. These studies usually imply coefficients of variation (of

the transitory component of the error term) of from .50 to .80, with sub-

stantial differences across studies. Unfortunately for our purposes, the

variance of the transitory error is always assumed to be independent of the

level of the permanent income, so no information is provided on whether the

(permanently) low—income population has a larger variance than the rest of the

population. Studies which focus only on low—income individuals (e.g., Hausman

and Wise, 1979), maintain the same independence assumption In the stochastic

specification of the error term. Fortunately, Gottschalk (1981) has calcu-

lated the standard deviation of earnings over a six—year period for each indi-

vidual in the National Longitudinal Survey of Men, and has tabulated the mean

of the standard deviations by the level of mean earnings over the period.

Professor Gottschalk graciously performed special tabulations for us which

sh that that coeffIcient of variatIon in the lowest quintile of the popula-

tion is 1.35. It falls to about .50 in the next highest quintile and then

down to about .20 for the rest of the population. Since we are interested in

the low—income sector of the population, we shall therefore perform our calcu-

lations for c's ranging from .50 to l.35.



   Federal Income Tax. Figures 1—4 show the disposable income schedules for

several tax and transfer programs. The first figure refers to the federal

personal income tax, including the earned income tax credit (EITC). For all

our calculations we have assumed a four-person family with a single earner and

no other Income. All tax and transfer programs are evaluated in their 1982
                                                               subsidizes ear-
forms. As the figure shows, the present income tax actually

nings up to $5,000 of income. This feature has been present since the

mid—1970's and is a result of the EITC, which is a refundable tax credit for

which families with dependents are eligible. While it IS   an earnings subsidy

up to $5,000, it becomes an earnings tax beginning at $6,000 because it must

be phased out. The marginal tax rate begins at —.10, is 0 at $5,000 and then

becomes a positive .13 at $6,000. A concave kink of about .23 is thereby

created (note that this is close to the .24 of Table 1). A further kink, one

which is convex, is created at about $11,000 of earnings, the point at which

the subsidy drops to zero and the regular marginal tax rates begin.

   Our calculated values of R for the federal tax are shown in the first five

rows of Table 2. As should be expected, R is inversely related to c.

However, it is quadratically related to mean income because our middle ranges

of income fall around the concave kink and our high ranges fall around the

convex kink. CR would fall again at higher income levels.) As the results

show, R does fall to .90 and a bit below when c takes on a value of 1.35 and

the individual's permanent income is slightly above the concave kink ($7,500

in the table). In this particular case y is $6,685, more than $800 below Y.

This is a large amount in absolute terms. It is also large relative to the
                                                             Y = $7500, the tax
effect of the tax system on after—tax permanent income——at

system provides about a $250 subsidy to working as a result of the EITC

(indeed the intent of the EITC is to encourage work); but the effect of risk

on expected after—tax labor earnings Is almost three times this amount, and

negative.   Thus the phenomenon we are examining in this paper seems quan—

titively important relative to the usual effects of tax systems discussed in
                                              10

 certainty models ——at least if the coefficient of variation is high and if an

 individual's permanent income falls in a certain range.

       Aid   to   Families with Dependent Children (AFDC). The major transfer

program in the U.S. for poor families is AFDC. However, in most states only

families without an able—bodied male present in the household can receive

it.5     Hence the female—headed population is the largest beneficiary. In 1982

the statutory tax rate in the program in most states was .67, as shown in

Figure 2. This tax rate applies until benefits end, at which point the

point the federal income tax system (including the EITC) takes over.6

However, in some states ——       Indiana   is an example (Hausman, 1983) —— a range

of zero marginal tax rates is imposed at low earnings levels. In Indiana,

as shown in Figure 3, the zero rate applies over the first $1,000 of earnings.

    The values of R for AFDC in Table 2 show that the convex kinks

generated by the transfer program can have sizable effects. At c = 1.35, R

reaches 1.38 if permanent income is $5,000, not far from the convex kink.

The value of y in this case is $6,900, almost $2,000 above Y —— again

a large amount. Moreover, It should be noted that all the R values

we have calculated are greater than 1.0, even those at Y = $12,500.        At higher

earnings levels, of course, R would fall below 1.0. But at $12,500 and below,

the c's we have used imply that the risk of falling below the eligibility

point is sufficiently high that the work—encouraging effects of the program

dominate the work—discouraging effects of the progressive rates at higher

points. The same is true in the Indiana AFDC system —— at the Y's we have

calculated, all the R's are still greater than 1 (even though somewhat smaller

than before because of the presence of the concave kink).7
                                       11



     Social Security. We have also calculated our R ratios for the Social

 Security program because it contains (to the authors' knowledge) the most
                                                                     8
 severe concave kink of any major tax or transfer program in the U.S.    As shown

 in Figure 4, Social Security benefits are not reduced unless earnings rise

above about $5,000, at which point they begin to be taxed on a 50 percent

rate. The federal tax begins at about $7,000, whereupon the marginal tax rate

rises to .65. Benefits end completely at about $16,000 of earnings, at which

point a large convex kink is generated.

    As Table 2 shows, this program generates the lowest values of R of any

program we have considered. Those with permanent income in the range $5,000 —

$7,500 —— who are most affected by the concave kink —— have values of R that
are almost always below .90 and even below .80 at high values of c. At Y =

$7,500 and c = 1.35, y is almost $2,000 below Y. Consequently, to the extent
that the aged face risk in their labor earnings, this program would seem to

have significant work—discouraging effects at these low earnings levels. Of

course, at higher levels closer to the convex kink, values of R are greater

than one, as they are for any transfer program.


IV. Summary and Conclusion.

     In this paper we have shown that the U.S. tax and transfer system has

potentially large effects on risk—taking in the labor market, effects which

vary greatly across individuals. Depending upon one's eligibility for dif-

ferent types of transfer programs and upon the mean and variance of an

individual's earnings, the effect may be quite large. For many, of course,

the effect discussed here will be insignificant. But the potential for large

effects suggests that these effects be taken into account in the design of such
                                        12


programs ——   along with the usual efficiency and equity effects.
    That these other effects —— which we have ignored ——   are   important should

be stressed. A superficial reading of this paper would suggest that its main

lesson is that regressive tax systems are desirable because they encourage

work. This is, of course, not our conclusion. We merely urge that the effect

of sharp kinks in the tax system on those with variable earnings be taken

into account in the design and analysis of tax systems. This topic cries out

for treatment as an optimal tax problem and for a more realistic model of the

labor supply decision. Both problems must be left for future work.
                                                   13

                                                Appendix


      A. We represent a tax system by a function B(y) which gives the amount

of after tax income retained by a person with a pretax income of y. A

progressive tax system is one in which B(.) is increasing, concave, and satis-

fies


(2)           B(O) = 0.


Let be the maximum marginal tax rate of a tax system. Then


                 = 1 —   urn B'(y).
                         y+
We say a tax system is i—admissible if it is increasing, concave, satisfies

(2) and it's maximum marginal tax rate is less than or equal to r.

      An example of a i           admissible   tax system is the piecewise linear system

which does not tax income which is less than or equal to k and taxes income

greater than k at rate r. We denote such a tax system BTk(•) and define it

as follows:                   (
                            )
                                  y                ify<k
             B    (y)
                                  k + (1—t)(y—k) if y > k


      Throughout this appendix we consider the effect of a tax system BC.) on

expected after tax income when pretax income y is a random variable with sup-

port [0, M]. For a tax system B(.), define                  as the solution to


             B(y) =

      is   a certainty equivalent. Under a tax system B(.), a certain income of

      gives the same expected after tax income as the random income y.

      For any c(O,l) there is a unique solution to the equation
                                                   14


 (3)            =
                    E[B1;(y)].
                                x                                                           to
To see this let g(x) =              and h(x) =
                                                 E[B(y)].           We seek a solution, ,

g() =     h().      Now g(O) =      0,   and h(0) = (1—T)E[y] > 0. However, for         > 0

g(M+c) = M+c > h(M+c). Thus there is at least one solution to (3). There

is only one since g'(x) = 1 and h'(x) =                 t[1—F(x)]   < 1.



Proposition: Let i- be the solution to (3); then BT;(.) is the r—admissible

tax system which minimizes y where y is defined in (2).

       The proof is a consequence of the following simple result.


Lemma: For any z in the support of y, B(.) is the T—admissible tax system

which minimizes


           E[B(y)]
           B(z)

Proof of Proposition: Suppose there is a T—admissible tax system (.)                    other
than BT9,(•) such that %()                E[(y)]   and     <    where y Is the solution to

(2) for B(y) =       B(y).          Then, E[(y)] =      G) <   (y). Thus,


               E[B(yfl < 1



But E[BTy(Yfl =
                          B(Y) °
           E[B         (y)]
                T,Yc
           B
                              =1
                    (y)
                      c



Thus       E[B(y)]            E[By(Y)l
                              Bty(Yc)
                                           15


  which contradicts the Lemma.


  Proof of Lemma: Let


                  E[B(y)]
          R =
                  B(z)
                E[B(y)y<z]       E[B(y)Jy>z]
            =                +
                    B(z)            B(z)

            =
                R1 + R2.


 We show that B
                  Z,T is a t—admissible tax system which minimizes both it, and R2
 Clearly the 'r—admissible tax system which does not tax income < z and taxes

 all income > z at rate t minimizes R2. Such a system minimizes the numerator

 of    while it maximizes the denominator. Consider the problem of finding a

 t—admissible tax system which minimizes R1. We need only concern ourseif with

how income is taxed on the interval [0, z]. The numerator of         is

(proportional to) expected after tax income when income is distributed on [0,

z]; the denominator of       is after tax income on income of z. Any progressive

tax system will decrease the denominator of R1 proportionately at least as

much as it decreases the numerator, for under a progressive system a person

with income less than z is taxed no more heavily than a person with income z.

Thus the progressive tax systems which minimize R1 are linear over the range

[0, zJ. Since B(.) is linear over [0, z] it is i—admissible and minimizes

both R1 and R2.
                                              16


      B. The following equation is used to compute Table 1:



(4)       T = (l-R)/[(1-((1og R -       - a2)Ia))      - R(1 -   ((log R   + -


where 4(.) is the cumulative distribution function of a standard normal random

variable. To derive (4) observe first that if B(.) is the tax system which

minimizes R and if y is distributed with density f(s) and cumulative distri-

bution function F(s), then



                = B(Yc) = E[B(y)] = J      yf(y)dy —   T J
                                                              (y_y)f(y)dy.
                                    0

Thus,


          y = Ey + ty[l —               — T        yf(y)dy.
(5)                            F(y)]          j




Now if log y is normally distributed with mean p and variance a2, then


(6)       EyYexp(p+a2).
Furthermore, it can be shown (Johnson and Kotz 1970, p. 129) that


(7)           yf(y)dy   = Y [1 —   ((log          — — a2)/a)I.
          J




Since


(8)       R =


We can substitute in (7) to obtain
                                             17




(9)      1     yf(y)dy   = Y[1 —   ((log R   + log Y — p —   o2)/a)]
         ye

                         = Y[1 —   (log R         02)/a)]


The last step follows from (6). A similar substitution shows that


(10)     1 —   F(y)      1 —   ((log R   + log Y —


                      =1   —   ((log R   + -   2),)
Substituting (8), (9) and (10) into (5) and rearranging we obtain (4)
                                         18


                                    FOOTNOTES



       1As Gary Chamberlain has pointed out to us, our analysis does not depend

on £    being subjectively uncertain. It could represent known variations in
earnings which will occur as an individual ages and his value in the labor

market changes. The analysis we give below applies to these predictable

changes ——with certain obvious changes to deal with discounting. (See

Rothschild (1969)). However, to simplify our exposition we shall refer to all

variability as risk.
    2
        Those familiar with Atkinson's (1970) work on the measurement of inequality will

note that y is the same as his equally—distributed equivalent: our R is equal

to 1—I where I is his measure of inequality.

    3An obvious analogous result applies to regressive tax systems. In the

next section we note that in fact non—concave kinks (regressive portions of the

tax and transfer system) are as important in driving R away from unity as are

    4Mirer (1974) presents some similar estimates over a three—year period. We

use Gottschalk's because they come from direct calculations of each individual's

standard deviations of earnings, whereas Mirer's come from the variances of

regression error terms. As the disccusion in footnote 1 above indicates, both

calculations underestimate variability since they disregard predictable

growth of income.

       Gary Chamberlain has pointed out to us that there are difficulties in

inferring from panel data that the variance of income differs for people

according to their average income. A complete model would explain how

variables such as education and age determine average income, as well as the

variability of income.
                                         19


    5Some   states   offer AFDC benefits to such families, but only if the male is

unemployed. Participation rates in the program are consequently low. Such

families can receive Food Stamps, however, but the cash equivalent values are

inconsequential relative to AFDC.

                (forthcoming) and others have shown that the effective tax rate

in the AFDC program is considerably lower than this. We also calculated our

R values for these lower tax rates, but we do not present the results because

their qualitative nature is the same as those here. The convex kink merely

occurs at a higher income level.

    7We would like to note at this point that the lognormal assigns a zero

probability to non—work, possibly an undesirable feature when studying a

transfer program. To see its effects we also simulated and made our calcula-

tions   with a displaced log—normal with 20 percent of the distribution
negative   (i.e., a one—fifth chance of being unemployed). The resulting R

ratios were all in the same range as those in Table 2.

    8The case of a "notch" —— where benefits are discontinuously reduced to

zero and the marginal tax rate i.s over 100 percent ——   Is   even more concave

The R ratios would be even smaller in this case.

    9Since the EITC can be received only by families with dependents, we

assume that the aged do not receive it.
                                     •   20


                                   Ref erences


Atkinson, Anthony B. "On the Measurement of Inequality." Journal of Economic
    Theory 2 (1970): 244—263. Reprinted in A.B. Atkinson, Social Justice and
    Public Policy, Cambridge: M.I.T. Press 1983

Gottschalk, Peter. "Earnings Mobility: Permanent Change or Transitory
    Fluctuations?" Discussion Paper 604—80, Institute for Research on Poverty,
    1980.

Hausman, Jerry. "Taxes and Labor Supply." Working Paper No. 1102, National
    Bureau of Economic Research, 1983.

Hausman, Jerry, and David Wise. "Attrition Bias in Experimental and Panel Data:
    The Gary Income Maintenance Experiment" Econometrica 47 (1979): 455—475.

Lillard, Lee and Robert Willis. "Dynamic Aspects of Earnings Mobility."
    Econometrica 46 (September 1978): 985—1012.

MaCurdy, Thomas E. "The Use of Time Series Processes to Model the Error
    Structure of Earnings in a Longitudinal Data Analysis.." Journal of
    Econometrics 18 (1982): 83—114.

Mincer, Jacob. Schooling, Experience, and Earnings. New York: Columbia
    University Press, 1974.

Mirer, Thad. "Aspects of the Variability of Family Income." In Five Thousand
    American Families —— Patterns of Economics Progress, ed. by James N.
    Morgan, Vol. II. Ann Arbor: Institute for Survey Research, 1974.

Moffitt, Robert. "The Econometrics of Piecewise—Linear Budget Constraints: An
    Exposition." Mimeographed, University of Wisconsin, 1982.

Moffitt, Robert. "An Economic Model of Welfare Stigma." American Economic
    Review, forthcoming.

Rothschild, Michael. "Changing Demand, Its Costs and Consequences" Chapter 3
    of "Essays in Economic Theory." Unpublished M.I.T. Ph.D. dissertation,
    1969.
                       21



                    Table 1

Marginal Tax Rate Required for Different Values of R



 Coefficient of        Required Marginal Tax Rate
    Variation

                         R=.9             R=.8

       .25                  .66            .90

       .50                  .43            .70

       .75                  .33            .58

      1.0                   .28            .51

      1.25                  .25            .46


      1.35                  .24            .44
                                            22


                                         Table 2

                    Values of R for Different Tax and Transfer Systems



                                   Coefficient of Variation


                i                 .50      .75        1.0        1.35

•   Federal tax, EITC

        2,500                   1.00       .99         .97        .95
        5,000                    .96       .94         .92        .90
        7,500                    .96       .94         .92        .89
       10,000                   1.00       .99         .96        .93
       12,500                   1.00       .98         .96        .93
    AFDC, Fed. tax, EITC
        2,500                   1.01      1.04        1.10       1.19
        5,000                   1.12      1.23        1.32       1.38
        7,500                   1.08      1.12        1.16       1.18
       10,000                   1.04      1.06        1.08       1.09
       12,500                   1.01      1.02        1.02       1.03
    AFDC, Indiana, Fed. Tax,
       EITC

        2,500                   1.00      1.01       1.03        1.06
        5,000                   1.10      1.21       1.29        1.37
        7,500                   1.09      1.14       1.17        1.20
       10,000                   1.04      1.07       1.08        1.10
       12,500                   1.01      1.02       1.03        1.03
    Social Security, Fed. Tax

       2,500                    1.00       .98         .95        .92
       5,000                     .93       .89        .86         .83
       7,500                     .87       .82        .80        .78
      10,000                     .98      .97         .96        .93
      12,500                    1.09     1.11        1.12       1.10
                                                23

                        FIGURE 1                                         FIGURE 2

   B (Y)                                                B (Y)




                                                                                              / /
                                                                                          ' /.27
                                                .14




                                                                                .13

                        0                                          .67




                        5            10      Y                              5          10           Y
                                          (000's)                                              (000's)

            Federal Tax, EITC                                   AFDC, Federal Tax, EITC




                    FIGURE 3                                             FIGURE 4


                                                      B (Y)
B (Y)



                                           '.25
                                                                                              .19,'
                                                                                          —
                                                                                .65


               .67———
           —




                                                                    5           10    15        Y
                    5              10       Y
                                                                                              (000's)
                                          (000's)
           AFDC (Indiana), Federal Tax, EI9IX                   Social Security, Federal Tax
