NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CURRENT ACCOUNT REVERSALS:
ALWAYS A PROBLEM?
Barry Eichengreen
Muge Adalet
Working Paper 11634
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11634
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2005

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Barry Eichengreen and Muge Adalet. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Current Account Reversals: Always a Problem?
Barry Eichengreen and Muge Adalet
NBER Working Paper No. 11634
September 2005
JEL No. F31, F33, N15, N65
ABSTRACT

Using panel data and case studies, we analyze the pre-1970 history of international capital flows and
current account reversals. Considering a sample of emerging markets and advanced economies with
per capita GDPs at least 60 per cent those of the lead country, we show that the incidence of
reversals has been unusually great in recent years. The only prior period that matched the last three
decades in terms of the frequency and magnitude of reversals was the 1920s and 1930s, decades
notorious for the instability of capital flows. In contrast, reversals were both less common and
smaller in the Bretton Woods and pre-World War I gold standard eras.

Muge Adalet
Department of Economics
Victoria University
Wellington
NEW ZEALAND
muge.adalet@vuw.ac.nz
Barry Eichengreen
Department of Economics
University of California
549 Evans Hall 3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
eichengr@econ.berkeley.edu

Current Account Reversals: Always a Problem?1
Muge Adalet and Barry Eichengreen
Victoria University, Wellington; and University of California, Berkeley
September 2005
1. Introduction
Sharp reductions in current account deficits can be disruptive. Milessi-Ferretti
and Razin (2000) in their seminal study of the phenomenon, known as “current account
reversals,” emphasize the dangers of large current account deficits that must be
compressed when external financing dries up. Their study, written in the aftermath of the
Asian crisis, presumably had countries like Thailand in mind. The authors cite other
disruptive reversals, such as Uruguay’s at the beginning of the Latin American debt
crisis, when financing for the current account deficit collapsed and growth fell from +5
per cent to -7 per cent.2 Looking forward there is the question of what would happen to
growth in the United States if financing for the country’s 5 per cent plus current account
deficit evaporated abruptly. Will the dollar fall, fanning import price inflation and
forcing the Fed to raise interest rates? How would the housing and stock markets react?
Sharp reductions in consumption and investment might have to be brought about by this
rise in interest rates and fall in asset valuations, since the current account is the difference
between investment and saving.
But not all current account reversals are disruptive. In Milesi-Ferretti and Razin’s
own sample, the median change in growth between the periods before and after such
reversals is zero. The output response, in other words, is very heterogeneous. For every
1

Prepared for the NBER Conference on G7 Current Account Imbalances, Newport, Rhode Island, June 12, 2005. We thank Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti and Alan Taylor for assistance with data and participants in
the preconference, especially Rick Mishkin, for helpful comments.
2
Between 1979-81 and 1982-84.

1

Uruguay there is a Nigeria, where growth went from -5.5 per cent in 1981-83 to +3 per
cent in 1984-86 despite sharp compression of the current account.
From an analytical standpoint, this is not surprising. Deficits develop for different
reasons. A deficit reflecting a temporary surge in investment owing to unusually rapid
productivity growth and high profitability will have different implications than a deficit
reflecting a temporary surge in consumption produced by the growth of public
consumption or overvaluation of the currency. Equally, current account deficits can be
eliminated for number of very different reasons, which are likely to have very different
output effects.
Nor is it clear that current account reversals were always as disruptive as in recent
years. The obvious contrast is the period before World War I, when very large deficits
were allowed to develop and persist. Bayoumi (1989) considers average current account
deficits over periods as long as 1870-1913 and finds that these reached high levels in
countries like Australia and Canada. Taylor (1996) and Obstfeld and Taylor (2004) do
the same over successive decades starting in the late 19th century and show that current
account balances were larger in that period than anytime in the 20th century. To be sure,
some of these deficits were compressed abruptly with interruptions to the flow of external
finance, reflecting a combination of rising interest rates in the capital-exporting countries
and economic and political problems in the capital importers. Instances springing to
mind where current account deficits fell sharply and precipitated banking or currency
crises include Denmark in 1885-6, Argentina in 1889-90, Canada in 1890-91, Australia in
1891-2, Brazil in 1896-7, Japan in 1899-1900, and Finland in 1900-1.3 Although crises
3

These are all years of or adjoining banking and currency crises as independently dated by Bordo and
Eichengreen (2003).

2

can occur for reasons other than those associated with current account reversals, the
connections between the two phenomena are clear. Recall Fischer’s (1988) caution that
the “primary indicator [of a looming crisis] is the current account deficit.”4
At the same time, crises – currency crises in particular – were lower in frequency
under the gold standard than in recent years.5 Indeed, another reading of gold standard
experience is that the economic and political environment made current account reversals
less of a problem. Greater wage and price flexibility in an era of unstructured labor
markets facilitated the adjustment of relative prices when the current account balance had
to be compressed abruptly (Bayoumi and Eichengreen 1996). With government budgets
close to balance in peacetime, the twin deficits problem that gives rise to “bad current
account deficits,” financing for which dries up suddenly when concerns arise about the
sustainability of public debts, was less prevalent. Because large current account deficits
reflected unusually high levels of investment in export-supporting infrastructure, those
deficits could be smoothly reduced by increased savings out of progressively higher
domestic incomes and increases in exports of goods and services (Feis 1930, Fishlow
1986).6 Since the credibility of the commitment to exchange rate stability was beyond
reproach, events that might have interrupted capital inflows and forced disruptive
compression of the current account elicited capital inflows that allowed that deficit to be
wound down smoothly rather than precipitating a crisis. Some of these tales are
consistent with fewer or smaller current account reversals, while others are consistent

4

Also cited in Edwards (2004b).
This is the finding of Bordo and Eichengreen (2003).
6
We can think of this as a somewhat refined version of the Lawson Doctrine as applied to the gold
standard.
5

3

with smaller output losses (smoother adjustment to equally frequent or large current
account shocks).
These observations suggest a series of questions. Were current account reversals
less frequent under the gold standard? Were their growth effects less disruptive? And if
there are differences across epochs, what is their explanation?
Bracketed by the gold standard and the post-1970 float were the 1920s and 1930s,
when capital flow volatility, economic instability, and financial crises were pervasive,
and the Bretton Woods quarter century, when capital flows were limited, recessions were
rare, and banking crises were essentially nonexistent. Given the contingent nature of the
connection between economic volatility on the one hand and current account reversals on
the other, it would be illuminating to know whether reversals were larger, more frequent,
and more disruptive in the interwar period – and smaller, less common, and less
disruptive under Bretton Woods.
In what follows we take a first cut at measuring the frequency, magnitude and
effects of current account reversals in the gold standard era (1880-1914), the interwar
period (1919-39), Bretton Woods (1945-70), and the post-Bretton Woods float (19721997). We use regression analysis to see how far we can get in ascribing cross-period
differences to observable characteristics of countries and the international economic
environment.
The results confirm that the gold standard era and the years since 1970 differed
strikingly from one another: reversals were smaller and less frequent in the gold standard
period. Controlling for, inter alia, the size of the initial current account imbalance, the
movement in the real exchange rate and the state of the global economy does not make

4

this difference go away. Evidently, there was something else about the gold standard
years that rendered current accounts more stable. But when reversals did take place, their
effects were every bit as disruptive as after 1945. This prompts us to consider a set of
case studies in an effort to shed more light on the issue.
The intervening period from the 1920s through the 1960s is more difficult to
characterize. The two interwar decades emerge here, as elsewhere, as years of instability:
reversals were frequent and large and had major output costs. Under Bretton Woods, in
contrast, reversals were few and small; in both respects this period resembles the gold
standard years. These facts are presumably explicable in part by the prevalence of capital
controls and tight regulation of domestic financial markets.
Finally, the years since 1972 are grouped with the gold standard years in terms of
ease of adjustment to reversals. The output losses from current account reversals appear
to be significantly smaller not just compared to the interwar years (which is not
surprising) but also compared to Bretton Woods. In the conclusion we speculate about
what changes in markets and institutions might help to account for this fact.

2. The Country Sample
Our empirical analysis utilizes data from Bordo and Eichengreen (2003) extended
to incorporate additional variables and countries.7 The principal sources are compendia
and monographs containing national historical statistics for the period prior to 1913,
publications of the League of Nations for the interwar period, and standard World Bank

7

For a more extensive discussion of data sources see that publication.

5

and International Monetary Fund sources after World War II. The resulting data set has
been checked and adjusted for compatibility.8
A problem for any study that undertakes historical comparisons over long periods
is the country sample. Reasonably complete macroeconomic statistics including not only
GDP and trade but also financial variables are available back to the late 19th century only
for a subset of Western European countries, overseas regions of recent European
settlement (the United States, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand), and a few of the
larger Latin American countries (Argentina and Brazil). The question is whether to
follow this same group of countries over time (as in for example Taylor 1996 and
Obstfeld and Taylor 2004) or to add additional countries as more data become available
(as in inter alia Bayoumi 1989).
Both approaches have drawbacks. Following the same 10 to 15 European
countries and offshoots over the entire 120 years maximizes the comparability of the
country sample at the cost of representativeness. If we are interested in the determinants
and consequences of current account reversals in modern-day emerging markets and how

8

Several limitations of these data are worth noting. The current account estimates for the period before
1945 build on reported figures for imports and exports of goods and services, following inter alia Bayoumi
(1990), Taylor (1996), and Obstfeld and Taylor (2004). This leaves open the possibility that some service
items are under- or unreported (imports and exports of shipping, insurance and financial services, for
example). In addition, there is the possibility of spurious volatility in earlier (specifically, pre-1914) output
data (Romer 1986). To the extent that this bias exists, it will presumably exaggerate the difference between
growth rates during expansions and contractions and therefore the magnitude of the output effects of
current account reversals. Finally, some variables that have proven popular in recent analyses of the causes
and consequences of current account reversals (measures of the composition of the public debt, for
instance) are not readily available for this earlier period and are therefore excluded from the analysis. In
particular, information on the capital account, as distinct from the current account, is not readily available
for earlier periods. (For an idea of what kind of distinct data on international capital flows exist for the
period prior to 1913, see Bloomfield 1963, 1968 and Stone 1999.) Data on reserves and imports and
exports of goods and services capture capital flows imperfectly to the extent that they do not measure trade
in certain services – see above – and to the extent that information on foreign exchange reserves is
incomplete. The analysis here follows Milesi-Ferretti and Razin (2000) – hereinafter MFR – who similarly
focus on the current account reversals but do not look separately at sudden stops in capital flows, unlike
Edwards (2004a, b) who looks at both.

6

these compare with such reversals in their historical antecedents, then a sample that
includes at most a couple of modern-day emerging markets is not likely to be
representative of their experience. If, on the other hand, one freely adds more countries
as data on these become available, then one ends up with better representation of modern
emerging markets but also with problems of intertemporal comparability. At the
beginning of the period the sample will be mainly comprised of a small number of
relatively advanced industrial economies, while at the end of the period it will be
dominated by a large number of low income countries, where the causes, consequences,
and incidence of current account reversals may be significantly different. Assume, for
example, that current account reversals are more frequent in low-income countries.
Adding more low-income countries as data on them become available over time will then
bias the analysis toward the conclusion that reversals have been growing more frequent
purely as a result of sample composition.
We therefore take a third approach to sample selection. Our strategy is to define a
consistent criterion in terms of relative per capita income – that is, a threshold value of
per capita income relative to the highest-income country in the first period, 1880-1913 –
and to add additional countries as data on them become available only if they satisfy this
criterion.9 We calculate for the period 1880-1914 the ratio of per capita income in the
lowest income country in the sample for that period (Brazil) to the highest income
country (the United States), which turns out to be 0.6. As data for more countries
become available, we then add all countries whose per capita incomes are at least 60 per
cent of the per capita incomes of the lead country. In 1919-39, for example, the lead
9

Observations for very low income economies are also limited toward the beginning of the sample period
because many such economies were not then independent countries.

7

country is again the United States, so we add all countries whose per capita incomes are
at least 60 per cent of U.S. levels for which we have comprehensive data. We do the
same for the Bretton Woods period and again once more for the post-Bretton Woods
years.
The resulting country sample is shown in Appendix Table A1. One can see how
sample size increases over time, while sample composition is not unduly dominated by
low-income countries which are necessarily omitted at the beginning of our long
historical period. Thus, our analysis of current account reversals should be thought of as
characterizing their incidence and consequences in middle- and high-income countries
(also referred to in the literature as “emerging” and “advanced” markets) but not also in
the poorest countries. Insofar as the economic volatility tends to be higher and
dependence on capital flows is less in the poorest countries, separate analysis of such
countries would seem appropriate. In some of the analysis that follows we compare what
we find using this limited sample for the post-1970 period with results obtained using the
somewhat larger country sample employed by Milesi Ferretti and Razin as a way of
gauging the consequences of our sampling strategy.

3. A Brief History of Current Accounts
We set the stage for the analysis that follows by first summarizing the historical
behavior of current accounts.
Two traditional ways of doing so are calculating the mean absolute value of the
current account over some period of time (say, five years) and running Feldstein-Horioka
(1980) regressions of the two components of the current account (investment and

8

savings) on one another. Obstfeld and Taylor (2004) have done this for 15 countries
similar to our pre-1914 sample. They report that the average absolute value of the current
account balance as a share of GDP was between 3 and 4 per cent prior to 1914. The
(absolute) current account remains at a relatively high 3.9 per cent in the immediate postWorld War I years 1919-1926, reflecting the exceptional investment demands associated
with postwar reconstruction (the largest value is for France), but then falls to 2.7 in 192731 and 1.5 in 1932-39, as capital controls are imposed and international financial markets
shut down. The average absolute value of current accounts was small in the Bretton
Woods years, when capital flows were still heavily controlled (1.8 per cent of GDP in
1947-59 and 1.3 per cent in 1960-73), before rising in 1974-89 and 1989-2000 (to 2.2 per
cent and 2.3 per cent, respectively), higher than under Bretton Woods but not the same
levels witnessed before 1914.10
Obstfeld and Taylor also run a succession of cross section regressions using fiveyear averaged data of investment on savings and a constant term. The results are
consistent with the hypothesis that capital mobility and hence the average magnitude of
current account balances traces out a u-shaped pattern over time. The “savings-retention
coefficient” (the estimated effect of savings on investment) is 0.5 until 1914, 0.6-0.7 in
the 1920s, 0.8-0.9 in the 1930s, 0.9 in the Bretton Woods years, and 0.7-0.8 in the postBretton Woods sample. Like the summary statistics in the previous paragraph, this
regression analysis suggests that while capital mobility is higher today than in the third
quarter of the 20th century, it has yet to rescale the peak reached before 1914.11

10
11

Obstfeld and Taylor also look at wartime current account balances, which we do not consider here.
Or even to match the levels reached in the 1920s.

9

While these results provide a summary measure of ex post capital mobility in a
constant sample of countries, it is not clear that they adequately summarize capital
mobility in the world as a whole, since the number of independent countries – and the
number of middle- as well as high-income countries potentially connected to
international capital markets in particular – is changing over our 12 decades. Bear in
mind, as emphasized above, that we are concerned with middle- and high-income
countries and systematically omit from our sample low-income countries that are
plausibly less connected to international capital markets (and for which data are scarce).
To the extent that our country sample corrects for this, we may paint a somewhat
different picture. A further problem with these estimates is that for almost all of these
cross section estimates of the savings-retention coefficient the confidence levels
overlap.12 While the tendency for this coefficient to be larger toward the middle of the
sample period suggests a u-shaped time profile for capital mobility (high toward the
beginning and end of the period), it is not clear whether the intertemporal differences are
significant – and thus whether the null of a random fluctuations around the average can
be rejected in favor of the alternative hypothesis of a u-shaped time profile of capital
mobility.
We may be able to do better insofar as our criterion for selecting countries allows
the sample to expand over time, while still applying consistent conditions for an
observation’s inclusion in the sample. The first column of Table 1 shows the mean
absolute value of current accounts for various subperiods for our sample; column 2 is the
comparison with Obstfeld and Taylor. We still observe a u-shaped pattern, with the
magnitude of current account balances dipping down in 1927-31 and 1932-39. Our
12

In part, this is presumably a function of the small samples of 12 countries for each point in time.

10

numbers are essentially the same as Obstfeld and Taylor’s through 1939 but larger for the
recent period. Taken literally, this suggests, contrary to Obstfeld and Taylor, that
international capital markets are more integrated than before 1913, not less.13 The
difference reflects our sampling strategy and our addition of more relatively small
countries with relatively large current account balances, especially in the last subperiod.
Figure 1 provides visual confirmation of these patterns. It is also a reminder, however,
that confidence intervals are wide, so that not too much should be made of these
differences.
Table 2 is another reminder of this fact. Using a different periodization, it reports
estimates of the associated savings-retention coefficients. The savings-retention
coefficients are 0.58 for the prewar period, 0.88 for interwar period, 0.86 for the Bretton
Woods period, and 0.73 for the post-1971 sample. This methodology and periodization
thus suggests that capital mobility was slightly higher before 1914, although the contrast
here is more muted than in some previous results (see e.g. Bayoumi 1989).
Thus, our new sample, intended to facilitate summary characterizations of
differences in the extent of global capital mobility over time rather than simply following
an unchanging country sample, broadly confirms the standard historical interpretation but
also provides some new nuances.

4. From Current Accounts to Current Account Reversals
We now move from current account balances to current account reversals, defined
as episodes in which the current account strengthens sharply, generally moving from
13

That capital markets are more integrated today than before 1914 is also the conclusion of Bordo,
Eichengreen and Irwin (1999), who use an entirely different approach.

11

deficit to surplus, in three or fewer years. It is useful at this point to reiterate what was
said in the introduction about why we focus on these episodes. Current account balances
have a number of positive functions that appear in textbooks under the heading of “the
intertemporal approach to the current account” (see for example Obstfeld and Rogoff
1996). If the current account strengthens when output is high and weakens when it is
low, its fluctuation is indicative of a country’s ability to smooth its consumption. An
ongoing current account deficit in a rapidly growing country may also be an indication
that investment and growth are not unduly constrained by domestic savings capacity,
facilitating the country’s convergence to steady state levels of output and capital
intensity. In practice, however, these advantages may be neutralized or dominated if
large or persistent current account deficits increase the likelihood of disruptive
adjustments that produce large output losses.14 Everyone can recall episodes when large
current account deficits ended in the sudden curtailment of financing, sharp compression
of the current account, and a drop in economic growth. Yet, as we have also noted, post1970 experience suggests that not all current account reversals end this way. And it is
not obvious a priori that large current account deficits bore the same association with
instability in earlier periods, such as the pre-1914 gold standard years.
Thus, we wish to determine whether current account reversals were always a
problem – whether they have always been frequent and disruptive. If current account
reversals were not always a problem, then it will be important to establish why.
Hopefully the answer will point to policy measures that can be taken at the national or

14

This is the warning in the quote from Fischer above to the effect that large current account deficits are
leading indicators of impending problems. His intuition that large current account deficits are leading
indicators of currency and banking crises gains further support from the literature on early warning systems
for emerging markets (Goldstein, Kaminsky and Reinhart 2000).

12

international levels to tilt the costs and benefits of international capital mobility in
socially desirable directions.
To identify current account reversals we use the same criteria as MFR. We
construct two variants of their measure, denoted Rev1and Rev2. Rev1 (and Rev2) must
satisfy three criteria: the average current account deficit must fall by 2 (3) per cent of
GDP between the first three and second three years; the maximum deficit in second three
years must be no larger than minimum deficit in first three years; and the average deficit
must fall by at least a third (as a percentage of GDP) between the first three and second
three years. Obviously, the 2 per cent cutoff generates more reversals than the 3 per cent
cutoff.
A list of the individual reversals for the pre-1970 period, excluding reversals
occurring in consecutive years and reversals occurring in wartime, appears as Appendix
Table A2.

5. Statistical Findings
Table 3 summarizes the frequency of reversals under the gold standard, the
interwar period, Bretton Woods, and the post-Bretton Woods years. Rev1 (based on two
per cent reductions in the current account deficit relative to the three preceding years)
shows that a lower frequency of reversals under the gold standard than under any of the
subsequent regimes. There are 59 reversal episodes (11 per cent of the period sample of
years) in 1880-1914, 102 episodes (27 per cent of the sample) in 1918-1939, 62 episodes
(12 per cent of the sample) in 1945-72, and 361 episodes (26 per cent of the sample) in
1972-1997. So measured, reversals were relatively infrequent under the gold standard

13

and Bretton Woods but much more frequent during the interwar period and since the
collapse of Bretton Woods. If one excludes reversals occurring in consecutive years,
their number falls to 30, 35, 28 and 101, but the ranking of frequencies (6, 10, 5 and 10
per cent) remains basically unchanged, the main difference being that the Bretton Woods
period looks slightly better than the gold standard years. From the perspective of the
historical literature, these contrasts are not surprising; the interwar years and recent
decades are both periods when there was much commentary about capital flow volatility,
unusually severe recessions and financial crises, all of which may be correlates of current
account reversals.
To be sure, simple tabulations do not tell us why reversals were more frequent in
some periods than others. Candidate explanations include, inter alia, volatile policies,
volatile financial markets, and a volatile global economic environment. We will consider
these possibilities more directly below.
Figure 3 shows the number of reversals by year. In the first panel of Figure 3 for
the gold standard, the largest cluster is in the first half of the 1890s following the BaringArgentina crisis and the collapse of international lending. In the interwar period,
reversals are spread fairly evenly over the immediate postwar years, the 1920s, and the
early 1930s, reflecting macroeconomic turbulence, shocks to international financial
markets (associated with failed stabilization efforts, reparations disputes and so forth), the
rise in U.S. interest rates in 1928 (which led to the sharp curtailment of foreign lending)
and then onset of the Great Depression and widespread debt default starting in 1931.
Reversals are relatively few in the mid-to-late 1930s, reflecting the widespread adoption
of trade and capital controls through which countries balanced their current accounts and

14

limited their dependence on capital flows. Under Bretton Woods, reversals are
concentrated in the first postwar quinquennium and centered in Europe. This was the
period when postwar foreign aid that had financed current account deficits was drawing
to a close and foreign reserves had been run down, forcing countries to balance their trade
accounts.
Next we calculated the magnitude of reversals in each period, measured as the
change in the current account/GDP ratio between the three pre-reversal and three postreversal years. The magnitude of reversals so measured was 3.13 per cent of GDP under
the gold standard, 6.43 in the interwar years, 3.51 under Bretton Woods, and 5.46 since
the breakdown of that system. Evidently, reversals were largest in the interwar years but
only slightly smaller after 1970. They were smallest under the gold standard, but only
slightly smaller than under Bretton Woods when international capital flows and the
magnitude of feasible current account balances were tightly constrained. The special
nature of gold standard experience compared to the two other periods of high capital
mobility comes through clearly from this comparison.15

15

As an alternative, we also scaled the change in the current account/GDP ratio by the initial current
account balance (as a share of GDP, where initial is defined as the average over the three years preceding
the event). Since the magnitude of the scaling factor varied across periods, this can be thought of as a
period-specific measure of the magnitude of reversals (one that controls for differences across periods in,
inter alia, the extent of international capital mobility and therefore the size of current account deficits in the
typical pre-reversal period). The change in the current account/GDP ratio in (the three) subsequent years as
a percentage of the initial (three year) current account ratio is 79 per cent, 210 per cent and 190 per cent
and 112 per cent in our four chronologically successive periods. The main difference here is that Bretton
Woods appears as a period of relatively large reversals, so scaled. Of course, the reason reversals appear so
large under Bretton Woods when expressed as a percentage of the initial current account ratio is that those
initial current account deficits were so small, reflecting the prevalence of controls on capital inflows and
the demoralized state of international financial markets. Indeed, there are no very large current account
deficits in the Bretton Woods years comparable to those evident in other periods, and the largest current
account deficits in the Bretton Woods years tend to be concentrated in 1945-50, when there were still
reserves and foreign aid to finance them (see above). The unweighted average of the current account
deficit in the three years preceding the reversal episodes is 3.8 under Bretton Woods, compared to 5.2 in the
interwar period and 5.7 in the post-Bretton Woods years (and 4.9 under the gold standard).

15

Table 4 shows summary statistics for GDP growth and the change in growth in
the year of the reversal and windows ranging from one to four years following its
occurrence. Growth is slower in reversal than nonreversal years, and it generally remains
depressed for one or two additional years before bouncing back. Subsequently, growth in
the reversal cases generally exceeds growth in the nonreversal cases, as output lost in the
reversal episodes is made up. The v-shaped output response to reversals has been noted
previously; see for example Calvo (2005).
Gauged in terms of the difference in growth rates between reversal and
nonreversal years, reversals were less costly – as well as smaller and less frequent – prior
to 1914. Growth was not significantly slower in reversal than nonreversal years before
1914 (the difference in growth rates, of -0.02 per cent, is not significantly different from
zero at standard confidence levels), 2.68 percentage points slower in the interwar years,
and 3.75 percentage points slower in the Bretton Woods years (Rev1 definition). It is
tempting to interpret the growing output costs of reversals as reflecting a secular decline
in wage, price and general economic flexibility over time (see e.g. Bayoumi and
Eichengreen 1996).
However, the difference in growth rates between reversal and nonreversal years
falls to 1.32 percentage points after 1972, though that difference is still statistically
significant at the 99 per cent confidence level. Note that this is a different intertemporal
pattern than we found for the frequency of reversals and their magnitude, both of which
were greater after 1972 than in the Bretton Woods years. It also becomes hard to identify
differences across regimes when we look at the longer-term impact of reversals (the

16

change in output between the reversal year and the subsequent three years, or between the
year following the reversal and the subsequent four years).16
Table 5 reports probit regressions designed to shed light on the incidence of
reversals. All independent variables are lagged. Following MFR, most of the
explanatory variables are averaged over the first three years of the six year window in
question to maintain consistency with the definition of reversals themselves.17 Given our
limited degrees of freedom and interest in intertemporal comparisons, we pool the data
for the four periods and include period fixed effects. Since certain countries are
especially prone to reversals in certain periods, we use the cluster option in Stata to adjust
for the fact that the error terms for a particular country in a particular period may not be
independent of one another.18 The regressions come in trios. Within each trio, the first
column reports robust standard errors. The second clusters the observations by countries.
The third then drops the observations for the UK, which we classify as the center country
for part of the period, on the grounds that reversals in a country that either is or recently
was the financial center are a qualitatively different phenomenon.19
MFR found that reversals are more likely in countries with large current account
deficits, real exchange rates suggesting growing overvaluation, large government deficits,
low per capita incomes, low reserves, high interest rates at the center, high growth at the
center, and high ratios of concessional to total debt. They consider U.S. interest rates and
OECD growth; for the period before 1914, we consider British interest rates and British

16

We return to this below.
See the footnote to the relevant table for details.
18
To be clear, we do not allow for clustering of the error terms for all reversals for, say, Argentina, but for
all reversals for Argentina in a particular period, say, 1880-1913 or 1972-98.
19
In contrast, we have no reversals for the United States except in the first period, when we take Britain
and not the U.S. as the center country.
17

17

growth, while for the interwar period we consider U.S. interest rates and U.S. growth.
Like them, we find some evidence that reversals are more likely in countries with large
current account deficits and large budget deficits, in countries with low per capita GDPs
relative to the lead country (proxying, presumably, for relatively weak institutions and
markets), and in periods when growth rates in the center country are high. We also find
that reversals are more likely in more open economies, where here openness may be
proxying for economic size. Edwards (2005), in another analysis of middle- and highincome countries, similarly finds that reversals are more likely in relatively small,
relatively open economies.
It is important to mention some of the variables that do not show up as consistently
significant. For example, some studies of recent decades have found that reversals are
more likely when the exchange rate is pegged, presumably making it more difficult to
adjust relative prices prior to the event (Edwards 2004b). Here the coefficient estimates
for whether or not the exchange rate is pegged display never approach statistical
significance at standard confidence levels.20 Similarly, the last three columns of the table
add a dummy variable for capital controls. There is some evidence that the maintenance
of controls limits the incidence of reversals, although this variable again is not
statistically significant at conventional confidence levels.21

20

We replicated MFR’s result when we used our sample of countries but limited the observations to the
post-1972 period, but not otherwise.
21
We found essentially the same thing for the four subperiods estimated separately (in results not reported
here), although significance levels vary. For the gold standard period, large prior current account deficits,
large prior budget deficits, and low GDP per capita are the most robust and statistically significant
determinants of reversal incidence. For the interwar period, reversals are more likely in countries with
lower GDP per capita, large prior current account deficits and budget deficits and no capital controls. For
the Bretton Woods period, countries with terms of trade improvement and large current account deficits are
more likely to experience reversals. For the post 1970 sample, large prior current account deficit and
having a peg are the main determinants of reversals. We also ran our specification using the MFR sample
of countries in the post-1970 period. The main difference is that the GDP per capita changes sign such that

18

Another noteworthy feature of Table 5 is that the dummy variables for the gold
standard and Bretton Woods periods are negative and significant (the post-1972 years are
the omitted alternative). Recall that we found above that reversals were less frequent
under the gold standard and Bretton Woods than in the interwar and post-1972 periods.
These coefficients are telling us that this difference is not fully explained by differences
in observable country characteristics (the size of the initial imbalances, the fiscal stance,
the global growth enrivonment etc.) but that it is at least partially explicable in terms of
other factors that we are not capturing here.
Table 6 turns to the consequences of current account reversals. The dependent
variable is growth over three years, starting with the year of the reversal, as a deviation
from the world average for that same three-year period following the reversal onset.22
The explanatory variables include the size of the reversal and a vector of controls (except
where indicated otherwise, averaged over the 3 years preceding the event). Again, the
data are pooled and estimated with period fixed effects. The first two columns show
ordinary least squares regressions with robust standard errors. Columns 3 through 6 then
cluster the observations by country within each period.
The results suggest that reversals were relatively costly when a large current
account deficit had been allowed to emerge and the real exchange rate was allowed to
become significantly overvalued in the preceding period. In addition, we consider a
countries with relatively high per capita incomes are more likely to experience reversals. (Note that the
MFR sample does not include the advanced-industrial countries, so this result is telling us – consistent with
intuition – that within the sample of emerging markets the higher-income EMs more integrated into
international capital markets are more subject to reversals). The main difference between these two pooled
regressions is that the one using the MFR countries for the post-1970 period shows a positive sign on the
interwar dummy (although one that varies in significance across specifications).
22
It makes little difference if we instead define the dependent variable as the growth rate in the subject
country over the three year period and include the global growth rate over the same period as another
independent variable on the right hand side. In this case the main difference is that the dummy variable for
Bretton Woods becomes positive (although it remains insignificant).

19

dummy variable for whether the current account was in deficit or surplus in the prereversal period, since in some of our cases the event in question is one in which a small
current account surplus becomes much larger, and it can be argued that in this case the
output effects may be easier to accommodate. The results are consistent with this
hypothesis. Finally, we added a dummy variable for the presence of controls on capital
account transactions on the grounds that such controls may limit capital flight in the wake
of the reversal, again moderating the output effects. The results are consistent with this
intuition: output losses are smaller when the current account is already in surplus in the
pre-reversal period and capital controls are present. But again the addition of these
variables does not alter our earlier findings.
An additional result is that a number of period dummies show up as statistically
significant. A negative (positive) sign means that growth was slower and output losses
were larger (growth was faster and output losses were smaller) in the period in question:
thus we find smaller output losses under the gold standard but larger output losses in the
interwar and Bretton Woods periods than in the omitted post-1972 alternative after
controlling for other observed characteristics of countries and the global environment
(that is, after controlling for the values of the independent variables). Recall that the
simple tabulation of output losses in different periods showed the same thing. That we
see the same pattern here suggests that the other explanatory variables such as the size of
the initial current account imbalance, the overvaluation of the real exchange rate or the
presence or absence of capital controls do not explain why the typical output loss from
reversals was smaller in some periods than in others.

20

This result sits uneasily with the cases in Section 6 below, which show that the
output effects of current account reversals under the gold standard could be substantial.
Eyeballing the data suggests that prior to 1914 the drop in output only commenced after a
year or more, whereas after 1971 it more commonly set in immediately. An explanation
for this different pattern is the greater incidence of currency crises after 1971, as noted
above, and the tendency for output to fall with the onset of a crisis. Consistent with this
conjecture, Bordo and Eichengreen (2003) identify currency crises coincident with only 7
per cent of the current account reversals occurring before 1914 but coincident with 12 per
cent of the reversals occurring after 1971.
To determine whether the results were sensitive to this timing, we redefined the
output response as the change in GDP not between year t (the year of the reversal) and
t+3 but between year t+1 and t+4. When we do this, the negative coefficient on the gold
standard dummy is no longer significantly different from zero. (The other results are
unchanged.) This suggests that not too much weight should be attached to the results in
Table 6 suggesting that the output losses from reversals were smaller under the gold
standard. Reversals may have been less frequent and smaller, but when they occurred
their output effects could still be severe, especially when they were accompanied by a
currency crisis. (See the next section.)
In comparison, a variety of further sensitivity analyses had little impact on the
results. For example, when we added a vector of country fixed effects, the basic results
continue to hold. We also experimented with a number of additional explanatory
variables. For instance, a potential explanation for why the output effects of reversals
were smaller in some periods than others is that the reversals themselves were smaller.

21

We therefore added the size of the reversal (measured here as the change in the current
account ratio between time t-3 and time t) as an additional explanatory variable. This has
plausible effects; for example, it lowers the significance level on the gold standard
dummy in Table 6, suggesting that one reason that the output losses associated with
current account reversals were smaller under the gold standard is that the magnitude of
the reversals themselves were smaller. However, the new coefficient is not statistically
different from zero, and the other results are little affected by its addition. Finally, we
followed Edwards (2004a) in estimating treatment regressions, first an equation for
current account reversals and then a second stage regression that treats the reversal
variable as endogenous.23 The results, in Table 7, are consistent with their predecessors.
Reversals are more likely in countries that had been running large external deficits in the
immediately preceding period and where growth was slow. They continue to cause
significant output losses, although output begins bouncing back relatively quickly.
In sum, the results here suggest that the gold-standard period was different:
current account reversals were less frequent and smaller than they have become
subsequently, although when they did occur their output effects could be substantial. The
years since 1972 do not compare unfavorably in these respects with the 1920s and 1930s;
if anything the opposite is true. But reversals today are more frequent and larger than
they were before 1914. Obvious measures of country characteristics and global
economic conditions do not seem to account for this difference. This motivates us to
look more closely at a number of episodes of sharp current account reversals before 1913
to see whether this can help us to understand better what is going on.
23

In the first stage, probit estimates of the treatment equation are obtained. From these estimates a hazard is
then computed. In the second stage, the hazard is included in the estimation of the outcome equation. This
augmented outcome equation lets us get consistent estimates of the regression disturbance term.

22

6. Case Studies
In this section we consider three prominent pre-1914 current account reversals:
Argentina in 1889-90, Australia in 1891-2, Brazil in 1896-7.
A. Argentina 1889-90. The 1880s was a golden decade for Argentina. The
wool and wheat producers of the pampas were integrated into world markets by the
construction of ports and railways.24 Argentina already had 2,500 kilometers of railroad
track in 1880, and its ample endowment of productive land promised the traffic to
support many more. Labor arrived in abundance; slow growth in Europe, depressed
conditions in that continent’s agrarian economies, and cheap international passenger rates
combined to encourage more than one million immigrant arrivals between 1880 and
1890. (Argentine government propaganda and subsidies for travel costs did not hurt.)
While only some two thirds of these immigrants settled permanently, this was a very
large increase in labor supply for a country with an 1880 population of only two million.
Britons in particular were galvanized by the attractions of investment in this
economy: new capital calls in London on behalf of the country rose from little more than
£½ million a year between 1875 and 1880 to nearly £5 million a year between 1881 and
1885 and then £17.5 million annually between 1886 and 1890.25 The British lent for
railway construction, for the improvement of port facilities, for the development of urban
infrastructure (most of the immigrants of the 1880s settling in the cities), and for the
system of ranches and meatpacking plants that allowed the exportation of canned and,
eventually, chilled beef. They were active participants in the real estate, securities
24

Wheat was first exported in 1878.
Stone (1999), Table 3. British investment accounted for the majority but certainly not the entirety of
European investment in Argentina in this period; see Ford (1962).
25

23

market, and banking booms of the period, and they lent extensively to politicallyconnected provisional mortgage banks.
While domestic and foreign economic events go some way toward explaining
these developments, their timing cannot be understood without reference to the political
consolidation that occurred in Argentina in the 1880s. This was the period when the
central state, bolstered by recent military victories, asserted its authority over the
provinces and the economy. The rebellion of the province of Buenos Aires was defeated
in 1880, and the city was transformed into the federal capital. The state then established
dominion over the regions inhabited by indigenous peoples. The territorial limits of the
nation were, for the first time, clearly defined. Starting in 1880 a new institutional
framework was created based on strong presidential power, checks and balances
exercised by the congress, and prohibition of presidential reelection. A uniform national
money was finally established. Basic fiscal, administrative and judicial powers were
defined (Botana 1997). Although Romero (2002) remarks that some of these powers
were more notional than real, it is clear that this picture did much to enhance investor
confidence in the administrative capacity of the state. And this in turn facilitated foreign
finance for Argentina’s twin deficits.
Thus, the growth of the current account deficit in the 1880s resulted from a
combination of domestic economic and political factors. Investment was encouraged by
the exceptional commercial opportunities afforded by a period of geographical
expansion, integration into world markets, large-scale immigration, and political
consolidation; meanwhile the working-age population was increasingly dominated by
recent immigrants as yet in no position to support high savings rates. The central

24

government reinforced the disparity by undertaking public investment projects while
running deficits. For better or worse, the consolidation of the state in the 1880s and the
extensive guarantees provided for private investment (investments in railways in
particular) encouraged foreigners to help finance the difference.26 Not least among the
beneficiaries was the government itself, which could borrow abroad in order to finance
public spending on projects that benefited its clients. Cronyism similarly prevailed in the
provinces, whose governments used provincial banks to contract foreign loans and use
the proceeds to extend credit to the provincial government.
Maintenance of this fragile equilibrium depended on two conditions. First, there
was a considerable gestation period between the initial investment in export-oriented
infrastructure and the coming on line of exports. Keeping current in the interim on shortrun debt-service obligations hinged on the willingness of foreign investors to provide a
steady stream of bridge finance. Between 1885 and 1890, as Ford (1962, p.87) observes,
“to some considerable extent foreign borrowings were employed in paying service
charges on previous foreign loans…” One potential explanation for why current account
reversals were smaller and less frequent than in subsequent periods is that current account
deficits reflected high levels of export-oriented infrastructure investment – that is, foreign
capital was devoted to uses that generated additional export revenues that could be used
to make debt service payments in the normal course of events (see Feis 1930, Fishlow
1986, and the discussion above). Analysis of the Argentine case suggests that this factor
may be subject to exaggeration. Natural complementarities there may have been, but
gestation periods were long.

26

Money finance contributed also, Argentina having gone off the gold standard in 1884.

25

Second, this happy equilibrium hinged on the credibility of the government’s
commitments. Paying out on its guarantees required a healthy rise in public-sector
revenues; here the gestation period between the initial investment projects and the
induced rise in economic activity again posed a problem. Insofar as some of the projects
that the government guaranteed were of low quality – they were likely to neither pay for
themselves nor to induce an increase in revenues through other channels – the authorities
might find themselves unable to uphold their part of the bargain. At that point, capital
inflows might dry up, forcing the current account deficit to be compressed.
Thus, the Argentine episode displays many of the characteristics identified in the
preceding analyses as raising the likelihood of current account reversals and heightening
their output effects, prominent among them large budget and current account deficits in
the run-up to the event. In addition, explanations for the Argentine crisis in this period
invoke two factors also emphasized in modern studies that do not show up in other goldstandard era reversals: tight credit conditions and slowing growth in the center. The
importing country on which Argentina depended most heavily, Great Britain, experienced
a cyclical peak in 1885, and its economy remained officially in recession through 1889
(the latter being the conventionally-dated business cycle trough). This made growing
Argentine exports more difficult. At the same time, the stability of British savings rates
and hence the inverse fluctuation of home and foreign investment (Cairncross 1953)
meant that ample British capital was available to Argentina and other contemporary
emerging markets from the middle of the decade.
But these same relationships rendered Argentina vulnerable to a decline in the
availability of finance when British growth began to accelerate and investment picked up

26

starting in 1889, and when the Bank of England began raising rates. Overall, the 1880s
was a decade of low interest rates, reflecting relatively weak investment demand in
Europe. Goshen’s 1888 debt conversion took advantage of this fact and put further
downward pressure on yields. Low interest rates encouraged investors to look abroad for
higher yields. As Bailey (1959, p.272) put it, London and Edinburgh were soon
“honeycombed with agencies” for collecting money for overseas investments. But in
1889, the cyclical trough had passed, and British activity began to accelerate. The Bank
of England ratcheted up its discount rate sharply, from 2 ½ to 6 per cent over the second
half of the year. It is not surprising that this led to a decline in new issues in London on
behalf of Argentina and made it difficult for Barings to place the Buenos Aires Water
Supply and Drainage Loan. Foreign financial factors clearly played a role in this current
account reversal, although it can perhaps be argued that it would have occurred, with or
without sharp changes in the Bank of England’s discount rate.27
With the failure of the Buenos Aires waterworks loan and the distress experienced
by Barings, lending to Argentina ground to a halt. Reversing the current account balance
was painful when the prior deficit was so large and the government budget was in deficit.
Successive governments struggled, with little success, to balance the budget through a
combination of tax increases and expenditure reductions and thereby limit the need for
monetization and inflation. The need to compress imports in order to facilitate current
account adjustment further complicated this task, since import duties were the single
most import source of revenues for the federal government. Moreover, compressing
imports by 50 per cent in 1891 and then boosting exports required sharp depreciation of
27

Given its prominence in this case, just why the British discount rate does not show up more generally in
our regressions explaining the incidence of current account reversals remains a something of a mystery.

27

the real exchange rate, which further eroded domestic living standards and depressed
consumption. Real GDP contracted by 4 per cent in 1890 and by a further 11 per cent in
1891 before bouncing back to plus 9 per cent in 1892 and 5 per cent in 1893. Thus, by
the end of 1893 output was roughly back up to where it had been in 1889.28 Still, this
was a large output drop by the standards of contemporary current account reversals,
reflecting the unfavorable initial conditions.
On the other hand, this was not an exceptionally long recession; that growth was
again positive little more than two years after the reversal was not atypical.29 Historians
point to a number of factors helping to avert a more extended recession. Argentina
avoided having to compress demand still more sharply and to move the current account
into surplus even further by restructuring its debt, first suspending payments, then
obtaining a bridge loan through the Rothschild Committee sufficient to finance the
federal government’s debt service for three years, securing a reduction of debt service
and holiday on amortization payments, and finally assuming the provincial debt at less
than 60 per cent of its face value.30 As a region of overseas European settlement
dominated by recent immigrant arrivals, labor exhibited an unusual degree of
intersectoral mobility, moving smoothly from the production of nontraded to traded
goods in response to the depreciation of the real exchange rate.31 World demand
conditions were favorable; export prices rose over much of the 1890s, and there was a

28

Living standards and imports in particular remained below earlier levels, however (Argentine imports not
again reaching1889 levels until 1904).
29
Fishlow (1989b) observes that “the data on railway receipts are suggestive of a less severe and prolonged
downturn than other peripheral economies experienced during the 1890s.”
30
Perhaps not too much should be claimed of this factor, for these negotiations took many years to
complete and were a pervasive source of demoralizing financial uncertainty while still underway.
31
Fishlow (1989a,b) emphasizes labor market flexibility as a factor in adjustment.

28

positive technology shock with the coming on line of large scale exports of chilled beef.32
Some of these factors are policies that governments might attempt to pursue in order to
cope with current account reversals. But others reflect factors having to do with the
structure of markets and the development of technology over which they have little
control.
B. Brazil 1896-7. Brazil’s reversal took place later than Argentina’s, although it
was affected by the same global economic and financial developments. Between 1886
and 1890 Brazil imported only about 40 per cent as much British capital as Argentina,
despite enjoying the same low global interest rates. In part this reflected the prevailing
commitment to fiscal orthodoxy and the desire to restore the milreis to its official 1846
par; this more conservative fiscal stance limited the magnitude of the subsequent twin
deficits. In part the difference reflected the fact that Brazilian publicity and propaganda
were less effective. It took the abolition of slavery in 1888 and the end of the monarchy
in 1889 to really put the country on the “radar screen” of international investors.33
As in Argentina, the government then used fiscal largess to buy and maintain the
political support of the military and the provinces. In the Brazilian case there was also
the fact that the abolition of slavery imposed financial losses on powerful agricultural
interests. The latter sought preferential access to cheap credit to compensate for the
capital losses suffered as a result of emancipation.34 Thus, following the proclamation of
the republic in 1889, domestic interest rates were kept low and the exchange rate was
allowed to depreciate. Sauce for the goose being sauce for the gander, financial
32

While Cardoso (1989) emphasizes this factor in explaining Argentina’s recovery from the 1890-92 crisis,
in reality it comes a bit late to explain the questions at hand here (Argentina exports of chilled beef rise to
significant levels only in the second half of the 1890s).
33
To be sure, British investors had preferred Brazil earlier in the 19th century, but not in the 1880s.
34
See Fishlow (1989a), pp.22-23.

29

preferences were extended to industry as well. The speculative boom which resulted
from the ample provision of credit, financed partly by domestic money creation and
partly by foreign borrowing, is known in the Brazilian literature as the Encilhamento. So
soon after the abolition of slavery, and with continuing political uncertainty, domestic
conditions were not conducive to high domestic savings rates. The investment
encouraged by the ample availability of credit thus bequeathed chronic current account
deficits.
It is striking, given the recent literature on contagion, that Brazil did not
experience a current account reversal, as we measure the phenomenon, at this time. As
Cardoso and Dornbusch (1989) note, negative financial spillovers from Argentina to
Brazil were limited. Part of the explanation, for this as for many things Brazilian, is
coffee prices, which strengthened from 1890. But another part may lie in the fact that
Brazil satisfies less well the leading indicators of vulnerability to a current account
reversal. While current account deficits were chronic, they were not allowed to widen to
the same extent as in Argentina; Brazil was never the darling of foreign investors to the
same extent. Although the commitment to fiscal orthodoxy weakened after the 1880s,
the legacy lived on; budget deficits were never allowed to explode as they did in
Argentina. Less pressure of demand meant less tendency toward overvaluation, which
further slowed the development of a patently unsustainable external position. As a result
the country retained limited capital market access: Brazil was able to contract new loans
in London, most prominently in 1893 and 1895 but also a short-term advance in 1896.
In this manner Brazil staggered into the second half of the 1890s. Limited capital
market access to finance ongoing deficits allowed the debt to continue rising, which

30

inevitably contributed to growing unease on the part of foreign investors. After 1893,
coffee prices weakened, bringing the situation to a head. By 1896 funding for the current
account deficit had dried up. The trade balance swung from a deficit of a bit less than
one per cent of GDP to a surplus of more than five percent, reflecting the magnitude of
ongoing debt service obligations. Like Argentina before it, Brazil now secured a funding
loan from its London bankers, in this case sufficient to cover the central government’s
interest payments for three years. In addition amortization obligations were suspended
for 13 years. Fishlow (1989a) notes that since the effective debt write-down was less
than in Argentina (where the issue had been forced by the government’s unilateral
suspension of payments), reliance on internal adjustment measures was necessarily
greater. The budgetary problem was addressed by raising tax rates and extending them to
new products, imposing surcharges on customs duties, and renting the federal railways to
private enterprises. The exchange rate was stabilized by withdrawing Treasury notes
from circulation, as required by the conditions attached to the funding loan.
This sharp deflation, presided over by Finance Minister Joaquim Murtinho,
sharply compressed domestic demand. Imports fell, partly owing to depressed demand
but also due to the import surcharges, while more domestic production was freed up for
export. Trade deficits gave way to ongoing surpluses, which grew larger after 1900. But
the greater reliance in Brazil on deflationary adjustment measures also meant that the
output effects of the reversal were as severe as in Argentina, notwithstanding the fact that
prior conditions would have indicated a less severe recession. Adjustment took place
mainly through the collapse of investment; the trade statistics show a sharp decline in
imports of industrial equipment. National income estimates suggest that GDP declined

31

by 10 per cent in 1897 and 5 per cent in 1898, mirroring the 1890-1 contraction in
Argentina, before stabilizing in 1899, and then beginning to grow again quite sharply
starting in 1900, aided by strengthening coffee prices and the coming on line of rubber
exports (although not soon enough to prevent a crisis in a banking system severely
weakened by preceding events).
Thus, the Brazilian case is a reminder that the output effects of a current account
reversal depend not just on inherited macroeconomic and financial conditions but also on
how the reversal is managed.
C. Australia 1891-2. In Australia, whose reversal was bracketed temporally by
those of Argentina and Brazil, the government resorted to neither currency depreciation
nor default. While many of the other circumstances surrounding this episode were
similar to those in Argentina and Brazil, imperial identity meant that default and
depreciation were essentially inconceivable. Even more than in Brazil, then, the burden
of adjustment fell on the domestic economy. In Australia, GDP fell for four years
running, from 1890 through 1893, not “just” two. The cumulative fall was on the order
of 25 per cent, not “just” 15. Unemployment rose sharply. Immigration slowed and
tentatively reversed direction. Social disorder spread, led by protesting sheep shearers,
dock workers, and miners. Post-1893 recovery, if it may be called that, was slow and
uneven. A summary measure of the severity of the consequent recession is the
comparison with Argentina: whereas Argentine real GDP doubled between 1890 and
1905 according to the conventional national income statistics, Australian GDP in 1905
was a mere 20 per cent above what it had been a decade and a half before. This is
especially impressive given that the absolute swing in the trade balance ratio, from -2.0

32

per cent of GDP in the three pre-reversal years to +0.4 per cent of GDP in the year of the
event, was small by the standards of the other countries we are considering.
Australia had been experiencing an investment boom, based in substantial part on
investment by nonresidents, off and on since the gold rushes of 1851. Much of this
overseas finance was devoted to speculative assets, including pastoral and urban land.
Like the government of Argentina, the governments of Queensland and New South
Wales subsidized the fares of immigrants. Self-reinforcing capital and labor inflows
fanned a speculative building boom. The urban land boom came to a head in the 1880s,
fueled by rapid increases in mortgage lending by savings banks. As a share of GDP,
bank credit (much of which was backed by foreign liabilities) doubled between 1880 and
1890. The majority of the increase went into residential construction, since the rate of
return on pastoral activities was declining and the ‘eighties was a decade of urbanization.
Land and housing prices shot up in Melbourne in particular.
As in Argentina and Brazil, these developments were not unrelated to the
activities of government, the individual colonial governments in particular. The
Australian colonies competed with one another to attract both labor and capital,
borrowing to build railways into the interior and providing urban amenities to appeal to
recent settlers. As McLean (1996) puts it, many of these investment projects were based
on overly optimistic assessments of the agricultural potential of the semi-arid regions of
the interior (reflecting temporarily favorable climatic conditions).35 In the second half of
the 1880s, they reflected the tendency for low interest rates in Britain to encourage
relatively indiscriminate borrowing and lending. So long as growth prospects were rosy,
35

Very much the same syndrome, reflecting the same climatic conditions, was evident in the United States
at this time.

33

government guarantees for the bonds underwriting the investments were credible. And,
of course, these projects were associated with large current account deficits reflecting the
propensity to import locomotives, steel rail, and a wide range of other investment goods.
The stop to lending that followed the Baring Crisis was more pronounced in
Australia than in Brazil. Capital inflows fell from £20 million in 1888 to £1 million in
1893. It is tempting to speculate that British investors were impressed by the similar
resource endowments of the two pastoral economies and revised their expectations
accordingly – although the fact that the curtailment of lending and current account
reversal took place fully a year after the Baring Crisis is difficult to reconcile with this
hypothesis. Given that “the imperial and Commonwealth tie” (in the language of Lindert
and Morton 1989) closed off other options, harsh deflationary policies became the order
of the day. There was no depreciation of the currency. Rather, relative prices had to
adjust through a grinding downward movement of wages and costs. Demand was
compressed by tight credit, which discouraged consumption and, in particular,
investment. Capital formation fell from £34 million in 1888 to £16 million in 1892 and
£9 million in 1893. State budgets were brought into rapid balance, further compressing
demand. Despite the stop to borrowing, government debt as a share of GDP rose sharply
with declining nominal income through the middle of the 1890s. Meanwhile, there was
no relief from the interest burden like that obtained by Argentina (and no delay of
amortization like that enjoyed by Brazil): debt service continued to account for nearly 10
per cent of GDP. This meant that imports had to be compressed sharply. In contrast,
exports were maintained at previous levels (unlike Argentina and Brazil, they did not rise
significantly in the wake of the reversal, presumably reflecting the stagnation of the

34

economy). Reflecting the impact of deflation, the export share rose from 20 to 28 per
cent of GDP in the first half of the 1890s.
The story would not be complete without reference to the drought that started in
1895, which nipped the economy’s recovery in the bud. What coffee was to Brazil, wool
was to Australia, and the drought of the mid-1890s had a devastating impact on the
pastoral economy. Thus, climate and not simply policy may explain why recovery in
Australia was so difficult and long in coming. However, drought was not an exclusively
Australian phenomenon in the 1890s, so the decline in pastoral production was offset to
an extent by strong prices. In addition, drought in 1895 cannot explain why the economy
contracted so persistently and severely between 1890 and 1893. Here the fact that the
domestic economy was forced to shoulder the entire burden of adjustment to the current
account reversal cannot be denied.

7. Conclusion
In this paper we have presented some new facts and a mystery. The new facts
concern the pre-1970 history of international capital flows and current account reversals.
Analyzing a sample of countries with per capita GDPs at least 60 per cent those of the
lead country and measuring reversals in a consistent way, we find that the incidence of
reversals has been unusually great in recent years. The only prior period that matched the
last three decades in terms of the frequency and magnitude of reversals was the 1920s
and 1930s, decades notorious for the instability of capital flows. In contrast, reversals
were both less common and smaller in the Bretton Woods and pre-World War I gold
standard eras.

35

That the Bretton Woods years were different is no surprise: capital controls were
widespread and financial flows across borders were suppressed. Current account
reversals were fewer because current account deficits were smaller, reflecting this limited
finance. At the same time, when reversals did occur, their effects could be severe.
That reversals were relatively few and small before 1914 is striking, given the
absence of impediments to capital flows and the large size of current account balances.
This finding is clearly related to the much commented upon smooth operation of the
prewar gold standard. Cross-country regressions and case studies alike suggest that the
same observable characteristics of countries (large current account and budget deficits in
the run-up, followed by negative shocks to growth at home and abroad) help to explain
the incidence of reversals both before 1914 and after 1971. But controlling for these
characteristics of countries and reversal periods does not make the contrast between the
gold standard and recent years go away. Ultimately, why reversals were not more
frequent and larger in the period of open capital markets a century ago is still a mystery.
To put it another way, the smooth operation of the classical gold standard remains be
explained.

36

References
Bailey, J.D. (1959), “Australian Borrowing in Scotland in the Nineteenth Century,”
Economic History Review (sec. ser) 9, pp.268-279.
Bayoumi, Tamim (1989), “Savings-Investment Correlations: Immobile Capital,
Government Policy, or Endogenous Behavior?” IMF Working Paper 98/66 (December).
Bayoumi, Tamim and Barry Eichengreen (1996), “The Stability of the Gold Standard and
the Evolution of the International Monetary System,” in Tamim Bayoumi, Barry
Eichengreen and Mark Taylor (eds), Modern Perspectives on the Gold Standard,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.165-188.
Bloomfield, Arthur (1963), “Short Term Capital Movements under the Pre-1914 Gold
Standard,” Princeton Studies in International Finance no. 14, International Finance
Section, Department of Economics, Princeton University.
Bloomfield, Arthur (1968), “Patterns of Fluctuation in International Investment Before
1914,” Princeton Studies in International Finance, International Finance Section,
Department of Economics, Princeton University.
Bordo, Michael and Barry Eichengreen (2003), “Crises Now and Then: What Lessons
from the Last Era of Financial Globalization?” in Paul Mizen (ed), Monetary History,
Exchange Rates and Financial Markets, Cheltenham, Edward Elgar, vol. 2, pp.52-91.
Bordo, Michael, Barry Eichengreen and Douglas Irwin (1999), “Is Globalization Today
Really Different than Globalization a Hundred Years Ago?” Brookings Trade Forum,
pp.1-72.
Bordo, Michael and Marc Flandreau (2003), “Core, Periphery, Exchange Rate Regimes,
and Globalization,” in Michael Bordo, Alan Taylor and Jeffrey Williamson (eds),
Globalization in Historical Perspective, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp.417472.
Botana, Natalio (1997), De la republica posible a la republica verdadera, Buenos Aires:
Espasa Calpe Argentina.
Brewer, John (1990), The Sinews of Power: War, Money and the English State,
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Cairncross, A.K. (1953), Home and Foreign Investment, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Calvo, Guillermo (2005), “Crises in Emerging Market Economics: A Global
Perspective,” NBER Working Paper no. 11305 (May).

37

Cardoso, Eliana A. (1989), “Comment on Fishlow,” in Guillermo Calvo, Ronald Findlay,
Pentti Kouri and Jorge de Macedo (eds), Debt, Stabilization and Development, Oxford:
Blackwell, pp.48-53.
Cardoso, Eliana A. and Rudiger Dornbusch (1989), “Brazilian Debt Crises: Past and
Present,” in Barry Eichengreen and Peter Lindert (eds), The International Debt Crisis in
Historical Perspective, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp.106-139.
Edwards, Sebastian (2004a), “Thirty Years of Current Account Imbalances, Current
Account Reversals, and Sudden Stops,” NBER Working Paper no.10276 (January).
Edwards, Sebastian (2004b), “Financial Openness: Sudden Stops and Current Account
Reversals,” NBER Working Paper no.10277 (January).
Edwards, Sebastian (2005), “Is the U.S. Current Account Deficit Sustainable? And if
Not, How Costly is Adjustment Likely to Be?” unpublished manuscript, UCLA (March).
Eichengreen, Barry (1992), Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great
Depression 1919-1939, New York: Oxford University Press.
Eichengreen, Barry and Michael Bordo (2002), “Crises Now and Then: What Lessons
from the Last Era of Financial Globalization?” NBER Working Paper no.8716.
Feis, Herbert (1930), Europe: The World’s Banker, New Haven: Yale University Press.
Feldstein, Martin and Charles Horioka (1980), “Domestic Saving and International
Capital Flows,” Economic Journal 90, pp.314-329.
Fischer, Stanley (1988), “Real Balances, the Exchange Rate and Indexation: Real
Variables in Disinflation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 103, pp.27-50.
Fishlow, Albert (1986), “Lessons from the Past, Capital Markets and International
Lending in the 19th Century and the Interwar Years,” in Miles Kahler (ed.), The Politics
of International Debt, Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Fishlow, Albert (1989a), “Lessons of the 1890s for the 1980s,” in Guillermo Calvo,
Ronald Findlay, Pentti Kouri and Jorge de Macedo (eds), Debt, Stabilization and
Development, Oxford: Blackwell, pp.19-47.
Fishlow, Albert (1989b), “Conditionality and Willingness to Pay: Some Parallels from
the 1890s,” in Barry Eichengreen and Peter Lindert (eds), The International Debt Crisis
in Historical Perspective, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp.86-105.
Goldstein, Morris, Graciela Kaminsky and Carmen Reinhart (2000), Assessing Financial
Vulnerability: An Early Warning System for Emerging Markets, Washington, D.C.:
Institute for International Economics.

38

Ford, Alec (1962), The Gold Standard: Britain and Argentina, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Lindert, Peter (1969), “Key Currencies and Gold, 1900-1913,” Princeton Studies in
International Finance no. 24, International Finance Section, Department of Economics,
Princeton University.
Lindert, Peter and Peter Morton (1989), “How Sovereign Debt has Worked,” in Jeffrey
Sachs (ed.), Developing Country Debt and Economic Performance, Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, vol. 1, pp.39-106.
McLean, Ian W. (1996), “Recovery from the 1890s Depression: Australia in an Argentine
Mirror,” unpublished manuscript, University of Adelaide.
Milesi-Ferretti, Gian Maria and Assaf Razin (1997), “Sharp Reductions in Current
Account Deficits: An Empirical Investigation,” NBER Working Paper no.6310.
North, Douglass and Barry Weingast (1989), “Constitutions and Commitment,” Journal
of Economic History 49, pp.803-852.
Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff (1996), “The Intertemporal Approach to the
Current Account,” NBER Working Paper no.4893 (April).
Obstfeld, Maurice and Alan Taylor (2004), Global Capital Markets, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Romer, Christina (1986), “Spurious Volatility in Historical Unemployment Data,”
Journal of Political Economy 94, pp.1-37.
Romero, Luis Alberto (2002), A History of Argentina in the 20th Century, University
Park, Penn.: Pennsylvania State University Press.
Stone, Irving (1999), The Global Export of Capital from Great Britain, 1865-1914, New
York: St. Martin’s Press.
Taylor, Alan (1996), “International Capital Mobility in History: The Saving-Investment
Relationship,” NBER Working Paper no.5743.

39

Table 1. Mean Absolute Value of Current Accounts, Percent of GDP
(Unweighted Averages)
Time
1880-1889
1890-1913
1919-1926
1927-1931
1932-1939
1947-1959
1960-1973
1974-1989
1990-2000

Present
Sample
3.8
3.6
3.9
2.7
1.5
2.4
1.9
4.8
4.7

ObstfeldTaylor
3.9a
3.7
3.9
2.7
1.5
1.8
1.3
2.2
2.3

a This figure is from Taylor (1996); Obstfeld and Taylor (1994) provide a statistic for the
longer period 1870-1889.
Source: see text.

40

Table 2. Estimates of Savings-Retention Coefficient for
Successive Five-Year Periods, Current Sample
Period
1880-1884
1885-1889
1890-1894
1895-1899
1900-1904
1905-1909
1910-1914
1920-1924
1925-1929
1930-1934
1935-1939
1945-1949
1950-1954
1955-1959
1960-1964
1965-1969
1970-1974
1975-1979
1980-1984
1985-1989
1990-1994
1995-1999

Coef.
0.534
0.311
0.536
0.668
0.548
0.567
0.581
0.590
0.613
0.783
0.927
0.667
0.721
0.778
0.744
0.887
0.863
0.708
0.623
0.699
0.598
0.452

Std. Err. 95% Conf. Interval
0.198
0.099
0.970
0.145
-0.003
0.625
0.141
0.231
0.840
0.114
0.421
0.915
0.132
0.262
0.833
0.207
0.119
1.014
0.206
0.135
1.027
0.219
0.107
1.073
0.196
0.185
1.041
0.074
0.622
0.944
0.068
0.780
1.075
0.128
0.395
0.939
0.069
0.576
0.866
0.057
0.659
0.897
0.084
0.570
0.919
0.073
0.737
1.037
0.069
0.719
1.007
0.111
0.478
0.938
0.124
0.368
0.878
0.122
0.448
0.951
0.113
0.365
0.832
0.112
0.222
0.683

Source: see text.

41

Table 3. Time Distribution of Reversals
Pre-1885 1885-1889 1890-1894 1895-1899 1900-1904 1905-1909 1910-1914
REV1
No Reversal
Reversal
REV2
No Reversal
Reversal

26
2

77
5

67
18

76
9

79
13

93
2

66
10

484
59

28

81
1

76
9

83
2

86
6

94
1

73
3

521
22

1918-1922 1923-1927 1928-1932 1933-1937
REV1
No Reversal
Reversal
REV2
No Reversal
Reversal

Total

1938

40
28

66
27

67
32

83
14

18
1

274
102

45
23

74
19

76
23

88
9

19

302
74

1945-1949 1950-1954 1955-1959 1960-1964 1965-1969 1970-1972
REV1
No Reversal
Reversal
REV2
No Reversal
Reversal

52
20

79
21

94
6

97
3

94
6

57
6

473
62

54
18

89
11

98
2

100

100

63

504
31

1970-1974 1975-1979 1980-1984 1985-1989 1990-1994 1995-1998
REV1
No Reversal
Reversal
REV2
No Reversal
Reversal

96
24

179
58

179
97

198
88

213
74

104
20

969
361

17
13

193
44

209
67

221
65

242
45

114
10

996
244

Notes: REV1 and REV2 refer to a fall in the current account deficit of at least 2 per cent
or three per cent over three years with respect to the preceding three years.
Source: see text.

42

Table 4. Summary Statistics For GDP Growth (Reversal and No-Reversal Episodes)
Gold Standard
Year of
Reversal
No Rev
1
Reversal
No Rev
2
Reversal
No Rev
3
Reversal
No Rev
4
Reversal
No Rev
Interwar
Year of
Reversal
No Rev
1
Reversal
No Rev
2
Reversal
No Rev
3
Reversal
No Rev
4
Reversal
No Rev

Mean

St. Dev

t-stat

2.79
2.81
1.15
1.95
3.59
2.38
6.22
2.45
3.47
3.10

5.08
0.95
4.70
1.31
6.28
1.59
4.14
1.36
5.35
1.43

-0.03

0.60
3.28
3.28
4.03
3.96
4.66
3.32
4.63
5.61
4.31

6.83
4.77
14.28
4.81
11.18
4.19
6.60
4.41
5.16
3.87

-2.57

-0.80
0.95
4.51
0.26

-0.33
-0.41
-1.44
1.43

Notes: t-statistics reported for two-sided null hypothesis of no difference between
reversals and non-reversals. t-statistics in bold indicate rejection of the null
hypothesis.

43

Table 4. Summary Statistics (Continued)
Bretton Woods
Year of
Reversal
No Rev
1
Reversal
No Rev
2
Reversal
No Rev
3
Reversal
No Rev
4
Reversal
No Rev
Post
1970
Year of
Reversal
No Rev
1
Reversal
No Rev
2
Reversal
No Reve
3
Reversal
No Rev
4
Reversal
No Rev

Mean

St. Dev

t-stat

5.39
9.14
6.94
9.94
6.15
8.05
4.74
6.19
5.21
6.37

3.91
5.69
6.03
6.34
5.19
5.39
4.72
3.14
5.03
2.77

-2.50

1.85
3.57
2.73
3.45
3.85
3.40
4.12
3.36
4.00
2.88

5.53
1.42
5.82
1.13
4.64
1.11
6.01
1.34
5.78
1.15

-3.30

-1.89
-1.30
-1.28
-0.95

-1.44
1.09
1.42
1.86

Notes: t-statistics reported for two-sided null hypothesis of no difference between
reversals and non-reversals. t-statistics in bold represent a rejection of the null
hypothesis.
Source: see text.

44

Table 5. Indicators of Reversals
GDP per capita
Fiscal balance/GDP
Trade balance/GDP
UK/US interest rate
Lagged UK/US growth
UK/US growth
Peg
Gold Standard
Dummy
Interwar Dummy
BW Dummy
Deficit
Openness

(1)
-0.205**
(0.099)
-0.014**
(0.007)
-0.033***
(0.005)
0.011
(0.009)
-0.024***
(0.007)
0.004
(0.008)
-0.063
(0.075)

(2)
-0.205
(0.154)
-0.014
(0.009)
-0.033***
(0.011)
0.011
(0.011)
-0.024***
(0.007)
0.004
(0.008)
-0.063
(0.100)

(3)
-0.177
(0.152)
-0.013
(0.009)
-0.035***
(0.012)
0.016
(0.012)
-0.019***
(0.007)
0.006
(0.009)
-0.044
(0.101)

(4)
-0.300***
(0.108)
-0.016**
(0.007)
-0.032***
(0.005)
0.009
(0.010)
-0.024***
(0.008)
0.007
(0.009)
-0.091
(0.078)

(5)
-0.300
(0.184)
-0.016*
(0.009)
-0.032***
(0.011)
0.009
(0.012)
-0.024***
(0.008)
0.007
(0.009)
-0.091
(0.100)

(6)
-0.272
(0.183)
-0.014
(0.009)
-0.034***
(0.012)
0.017
(0.012)
-0.020***
(0.007)
0.007
(0.010)
-0.073
(0.101)

-0.389***
(0.115)
0.142
(0.102)
-0.338***
(0.107)
0.164**
(0.069)
0.004***
(0.001)

-0.389**
(0.178)
0.142
(0.135)
-0.338**
(0.153)
0.164**
(0.069)
0.004**
(0.002)

-0.372**
(0.177)
0.137
(0.139)
-0.349**
(0.156)
0.165**
(0.071)
0.004**
(0.002)

-1.030***
(0.110)
1978
-894.13
0.08

-1.030***
(0.147)
1978
-894.13
0.08

-1.062***
(0.148)
1895
-864.97
0.08

-0.434***
(0.132)
0.092
(0.121)
-0.330***
(0.112)
0.134*
(0.072)
0.004***
(0.001)
-0.102
(0.091)
-0.879***
(0.135)
1869
-836.52
0.08

-0.434**
(0.192)
0.092
(0.148)
-0.330**
(0.165)
0.134*
(0.071)
0.004**
(0.002)
-0.102
(0.134)
-0.879***
(0.177)
1869
-836.52
0.08

-0.439**
(0.193)
0.067
(0.154)
-0.329*
(0.169)
0.135*
(0.073)
0.003**
(0.002)
-0.127
(0.135)
-0.891***
(0.180)
1793
-810.56
0.08

Capital Controls
Constant
Observations
Log-likelihood:
pseudo-R^2:

Note: Dependent variable takes the value 1 if a reversal of at least 2 % takes place and 0
otherwise. Standard errors in parentheses,* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; ***
significant at 1%. All the explanatory variables are lagged once. The variable trade
balance to GDP ratio is averaged over the three years before the event to maintain
consistency with the definition of reversals. Government surplus to GDP, world interest
rate and growth rates are levels.
Source: see text.

45

Table 6. Consequences of Reversals
Trade balance/GDP
RER overvaluation
UK/US interest rate
UK/US interest
rate(+1)
Gold Standard
Dummy
Interwar Dummy
BW Dummy

(1)
0.077***
(0.026)
-0.166***
(0.021)
0.055
(0.069)

(2)
0.115***
(0.034)
-0.180***
(0.023)
0.092
(0.065)

(3)
0.077
(0.069)
-0.166***
(0.044)
0.055
(0.064)

(4)
0.115
(0.082)
-0.180***
(0.031)
0.092
(0.061)

(5)
0.085***
(0.028)
-0.156***
(0.021)
0.046
(0.071)

(6)
0.129*
(0.075)
-0.169***
(0.032)
0.075
(0.073)

0.051
(0.077)

0.031
(0.073)

0.051
(0.072)

0.031
(0.066)

0.082
(0.079)

0.073
(0.070)

0.913**
(0.445)
-2.788***
(0.477)
-2.708**
(1.359)

0.445
(0.556)
-3.257***
(0.568)
-3.394**
(1.398)
-0.097**
(0.042)

0.913
(0.918)
-2.788***
(0.863)
-2.708
(3.100)

0.445
(1.056)
-3.257***
(0.967)
-3.394
(3.045)
-0.097*
(0.051)

0.668
(0.503)
-3.959***
(0.533)
-2.707*
(1.482)

0.013
(1.426)
-4.702***
(1.379)
-2.806
(3.279)
-0.679
(0.414)
-0.068
(0.048)
-0.828
(1.251)
1.749
(1.383)
199
0.33

Size of Reversal
Capital Controls
External Def. Dum.
Constant
Observations
R-squared

0.267
(0.297)
318
0.21

1.060**
(0.513)
222
0.28

0.267
(0.685)
318
0.21

1.060
(0.955)
222
0.28

-0.391
(0.405)
-0.749*
(0.395)
0.889*
(0.462)
288
0.26

Notes: Estimated using OLS with White'
s correction for heteroscedasticity. Standard
errors in parentheses,* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
Reversal defined according to rev1. The dependent variable is output growth defined as 3
year averages, expressed as deviations from world averages. The explanatory variables
trade balance, the real exchange rate and the UK/US interest rates areaveraged over the
three years before the event.
Source: see text.

46

Table 7. Causes and Effects of Current Account Reversals: Two-Step Estimates,
(top panel shows growth regression, bottom panel determinants of reversals)
(1)
Initial Log GDP per capita -0.459***
(0.136)
0.564***
Pop. Growth
(0.100)
0.114***
Fiscal Surplus/GDP
(0.024)
0.313
Peg
(0.243)
0.702***
Capital Controls
(0.237)
-4.825***
Reversal
(1.095)
Lagged Rev.

(2)
-0.483***
(0.136)
0.539***
(0.101)
0.112***
(0.024)
0.329
(0.244)
0.653***
(0.237)
-5.700***
(1.139)
1.147***
(0.335)

Lagged (2) Rev.
Trade Balance/GDP
Growth
Money/Reserves
Prewar Dummy
Interwar Dummy
BW Dummy
Lambda
Observations

-0.033***
(0.005)
-0.022***
(0.009)
-0.009*
(0.005)
-0.591***
(0.118)
-0.053
(0.115)
-0.726***
(0.107)
2.164***
(0.649)
1919

Source: see text.

47

-0.032***
(0.005)
-0.024***
(0.009)
-0.009*
(0.005)
-0.572***
(0.119)
-0.046
(0.115)
-0.717***
(0.108)
2.282***
(0.666)
1890

(3)
-0.535***
(0.135)
0.450***
(0.100)
0.113***
(0.024)
0.305
(0.242)
0.654***
(0.235)
-6.022***
(1.137)
0.562
(0.391)
0.878***
(0.335)
-0.031***
(0.005)
-0.023***
(0.009)
-0.009*
(0.005)
-0.566***
(0.120)
-0.052
(0.115)
-0.741***
(0.109)
2.490***
(0.665)
1855

1

2

ca1
3

4

5

Figure 1. Mean Absolute Value of Current Account as a Percent of GDP

1880 1890 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990
year1

Note: War years are excluded from the sample.
Source: see text.

48

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

Figure 2. Plot of Savings-Retention Coefficients and Confidence Intervals,
Successive 5-Year Periods (1 = 1880-4,…22 =1995-1999)

0

5

10
Period
beta
minus

Note: war years are excluded from the sample.
Source: see text.

49

15
plus

20

50
Date
19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

37

35

33

31

29

27

25

23

21

19

Mean(Reversal)

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

18

18

18

18

18

18

18

18

18

18

12

10

08

06

04

02

00

98

96

94

92

90

88

86

84

82

80

Mean(Reversal)

Figure 3. Number of Reversals by Year
Gold Standard

0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0

Date

Interwar

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

51
Date
20

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

0.5

0.3
0.4

0.2

0.1

0
19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

00

19

0.6

98

Post 1970

19

Date

96

94

92

90

88

86

84

82

80

78

76

74

72

Mean(Reversal)

70

68

66

64

62

60

58

56

54

52

50

48

46

Mean(Reversal)

Bretton Woods

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

Table A1. Countries in the Sample
1880-1914
Argentina
Australia
Austria
Brazil
Canada
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Italy
Japan
Netherlands
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
United Kingdom
United States

1918-1939
Argentina
Australia
Belgium
Brazil
Canada
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Italy
Japan
Netherlands
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
United Kingdom
United States

1945-1971
Argentina
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Brazil
Canada
Denmark
Egypt
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
India
Italy
Japan
Mexico
New Zealand
Netherlands
Norway
Portugal
South Africa
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Uruguay
USSR
United Kingdom
United States

Source: see text.

52

1972-1998
Algeria
Argentina
Australia
Austria
Barbados
Belgium
Belize
Brazil
Canada
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Denmark
Egypt
Finland
Fiji
France
Gabon
Germany
Grenada
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Iran
Israel
Italy
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Korea
Malaysia
Mexico
Malta

Romania
Russia
Seychelles
Singapore
South Africa
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Thailand
Trinidad and Tobago
Turkey
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Venezuela

Table A2. Incidence of Reversals: Gold Standard and Interwar Periods
Country
Argentina
Argentina
Argentina
Australia
Australia
Brazil
Brazil
Brazil
Brazil
Canada
Canada
Denmark
Denmark
Denmark
Denmark
Finland
Finland
Finland
Finland
Germany
Japan
Japan
Netherlands
Norway
Sweden
Sweden

Year
1885
1889
1898
1891
1903
1884
1886
1897
1899
1891
1913
1886
1890
1901
1908
1884
1892
1901
1913
1913
1899
1901
1911
1901
1887
1891

Country
Argentina
Argentina
Argentina
Australia
Belgium
Brazil
Brazil
Canada
Canada
Denmark
Denmark
Finland
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Italy
Italy
Japan
Netherlands
Netherlands
Norway
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden

Year
1924
1926
1931
1931
1927
1923
1929
1923
1932
1921
1925
1918
1929
1919
1928
1930
1919
1931
1927
1921
1932
1922
1931
1924
1925
1922

Sweden

1910

Switzerland

1921

Switzerland
Switzerland
USA

1892
1899
1896

Switzerland
UK
UK

1933
1919
1932

Note: These episodes list only the first year of successive-year reversals and exclude
wartime reversals, using the REV1 definition.
Source: see text.

53

Table A3. Incidence of Reversals: Bretton Woods and Post-Bretton Woods Periods
Country
Australia
Australia
Australia
Belgium
Denmark
Denmark
Finland
Finland
France
France
Germany
Germany
Italy
Italy
Japan
Netherlands
Netherlands
Netherlands
Norway
Norway
Portugal
Sweden
Switzerland
Switzerland
Switzerland
UK

Year
1946
1962
1970
1950
1948
1954
1949
1951
1948
1959
1952
1967
1950
1964
1954
1949
1958
1967
1950
1964
1950
1949
1949
1953
1965
1948

Country
Algeria
Algeria
Argentina
Argentina
Austria
Barbados
Barbados
Barbados
Belgium
Belgium
Belize
Belize
Brazil
Brazil
Canada
Canada
Chile
Chile
Colombia
Colombia
Colombia
Costa Rica
Costa Rica
Costa Rica
Denmark
Egypt

54

Year
1978
1989
1976
1982
1981
1973
1982
1991
1983
1992
1984
1995
1977
1981
1982
1994
1974
1982
1973
1975
1984
1982
1990
1994
1991
1982

Table A3. Incidence of Reversals: Bretton Woods and Post-Bretton Woods Periods,
Continued
Country
Egypt
Egypt
Fiji
Fiji
Finland
Finland
Finland
Gabon
Gabon
Gabon
Gabon
Germany
Greece
Grenada
Grenada
Grenada
Hungary
Iceland
Iceland
Ireland
Ireland
Ireland
Israel
Israel
Italy
Italy
Jamaica
Jamaica
Jamaica
Japan
Japan
Jordan
Jordan
Korea
Malaysia
Malaysia
Malta
Malta
Mauritius
Mauritius
Mexico
Mexico
Mexico

Year
1987
1989
1973
1982
1976
1983
1991
1973
1978
1988
1993
1985
1986
1983
1990
1994
1988
1983
1992
1975
1982
1991
1976
1984
1976
1992
1977
1984
1992
1976
1982
1984
1992
1982
1975
1984
1973
1986
1981
1995
1981
1994
1982

Country
New Zealand
New Zealand
Norway
Norway
Norway
Norway
Oman
Oman
Panama
Panama
Portugal
Portugal
Romania
Singapore
Singapore
Singapore
Singapore
Singapore
South Africa
South Africa
Spain
Spain
Sweden
Sweden
Switzerland
Switzerland
Seychelles
Seychelles
Seychelles
Seychelles
Thailand
Thailand
Trinidad & Tobago
Trinidad & Tobago
Trinidad & Tobago
Trinidad & Tobago
United Kingdom
United Kingdom
United Kingdom
Uruguay
Uruguay
Venezuela
Venezuela

55

Year
1976
1986
1972
1977
1989
1996
1978
1987
1976
1981
1983
1993
1993
1973
1975
1982
1992
1994
1977
1983
1977
1984
1982
1992
1973
1991
1973
1983
1988
1994
1978
1986
1973
1985
1987
1994
1976
1980
1991
1982
1988
1973
1979

Mexico
Netherlands
Netherlands

1995
1980
1989

Venezuela
Venezuela

1988
1994

Note: These episodes list only the first year of successive-year reversals and exclude
wartime reversals, using the REV1 definition.
Source: see text.

56

