                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  TRADABILITY, PRODUCTIVITY, AND UNDERSTANDING
                      INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC INTEGRATION

                                              Paul R. Bergin
                                              Reuven Glick

                                          Working Paper 11637
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11637


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2005




We thank seminar participants at the London School of Economics, University Pompeu Fabra, University
Autonoma Barcelona, European Central Bank, Institute for Advanced Studies in Vienna, Birkbeck College,
the University of California at Berkeley, and the Annual Meetings of the American Economic Association.
The views expressed below do not represent those of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco or the Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Part of this research was undertaken while Bergin was a
Jean-Monet Fellow at the European University Institute. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Paul R. Bergin and Reuven Glick. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Tradability, Productivity, and Understanding International Economic Integration
Paul R. Bergin and Reuven Glick
NBER Working Paper No. 11637
September 2005
JEL No. F4

                                             ABSTRACT




This paper develops a two-country macro model with endogenous tradability to study features of
international economic integration. Recent episodes of integration in Europe and North America
suggest some surprising observations: while quantities of trade have increased significantly,
especially along the extensive margin, price dispersion has not decreased and may even have
increased. We propose a way of reconciling these price and quantity observations in a
macroeconomic model where the decision of heterogeneous firms to trade internationally is
endogenous. Trade is shaped both by the nature of heterogeneity -- trade costs versus productivity --
and by the nature of trade policies -- cuts in fixed costs versus cuts in per unit costs like tariffs. For
example, in contrast to tariff cuts, trade policies that work mainly by lowering various fixed costs
of trade may have large effects on entry decisions at the extensive margin without having direct
effects on price-setting decisions. Whether this entry raises or lowers overall price dispersion
depends on the type of heterogeneity that distinguishes the new entrants from incumbent traders.


Paul R. Bergin
Department of Economics
University of California at Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
prbergin@ucdavis.edu

Reuven Glick
Economic Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
101 Market Street
San Francisco, CA 94105
reuven.glick@sf.frb.org
I.     Introduction

         International macroeconomics is interested in the issue of market segmentation and
integration for several reasons. Firstly, the broad literature on pricing to market and deviations
from purchasing power parity relies upon the assumption that national markets are segmented, so
that firms have the ability to charge different prices in different countries. Secondly, such failures
in the law of one price are fundamental to our theories of real exchange rate behavior. Thirdly,
given recent policies aimed at promoting international market integration in Europe and North
America, there is heightened interest in understanding the implications of such integration
policies.
         Recent experiences with policy reforms have provided some new evidence regarding
market segmentation which is difficult for our standard open economy macro models to explain.
In particular, we refer to the Canada-U.S. Trade Agreement (CUSTA) and the North America
Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) aimed at promoting economic integration in North America in
the early 1990s, and the Single Market Program (SMP) in the early 1990s and the European
Monetary Union (EMU) in 1999 designed to further consummate economic integration in
Europe. One set of observations involves quantities: trade volume seems to respond more
significantly than standard models predict, and much of the increased trade volume occurs in the
form of new goods that were not previously traded, rather than increased intensity in trade of
previously traded goods (Kehoe and Ruhl, 2002). This is often referred to as the extensive
margin of trade. A second set of observations refers to prices. Recent research by Engel and
Rogers (2004) suggests that average deviations from the law of one price deviations for many
groups of traded goods in Europe stopped converging in 1999 and may even be diverging. A
similar conclusion is suggested in other research for North America, where price convergence
appears to have stopped in the early 1990s, with divergence in many classes of traded goods.
         These price and quantity observations present a challenge to our standard models of
international integration, and this paper proposes a way of reconciling them. It provides an
illustration of how macro models that endogenize firms’ decisions to trade can be useful. The
results also shed a new light on the debate over how best to measure the degree of international
integration: in terms of trade quantities or prices.
         In general, our open economy macro models are ill-suited for studying the process of
economic integration, since they tend to take market segmentation as given, simply assuming
firms can set different prices in different national markets. Standard trade theory also has
difficulty here. Recent advances have been made in modeling the costs of trade, and how they
determine the decision of firms to export (see Melitz, 2003; Ghironi and Melitz, 2004; Kehoe
and Ruhl, 2002; and Ruhl 2003). Emphasis in this literature has been placed on heterogeneity of
firms in terms of productivities, where only the more productive firms find it profitable to enter
the export market. But uniform trade costs in such models imply that there is a uniform price
wedge for goods across countries. However, evidence indicates that there is a great deal of


                                                  1
heterogeneity in price wedges (Crucini, Telmer, and Zachariadis, 2001), as well as in the trade
costs that drive them (Hummels, 1999, 2001; Anderson and van Wincoop, 2003). To address this
fact, we emphasize the role of heterogeneity in the trade cost dimension.
         To be more precise, this paper formulates a two-country macro model where each
country has a continuum of monopolistically competitive producers which must choose whether
to sell in the foreign market in addition to the domestic market. This decision is affected by two
types of real trade frictions: one in the form of per-unit (iceberg) trade costs which can vary by
good, and the other a fixed cost of international trade which does not depend upon the quantity
traded and does not vary by good. The first type of cost is motivated by tariffs and transportation
costs, as discussed above; the second type reflects establishment costs or the cost of learning to
deal with a foreign language or legal system. While iceberg costs have been favored in recent
macroeconomic studies of segmentation (Obstfeld and Rogoff, 2000), fixed costs are essential if
some goods are to be nontraded under the assumption of monopolistic competition. A firm will
participate in the international market only if it can generate additional positive profits by doing
so. In equilibrium, the traded goods will be those with low trade costs or high productivity.
         The paper’s findings arise from two important distinctions raised by our model. First,
what type of trade cost is the liberalization policy reducing: per unit costs like tariff rates or the
various fixed costs of trade? Second, which of the two types of heterogeneity distinguishes new
entrants into trade from incumbent traders: transport costs or productivity?
         The first and most general theoretical finding of the paper is that it is incorrect to assume
that policies promoting integration in terms of trade volume must also promote price
convergence. If prices are set under monopolistic competition as a markup over per-unit costs,
including per-unit trade costs for exports, then a policy that reduces per-unit tariffs indeed will
have a direct impact in price-setting behavior in the foreign market and will reduce price-
dispersion between the countries. But fixed costs do not enter the price-setting decision in a
standard model of monopolistic competition, so policies working mainly through fixed costs of
trade do not affect foreign prices here. Consequently, such trade policies may not reduce
international price dispersion. The model also implies that these two types of policies have very
different implications for quantities: with fixed cost reductions working much more strongly
through the extensive margin of new goods not previously traded.
         A second finding is that if new trade arises largely at the extensive margin, it may lead to
the type of price dispersion observed recently. For example, suppose that goods are
heterogeneous in terms of their per-unit trade costs such as transportation costs. Then the new
goods being traded systematically will have higher per-unit costs than previously traded goods.
After all, this is precisely the reason why these goods were previously nontraded. These will be
goods with higher price wedges between national markets, and their entry into trade will raise the
average international price wedge, and thereby a mean-squared error measure of price dispersion.
         Section II presents empirical observations of recent trade liberalizations and other policies
promoting greater economic integration in Europe and North America. Section III develops an


                                                  2
open economy macro model with endogenous trade. Section IV discusses analytically how the
model can be used to reconcile price and quantity observations, where Section V uses numerical
simulations to address theoretical ambiguities. Section VI concludes by drawing implications for
the recent experiences of Europe and North America, and by raising questions for future research.

II.     Empirical Observations

A.      Price Evidence
        Foremost among the empirical observations we wish to highlight is the finding that trade
liberalizations need not lead to convergence of price levels across national markets. There is an
extensive and active literature measuring failures in the law of one price across national markets.
One finding over much of this literature is that the law of one price fails also for tradable goods
(Engel, 1999). Another is that there is a good deal of heterogeneity in the degree of price
deviations at the disaggregated level, with about as many goods underpriced as overpriced
(Crucini et. al, 2001).
        The European case is especially surprising, given that an ostensible goal of monetary
union was to promote price transparency and arbitrage. Of special interest here is recent research
by Engel and Rogers (2004), who find that while there was price convergence within the
Eurozone in the early to mid 1990s, there has been no convergence since the adoption of the euro
in 1999.1 We replicate and extend this result in Figure 1 to include more recent data. The figure
is constructed from price level data for individual goods from 1990-2004, using data from the
Economist Intelligence Unit for about 100 traded as well as 38 nontraded items, covering 18
cities within the Eurozone.2 Data collectors at each location are given discretion to identify
representative examples of particular classes of goods (such as women’s cardigan sweaters or
100-count aspirin bottles) Since each observation is drawn from a potentially wide and evolving
range of varieties available in the market, the prices can be affected by new entry. The EIU sales
literature states that its price measures are affected by the opening up of markets and
deregulation: “As governments welcome foreign investment and open up their markets to
international companies, so the variety and availability of imported products improves.”
        Following Engel and Rogers, the metric used in Figure 1 is the mean squared error of (the
relative logs of) product item prices across cities in the Euro zone, averaged over groups of
goods. The figure shows the changes in price dispersion for different product categories and


1
  This result is distinct from micro-level studies that find convergence to the law of one price in particular
industries for narrowly defined goods, such as brands of autos and televisions (see Imbs et al., 2004;
Goldberg and Verboven, 2005). It is also a distinct issue from the evident lack of convergence in
European national inflation rates: for example, divergent inflation rates may still be associated with
convergence in price levels if the higher rates of change are in countries that initially had low price levels.
2
  This data set is becoming widely used in the literature. In addition to Engel and Rogers (2004), see also
Crucini and Shintani (2004) for a leading application.


                                                      3
subperiods.3 One observation is the heterogeneity in price deviations among different categories
of goods. But even more striking is that of the eight categories of traded goods, seven show
greater price dispersion in the period since 1998. The fact that this finding continues to hold in
our extended data set through 2004 indicates it is not just a temporary byproduct of transition, as
prices were converted to new currency units at the onset of the monetary union.
        Other recent papers support this general conclusion for Europe. The European
Commission (2004) finds that price indices in the most expensive and least expensive countries
were converging in the early 1990s, but stopped converging in the middle of the decade. Baye et
al. (2002) examine the effects of EMU on a small set of homogenous goods that shoppers buy
online, mostly electronic goods, and find that EMU had little effect on price dispersion. Lutz
(2002) considers a small set of goods with only post-1999 price survey data and also finds that
EMU has not reduced price dispersion significantly.
        In our empirical investigation, we find that further insight is obtained by distinguishing
between “core” and “peripheral” countries within the Euro zone, as reported in the top panel of
Table 1, where we denote Finland, Ireland, Portugal, and Spain as peripheral countries, and
Austria, Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, Luxemburg, and the Netherlands as the core
countries. This distinction makes sense based on both geography and the extent to which lowered
trade barriers have had time to foster stronger cross-country trade links. The former countries are
located in the outer areas of Europe. Moreover, Ireland joined in 1973, Portugal and Spain in
1986, and Finland in 1995, well after the core members formed the European Union in 1957.4
        Consistent with the message of Figure 1, the top panel of Table 1 shows that overall price
dispersion for traded goods in Europe fell over the period 1990-94, was flat for 1994-1998, and
then rose over 1998-2004 after the formal adoption of the euro. What is of main interest in Table
1 is that the increase in price dispersion during the latter period was greatest among the core
countries. In fact, for these countries the increase in price dispersion since 1998 has almost fully
offset the decline in price dispersion experienced in the early 1990s. In contrast, the peripheral
countries experienced a much greater decline in price dispersion in the early 1990s and a much
weaker increase in dispersion with core countries since adoption of the euro.
        We also find similar conclusions for price integration when we examine the effects of
trade liberalization in North America, following the CUSTA trade liberalizations between
Canada and the U.S. in 1989, Mexico’s comprehensive trade liberalization and economic
reforms begun in the late 1980s, and Mexico entering into NAFTA in 1994.5 The bottom panel

3
  Engel and Rogers (2004) find that this result holds, even after controlling for relative wages, relative
incomes, VAT taxes, slow adjustment of prices, etc
4
  Austria did not join the European Union until 1995, but is treated as a core country because of its long-
standing trade links with Germany and its central geographic position within Europe.
5
  Although NAFTA entailed an immediate reduction in various tariffs and nontariff barriers when it was
enacted in 1994, most of the trade reforms under the agreement involved gradual liberalization.
Consequently, economic integration in North America has been a gradual process over an extended
period of time..


                                                      4
of Table 1 reports calculations of changes in price dispersion in North America based on EIU
data for individual product items in 12 U.S. cities, 4 Canadian cities, and Mexico City. Price
dispersion declined considerably in the early 1990s, but increased sharply after 1994 at the time
of the adoption of NAFTA. 6 While the Mexican crisis of 1994-95 most probably played a role in
the upward movements involving Mexico, it does not explain why price dispersion between U.S.
and Canada also rose.
        Other studies support this finding of greater price dispersion in North American since the
adoption of NAFTA. See Globerman and Storer (2003) for a more detailed discussion and
analysis of this literature. In particular, Engel and Rogers (1998) find that any price convergence
during the 1990s was not due to NAFTA. Further, since 1994 they found that cross-border price
variability increased for some very tradable categories, such as clothing and footwear, where one
would expect that trade liberalization should have been most likely to encourage price
convergence.
        The conclusion arising from these recent studies is that price convergence may be limited
following policies encouraging integration, and furthermore, there even appears to be a tendency
for price divergence in many tradable groups of goods. One possible explanation suggested by
past theoretical literature is the presence of sticky goods prices and fluctuations in nominal
exchange rates. Earlier work by Engel and Rogers (1996) found a role for such an explanation,
but that accounts for less than half of the LOP deviations. Clearly, we need to find other types of
sources for price deviations. Further, this explanation cannot explain increased price divergence
across European country borders after the EMU eliminated currency fluctuations in 1999. A
second possible explanation is that price convergence in Europe and North America stopped
because goods market integration had been completed by that point and price convergence had
reached its natural limit. However, the presence of price divergence rather than just a lack of
convergence argues against this explanation. Further, evidence of significant additional goods
market integration in terms of trade flows suggests that integration had not reached its limit
previously. We turn to this quantity evidence next and draw additional lessons.

B.      Quantity Evidence
       Despite the lack of evidence of market integration in terms of price convergence, there
does seem to be evidence that trade liberalization promotes integration in terms of increased
trade volume. An important aspect of this finding is that much of the new trade is in the form of
new goods not previously traded. Evidence of this extensive margin of trade is documented in
Kehoe and Ruhl (2002), who study six different trade liberalizations, including the EU Single
Market and NAFTA. They define growth at the extensive margin as growth in the share of



6
 Since the EIU data are only available from 1990 on, we were unable to examine earlier price dispersion
movements within North America.


                                                   5
exports by products accounting for 10 percent or less of total trade prior to liberalization.7 They
find that initially these “least traded” product categories experienced the largest increases in
export shares following trade liberalization.
         For example, as shown in Table 2, European integration during the 1990s was associated
with an increase in this share from 10 percent to 17 percent in the case of Sweden, 14 percent of
Italy, and 19 percent of Portugal. Adjusting these results for the increase in total trade, one can
compute that the external margin accounted for more than 100 percent of the increased trade of
Sweden and Italy and almost 90 percent of that of Portugal with their EU trade partners.
Extensive margin effects are significant in the case of NAFTA integration during the 1990s as
well. The extensive margin share rose from 10 percent to 15 percent in the case of U.S. exports
to Mexico and to 41 percent in the case of Canadian exports to Mexico. Adjusting for the
increase in total trade, the external margin accounted for roughly 25 percent of the increased
trade between Mexico and the United States, 40 percent of increased Mexican exports to Canada,
and almost 100 percent of increased Canadian exports to Mexico.
         Hillberry and McDaniel (2002), using an alternative measure, find evidence of smaller,
but still significant, extensive margin growth for the United States following the implementation
of NAFTA. Using the methodology of Hummels and Klenow (2005), they define a country’s
extensive margin as its share of world exports that occur in those product categories (measured
HTS lines at the 10-digit level) in which a country exports. Other things equal, by this measure if
a country concentrates its exports in a few product categories, it will have a lower extensive
margin. Hillberry and McDaniel estimate that Mexican exports to the US grew by $86 billion
between 1993 and 2001, of which 12.5% is attributable to greater extensive margin trade.
Correspondingly, Mexican imports from the US grew by $44 billion, of which 9.7 percent
occurred at the extensive margin. Their lower magnitude estimates in comparison to Kehoe and
Ruhl can be attributed to their different metric: Hillberry and McDaniel define a product
category as traded even if actual exports, though positive, are virtually insignificant. In addition,
they focus on the effects of NAFTA per se and not of trade liberalization undertaken by Mexico
in earlier years.
         Evidence regarding quantities for EMU is more limited. But there are good theoretical
reasons and prior empirical evidence for expecting the adoption of a single currency to lead to
increased trade among the members of a currency union (see Rose, 2000). While the data
limitations are evident, there is already some evidence that EMU has boosted intra-euro area
trade since 1999 (HM Treasury, 2003). EMU-specific calculations based on a structural model
incorporating multilateral resistance suggest an increase in trade as high as 40 to 60 per cent.
Other studies, e.g. Bun and Klassen (2002), yield smaller, though still, significant effects.

7
  This approach towards determining whether a particular set of goods are not traded assumes that the
cutoff depends on the relative importance of these goods in a country’s trade (e.g. 10 percent of total
export value) rather than on whether their yearly value of trade falls below a fixed dollar-value cutoff
(e.g. $500, 000).


                                                     6
        Is there any connection between the quantity evidence and price evidence presented
above? Specifically, is there any association between the observations that the extensive margin
has increased and price dispersion has risen within Europe since the adoption of the euro? We
present suggestive evidence that there is, through a simple regression of the change in price
dispersion on the change in the extensive trade margin across individual country pairs. The price
dispersion figures are constructed as above; the extensive trade margin figures are calculated
from OECD data on International Trade by Commodity Statistics (ITCS), disaggregated at the 4
digit SITC product level. (We measure price dispersion changes and the extensive margin over
the period 1998-2002 because of the absence of bilateral product-disaggregated trade data for
most countries beyond 2002.) The results are reported in Table 3. A bivariate regression (in col.
1) indicates a positive, though insignificant relation. Controlling for differences between core
and peripheral trading relationships yields more interesting results (see col. 2). The coefficient
of the extensive margin variables, reflecting the effect for core-peripheral country pairs, is
positive and significant at better than 5%. For core-core country pairs the coefficient is even
more positive. For peripheral pairs the effect is weaker. This suggests that the entry of new
goods since 1998 is associated with an increase in price dispersion.
        These results point out the need for a theoretical framework to understand trade
liberalization that permits entry of new goods into the export market. We present one approach
doing so in the following section. Alternatives have been proposed by Kehoe and Ruhl (2002),
Ghironi and Melitz (2004), as well as others. But in addition, we propose a model that tries to
account for the puzzling price evidence. Given the clear role for the extensive margin in
explaining the quantity observations, our model will also consider how such an extensive margin
can coincide with and even facilitate price divergence.

III.   Model Specification

        In this section we formulate an open economy macro model that specifies real trade
frictions in the form of both per unit (iceberg) trade costs as well as a fixed cost of international
trade. The model consists of two countries, home and foreign, in which each country’s output
consists of a distinct continuum of differentiated goods, denoted by labels H and F, respectively.
Each country’s goods are indexed on the unit interval and are produced by monopolistically
competitive firms using labor as the sole input in a linear (constant returns to scale) technology.
        In principle, any good can be exported but there are variable costs τ and fixed costs of
exporting f X for any good, which are borne by the exporting firm. Consequently, an
endogenously determined fraction will be nontraded in equilibrium. Nontraded goods are labeled
N and traded goods T. Home and foreign agents consume CES aggregates of their own domestic
goods and the other country’s traded (export) goods. Quantities and prevailing prices for the
goods varieties consumed in the foreign country are denoted by *. (Below we generally present



                                                  7
consumption and price expressions for the home country only; the corresponding expressions for
the foreign country are analogous.)
         There are several key assumptions in our framework. First, each country specializes in a
range of goods that are unique to that country (albeit goods from different countries are
substitutes) and that the continua of goods produced are exogenously given.8 Thus, in focusing
on tradability, we abstract from possible new entrants into domestic production. Second, we
aggregate consumption only over the mass of goods that are actually available to consumers; this
mass may change over time as the number of imported tradable goods varies. In order to
facilitate the construction of CES aggregates this necessitates assuming that elasticity between
individual varieties of domestic and foreign goods are the same. This precludes the possibility of
separate elasticities between home and foreign goods, and between traded and nontraded goods,
which have often proven useful in open macro models. Third, we follow the tradition of standard
open economy macro models by defining consumption aggregates as (weighted) averages of the
consumptions of individual varieties, implying that consumption is invariant to the entry of new
varieties.9 This rules out the “love of variety” effect characteristic of Dixit-Stiglitz specifications
which are popular in models of international trade and imply that utility rises with the number of
varieties consumed.10 The implications of having “love of variety” or not are absent from open
economy macro models, where the mass of firms is assumed constant, the number of available
varieties never changes, and hence the baskets of goods consumed are fixed.11 Fourth, we permit
productivity and iceberg transport costs to vary heterogeneously across goods varieties. As will
be seen below, this gives our model flexibility necessary to explain the price and quantity
puzzles of international economic integration trade liberalization discussed in Section II.

A.      Consumption
        The continuum of goods produced in each country is indexed by i on the interval [ 0,1] .
Let n denote the (endogenous) share of these goods in the home country that are nontraded,
where goods are ordered such that i ∈ [ 0, n ] are nontraded and i ∈ [ n, 1] are traded. (Analogously
for the foreign country, where n* represents the share of foreign nontradeds.) Residents consume
a basket of locally-produced goods and tradable goods imported from the other country.

8
  A different approach is to allow a common set of goods to be potentially produced in all countries, and
then have only the lowest-cost supplier actually export the good to each market.
9
  The love of variety effect also implies that the aggregate price index falls with new varieties. This
implies that the real exchange rate may move in the “wrong” direction (i.e. depreciate) if productivity
gains generate entry, contrary to the prediction of the Balassa-Samuelson theory. The average price index
that corresponds to our consumption index does not display this property.
10
   Kehoe (2003) points out that trade models with a love of variety specification and large home bias
weights counterfactually predict that, in response to trade liberalization, the largest increases in trade
should occur in sectors in which there already is significant trade.
11
   Benassy (1996) formulates a general specification with a parameter that nests “no love of variety” and
“Dixit-Stiglitz love” as special cases.


                                                    8
Consequently, the total mass of varieties of goods available for consumption in the home country
is the sum of the mass of domestic varieties and of the goods exported by the foreign country, i.e.
1 + (1 − n* ) = 2 − n* .
      Accordingly, aggregate consumption ( C ) can be defined as a CES aggregate of
consumption of the home country’s own goods ( CH ) and imports of the foreign country’s traded
(export) goods ( CFT ):
                                                                                                     φ
                  ⎛          1       φ −1              1        φ −1 ⎞ φ −1
             C = ⎜⎜ (θ [n* ])φ ( CH ) φ + (1 − θ [n* ])φ ( CFT ) φ ⎟⎟                                                               (1)
                  ⎝                                                  ⎠
where φ > 1 is the elasticity of substitution between home and foreign goods, and θ [n* ] is the
own-goods bias coefficient that depends endogenously on the number of imported varieties (see
the appendix for the derivation):
                               1                      1 − n*
            θ [ n* ] ≡              , 1 − θ [ n *
                                                  ] ≡        , 0 ≤ θ [ n* ] ≤ 1
                             2 − n*                   2 − n*
       Consumption of the home country’s own-good is in turn defined as a CES consumption
index of its nontraded ( CHN ) and traded own goods ( CHT ):
                                                                                             φ −1                        φ −1
                                           φ −1                         φ −1
                      φ −1
                                                                                    ⎛C ⎞                       ⎛C ⎞
                                n                      1
                             = ∫ ( cHi )          + ∫ ( cHi )
                                                                                              φ                           φ
             ( CH )    φ                    φ                            φ     di = ⎜ HN ⎟          + (1 − n ) ⎜ HT ⎟               (2)
                                0                      n                            ⎝ n ⎠                      ⎝1− n ⎠
                                                                    φ                                                           φ
                    ⎡       1
                                              ⎡      ⎤ φ −1
                                                          1
                                                                     φ −1   ⎤ φ −1
                                                ⎛       ⎞
                                    n         φ −1          1
                      ⎛   ⎞
                                                              ( cHi ) φ di ⎥⎥
                            φ                      1      φ
                                       CHT ≡ ⎢⎜
                        1
                  ≡ ⎢⎜ ⎟            ∫0 ( cHi ) φ di ⎥⎥ ,
                                              ⎢⎝ 1 − n ⎟⎠ ∫n
where CHN                                                                             (3, 4)
                    ⎢⎝ n ⎠
                    ⎣                         ⎣     ⎦                       ⎦
and lower cases are used to denote consumption of individual varieties i of each differentiated
good. Again note that the elasticity of substitution among individual varieties of the home good
and the foreign good is also assumed equal to φ . 12 At home, the HN goods occupy [ 0, n ] and the
HT goods [ n, 1] . (Correspondingly, abroad the FN goods occupy ⎡⎣0, n* ⎤⎦ and the FT goods ⎡⎣ n* , 1⎤⎦ .)
           Analogously, the consumption index of the foreign good imported by domestic agents
CFT     is defined as
                                                                          φ
                  ⎡            1
                                                           φ −1      ⎤ φ −1
                    ⎛ 1 ⎞φ
                                        1
           CFT    ⎢
                 ≡ ⎜
                  ⎢⎝ 1 − n* ⎠⎟          ∫ (c )    Fi
                                                            φ     di ⎥
                                                                     ⎥
                                                                                                                                    (5)
                  ⎣                     n*
                                                                     ⎦


B.    Prices and Relative Demands
      Price indexes are defined as usual for each category of goods, in correspondence to the
consumption indices above:

     That is, cH i / cH j = ( pH i / pH j ) , cF* i / cF* j = ( pF* i / pF* j ) for any two goods i and j.
12                                                  −φ                                        −φ




                                                                                              9
                 (                                                                   )
                                                                                       1

           P = θ [n ] ( PH )             + (1 − θ [n ]) ( PFT )
                         *         1−φ                       *                    1−φ 1−φ
                                                                                                                                                       (6)
                     n                          1
where PH 1−φ = ∫ ( pHi )                        ∫( p )
                                  1−φ                                 1−φ
                                                                            di = n ( PHN )           + (1 − n) ( PHT )
                                                                                               1−φ                       1−φ
                                        di +             Hi                                                                                            (7)
                     0                          n
                                               1                                                               1
                   ⎛⎛ 1 ⎞ n          ⎞1−φ                                            ⎛ ⎛ 1 ⎞ 1 1−φ ⎞1−φ
           PHN   ≡ ⎜ ⎜ ⎟ ∫ pHi1−φ di ⎟ ,                                    PHT    ≡ ⎜⎜     ⎟ ∫ pHi di ⎟                                             (8, 9)
                   ⎝⎝ n ⎠ 0          ⎠                                               ⎝⎝1− n ⎠ n        ⎠
                                                         1
                 ⎛ ⎛ 1 ⎞ 1 1−φ ⎞1−φ
                 ⎜ ⎝ 1 − n* ⎟⎠ ∫* Fi
           PFT ≡ ⎜ ⎜             p   di ⎟                                                                                                             (10)
                                        ⎟
                 ⎝             n        ⎠
where P is the aggregate domestic country price level, PH is the price index of all home goods,
PHN is the price index of nontraded home goods, PHT is the price index of traded home goods,
and PFT is the price (to domestic residents) of imported foreign goods.
       Note that the consumption and price indices imply the following relative demand
functions for domestic residents:13
           CH / C = (θ [ n* ]) ( PH / P ) ,                                 CFT / C = (1 − θ [n* ]) ( PFT / P )
                                                    −φ                                                                  −φ
                                                                                                                                                      (11)

           CHN / CH = n ( PHN / PH ) ,                                      CHT / CH = (1 − n )( PHT / PH )
                                               −φ                                                                  −φ
                                                                                                                                                      (12)
and analogously for foreign residents.

C.      Production and Productivity
        The production sector in each country consists of constant-returns-to-scale technologies
for the output of each differentiated good:
         yHi = Ai lHi ,                                                               (13)
where yHi represents the level of home output, lHi denote workers employed in production, and
Ai is the home productivity coefficient for each individual good i. We employ the usual
assumption that labor is mobile across sectors within each economy, but immobile across
countries.
       Profit maximization under monopolistic competition implies pricing is determined by the
standard cost markup rule. For domestic sales of all home goods, either traded or nontraded
goods:
               φ W
        pHi =          , i ∈ [ 0,1] ,                                                (14)
              φ − 1 Ai
where W denotes the home wage rate, and φ /(1 − φ ) is the markup factor. For export sales of
traded goods,

13
     Also note that the CES specification implies for individual goods variety i
cHi / CH = ( pHi / PH ) , cHi / CHT = (1 − n )                        (p         / PHT ) , and cFi / CFT = (1 − n* )           (p        / PFT ) .
                             −φ                                  −1                      −φ                              −1                   −φ
                                                                            Hi                                                      Fi




                                                                                              10
                         φ W    1                                φ W       1
          *
         pHi =                        , i ∈ [ n,1] ,   pFi =                     , i ∈ ⎡⎣ n* ,1⎤⎦   (15, 16)
                     φ − 1 Ai 1 − τ i                          φ − 1 Ai 1 − τ i*
where τ i ( 0 < 1 − τ i < 1 ) is the fraction of each good i lost during shipment and it is assumed that
consumers fully absorb these iceberg costs of shipping.14 Thus for each traded good the foreign
sales price exceeds the domestic price by the proportion 1/ (1 − τ i ) > 1 :
                              1                                       1
          *
         pHi = pHi                 ,                   pFi = pFi
                                                              *

                             1−τ i                                 1 − τ i*
Note that, in the absence of transport costs, sales prices are equalized across markets for each
good i, i.e. pHi = pHi
                    *
                       , pFi = pFi
                                *
                                   .
       One important feature of the model is the distribution of productivities across each
country. Firms in the domestic country have a distribution of productivity levels given by F [ Ai ] .
Among these firms, n = 1 − F [ An ] are nontraders and 1 − n = F [ An ] are exporters.
        We define special weighted productivity averages for home goods A , nontraded home
goods AN , and traded home goods AT : 15
                             1

        ( )
                  φ −1
            A           ≡ ∫ Ai di ,
                                  φ −1
                                                                                                      (17)
                             0
                                         n

        (                )
                          φ −1    1
            A N [ n ]           ≡ ∫ ( Ai ) di ,
                                           φ −1
                                                                                                      (18)
                                  n0

                                  ⎛ 1 ⎞ φ −1
                                             1

        ( A [ n])
                         φ −1
                                 ≡⎜     ⎟ ∫ Ai di .                                                   (19)
                                  ⎝1− n ⎠ n
              T


The foreign productivity averages are analogous.
       If goods are ordered with increasing productivity, then ∂AT / ∂n > 0 , ∂A N / ∂n < 0 , i.e.
average productivity rises (falls) in the traded sector (nontraded) sector with increasing n.
Intuitively, as the share of nontraded goods in the economy rises, goods at the low productivity
end of the traded goods sector become nontraded, and the average level of productivity of all
remaining traded goods rises. 16
        Transport costs may also vary heterogeneously across firms. We define the “effective”
productivity of home good exports as Ai (1 − τ i ) , i.e. productivity adjusted by the transport costs of
goods exported abroad, since higher τ effectively lowers the productivity of these goods relative
to the same goods sold domestically.


14
   For example, if τi = 0.5 , then 50% of good i is lost in shipment and the firm doubles the price of the
good that reaches the foreign market.
15
   As pointed out by Melitz (2003), weighting by the elasticity parameter φ , makes the weights
proportional to the relative output shares of firms.
   Note ( A ) = n ( A N [n]) + (1 − n) ( AT [n]) .
16            φ −1            φ −1                 φ −1




                                                                     11
        We define the average effective productivity of home exports A(1−τ )T as
                                    ⎛ 1 ⎞
                                                1

        (                   )             ⎟ ∫ ( (1 − τ i ) Ai   )
                            φ −1                                φ −1
            A(1−τ )T [n]          ≡⎜                                  di                      (20)
                                    ⎝1− n ⎠ n
where the “T” in the subscript indicates that these averages are computed over the range of
goods that are traded. It is straightforward to express the price index for nontraded and traded
home goods in terms of these productivity averages by using (14) to substitute for pHi in (8) and
(9):
                      φ ⎛ W ⎞                                     ⎛ φ ⎞ W
         PHN =          ⎜          ⎟,                       PHT = ⎜       ⎟                (21, 22)
                  φ − 1 ⎝ A N [n] ⎠                              ⎝ φ − 1 ⎠ AT [n]
with (7) implying
                   φ W
         PH =                                                                                  (23)
                 φ − 1 A
Correspondingly, the price of home goods exported to foreign residents is
              ⎛ φ ⎞ W
          *
         PHT =⎜       ⎟                                                                        (24)
              ⎝ φ − 1 ⎠ A(1−τ )T [ n]
        Equations (21) and (22) express the prices of nontraded and traded goods as functions of
the wage rate W, the relevant productivity averages, and the share of nontraded goods n. Observe
that these prices are increasing in the wage rate and decreasing in average productivity. Since A
is independent of n, the nontraded vs. traded goods composition of the economy affects PH only
through its effect on the average wage level in the economy. In the absence of any transport costs
at all, all goods are traded ( n = 0 ), implying A = A(1−τ )T = AT , and prices of all goods are
equalized: PH = PHT = PHT
                       *
                          . Keep in mind that n (and n* ) is itself an endogenous variable that will
be solved as part of the general equilibrium system

D.      Marginal Trading Condition
        The additional profit to a home firm i of exporting to the foreign market may be written:
                  ⎛             W 1          ⎞ *
        π Hi
          *
             = ⎜ pHi
                  *
                     −                       ⎟ cHi − Wf X                                     (25a)
                  ⎝             Ai 1 − τ i   ⎠
where the operating profits are defined as the export price minus marginal cost, times the volume
of sales to foreign residents. We follow Ghironi and Melitz (2004) in assuming that firms employ
domestic workers to cover the fixed costs. With fX measured in units of effective domestic labor
and W as the wage rate of this labor, labor costs are expressed as Wf X .17 If this additional profit is



17
  In general, the effective labor employed to cover the fixed costs should depend on the productivity of
the labor employed and the wage rate should be scaled by this level of productivity, which we can


                                                                            12
positive, the firm will choose to export; if negative, the firm will not. This provides the condition
that pins down the index of the marginal trading firm and hence the share of nontraded goods.
For firm index i = n the profit from exporting is exactly zero, so
        ⎛ *     W 1 ⎞ *
        ⎜ pHn −            ⎟ cHn = Wf X                                                      (25b)
        ⎝       An 1 − τ n ⎠


E.      Closing and Solving the Model
        Labor market equilibrium in each country requires that labor employed in production of
nontraded and traded home goods plus labor employed to cover the fixed costs of exporting
equal the (exogenous) domestic labor supply LH . In the appendix we show that this condition
implies the following relation for the home country18:
                              ⎛ φ −1⎞
        WLH − (1 − n) f X W = ⎜     ⎟ ⎡⎣ PH CH + PHT CHT ⎤⎦
                                                  *   *
                                                                                              (26)
                              ⎝ φ ⎠
i.e. the domestic wage bill—net of wages paid for workers employed in covering fixed costs,
W (1 − n) fX —is proportional to the value of home goods consumed domestically or exported, with
the proportionality constant equal to 1 minus the profit rate 1/ φ .
       We close the model with the balanced trade condition that the value of exports equals the
value of imports
          *
        PHT  *
            CHT = PFT CFT                                                          (27)
and the normalization condition
        P* = 1 .                                                                            (28)
       Equilibrium determines the 24 variables C , CH , CHN , C HT , CFT , P, PH , PHN , PHT , PFT , W ,
and n and their foreign counterparts (denoted by *) by solving the system of 24 equations (1)-(7),
(21)-(22), (25b), and (26) plus their foreign counterparts, together with (27) and (28). In words,
production markups link prices to wages. Standard CES demand conditions link prices to
consumption quantities and, thence, via technology, to derived labor demand. Market clearing
(including balanced trade) and the numéraire choice yield a solution conditional on given
nontraded shares n and n* . The marginal trading conditions render the producers of the
borderline traded-nontraded good indifferent between home and foreign sales, and, given the
costs of shipping, this pins down n and n* in equilibrium and completes the solution.




denote AfX AfX may be assumed exogenously given or related to productivity elsewhere in the economy,
e.g. A , the average aggregate productivity level. We abstract from this issue by normalizing AfX to 1.
18
  When all home goods are nontraded, i.e. n =1, then no labor is employed to cover fixed costs of
exporting.


                                                              13
IV.     Analytical Results and Discussion

        In this section we discuss some of the general insights of our framework for economic
integration. In particular, we focus on illustrating the differential effects of changes in iceberg
and fixed costs on cross-country price differences and trade flows. Simulations in the following
section will complete the analysis and understanding of the model.19

A.     Preliminaries: Decomposition into Homogenous and Heterogeneous Components.
       Our model potentially permits heterogeneity in two different dimensions: in terms of
productivity and in iceberg transport costs. In the following discussion it will prove useful to
decompose productivity and iceberg transport costs for good i into homogenous ( α ) and
heterogeneous ( β ) components. We will address two (polar) cases: (i) heterogeneity in
productivity only, and (ii) heterogeneity in iceberg costs only (we report only home country
expressions; the foreign country counterparts are analogous):
       In the case of heterogeneity in productivity only, we may write the distributions as
        Ai = α A β A [i ] ,     i ∈ [ 0,1] ,   0 < α A, βA
        1 − τ i = α1−τ ,                 i ∈ [ 0,1] ,      0 ≤ α 1−τ ≤ 1
implying effective productivity can be expressed as
        Ai (1 − τ i ) = (α A β A [i ])α1−τ .
Changes in α A , α 1−τ represent balanced changes in productivity and transport costs affecting all
goods equally. Note a rise in α1−τ implies a decline in iceberg costs. It follows that the
productivity averages can be expressed (with the foreign counterparts defined analogously) as:
                                     1

        A = α ⎡⎢ ( β [i ])φ −1 di ⎤⎥ ≡ α β
                                      φ −1
                                                ( )
                 1
                                             i
              A ∫    A                     A   A                                           (29a)
                ⎣0                  ⎦
                                                    1

        A [ n] = α ⎡⎢ 1 ( β [i ])φ −1 di ⎤⎥ ≡ α β
                                             φ −1
                                                           (         )
                             1
                                                    i [ n]
          T        A
                     ⎣ 1 − n ∫
                             n
                               A
                                           ⎦
                                                  A  AT                                    (30a)

                                                           1
                                  ⎡ 1 1                         ⎤ φ −1
                                            (          )                 (             )
                                                        φ −1
        A(1−τ )T [ n ] = α Aα1−τ ⎢       ∫   β   [i ]       di             i
                                                                ⎥ ≡ α Aα1−τ β AT [n]       (31a)
                                      −
                                                A
                                  ⎣ 1   n n                     ⎦




19
   Bergin, Glick, and Taylor (2004) formulate a similar model without iceberg costs in order to investigate
the effects of productivity growth on the real exchange rate and the range of goods traded. Their
framework provides a more generalized approach to the Balassa-Samuelson hypothesis and its
relationship to long-run growth.



                                                               14
Assuming that goods are ordered with increasing productivity i.e. ∂β A / ∂i > 0 , then ∂ βi AT / ∂n > 0 ,
∂AT / ∂n > 0 . That is, average productivity in the traded sector rises as n increases and the traded
goods share declines.
       In the alternative case of heterogeneity in transport costs only, we write the distributions
        Ai = α A ,             i ∈ [ 0,1] ,   0 <αA
        1 − τ i = α1−τ β1−τ [i ] ,       i ∈ [ 0,1] ,        0 ≤ α 1−τ , β 1−τ ≤ 1
implying effective productivity can be expressed as
                                 (
         Ai (1 − τ i ) = α A α1−τ β1−τ [i ] . )
The corresponding averages are
        A = α A                                                                                                         (29b)
        AT [n] = α A                                                                                                    (30b)
                                                              1
                                  ⎡ 1 1
        A(1−τ )T [ n ] = α Aα1−τ ⎢
                                  ⎣ 1 − n ∫
                                          n
                                            ( β1−τ [i ] )
                                                         φ −1
                                                              di
                                                                 ⎤ φ −1
                                                                 ⎦
                                                                             (
                                                                             i
                                                                 ⎥ ≡ α Aα1−τ β (1−τ )T [ n]      )                       (31b)

Assuming that goods are ordered with decreasing iceberg costs, i.e. ∂β1−τ / ∂i > 0 , then
 i
∂β                     
   (1−τ )T / ∂n > 0 , ∂A(1−τ )T / ∂n > 0 , i.e., average heterogeneity and transportability rise in the traded

sector with increasing n.

B.      Tradability
        One immediate conclusion is the equivalence, in terms of their effects on tradability, of
the trade cost heterogeneity that we advocate and the heterogeneity in productivity that has been
the focus of other recent papers. This may be seen by considering the trading condition for firm i
(25a), substituting out all firm-specific endogenous variables and making some additional
                                                                                                *
simplifying substitutions. We use the price setting conditions (15) and (24) to substitute for pHi

                                                                                       (p              )
                                                                                                           −φ
                                                    = (1 − n )
     *                                     *     *                                −1        *       *                *
and PHT and the relative demand condition cHi / CHT                                         Hi   / PHT          for cHi to find:

                             (          )
                                            −φ
                            ⎛ A               *
                                         [n] CHT   ⎞
        ( A (1 − τ ) )      ⎜                      ⎟= f .
                        φ       (1−τ ) T
           i       i
                            ⎜⎜ (φ − 1)(1 − n )     ⎟⎟  X

                             ⎝                      ⎠
In this equation, the good-specific trade cost term and that for technology appear only as a
product, Ai (1 − τ i ) , so it is only the net effect of the two terms that matters for the relative
ranking of varieties in terms of their tradability. For example, even if a good i is more costly to
trade than a good j, τ i > τ j , good i nevertheless can be more tradable if it has a sufficiently high
level of productivity so that Ai (1 − τ i ) > Aj (1 − τ j ) . Conversely, there also may be some highly
productive goods that nevertheless will probably never be traded, because they have particularly



                                                                  15
high good-specific transport costs. Goods can in principle be ranked in terms of tradability using
this composite metric.
    We next obtain some insight into the extensive margin of trade by considering the trading
                                                                                    *
condition for the marginal good (25b). Using the price setting condition (15) for pHn and noting

                                                                                  (p              )
                                                                                                      −φ
                                             = (1 − n )
                                    *     *                                  −1        *       *
that the relative demand condition cHi / CHT                                           Hi   / PHT          holds for all goods i in the range
[ n, 1] :
                                                    −φ
            ⎪⎧ 1 ⎛          1        ⎞ ⎪⎫ ⎪⎧⎛ pHn
                                               *
                                                  ⎞ CHT   * ⎫
                                                             ⎪
             ⎨        ⎜⎜             ⎟⎟ ⎬ ⎨⎜ * ⎟             ⎬ = fX .                                                        (32)
             ⎪⎩ φ − 1  ⎝ n(
                         A 1 − τ n ) ⎠⎪ ⎭⎩ ⎪⎝ PHT ⎠    1 − n ⎪⎭
In this form, we can infer that the nth firm’s variable profits depend on two factors: (1) per unit
export profits – the term in the first set of curlicue brackets on the LHS, expressed as a
proportion 1/(φ − 1) of marginal costs, and (ii) the quantity of exports sold – the term in the
second set of curlicue brackets. The latter, in turn, can be decomposed into the relative price
effect on demand for the nth firm’s exports, ( pHn       ) , and its share of the aggregate level of
                                                *     *                            −φ
                                                   / PHT
                      *
exports sold abroad, CHT /(1 − n) .
        When variable exports profits exceed the fixed costs of exporting—either because per
unit profits or the volume of exports are high – goods with effective productivity lower than that
of the initial nth good will become traded (since even though Ai (1 − τ i ) < An (1 − τ n ) for these goods,
it has become profitable to export them). The resulting decline in n and rise in the share of
tradable goods 1-n raises the marginal cost and price of the marginally traded good and reduces
its share of aggregate exports. These effects cause both per unit profits and the export volume to
fall. In equilibrium, profits are reduced to just covering the fixed costs of the nth good entering
into the foreign export market.
         Equation (32) is useful for understanding the effect of trade policies on the entry of new
goods into trade, and how this depends on the type of trade policy. We consider cuts in iceberg
costs and fixed costs in turn.
         Consider first a balanced cut in per unit (iceberg) costs, i.e. a rise in α1−τ , α1*−τ . Equation
(32) suggests a number of offsetting effects that could make the effect on new entry of exporters
small. First, under monopolistic competition, firms pass on tariff changes into the sales price
charged to foreign consumers (see expression (15)); consequently the lower export price implies
lower per unit export profits for the nth firm. Second, because the cut in tariffs affects all traded
goods equally, the relative price of the nth firm’s exports ( pHn
                                                               *     *
                                                                  / PHT ) is unaffected.20 Lastly, it is

20
     These effects can be seen more clearly by noting that (29)-(31) imply (32) may be expressed as
                                                     −φ
 ⎧⎪ 1 ⎛          1         ⎞ ⎫⎪ ⎪⎧⎛ βi (1−τ )T [n] ⎞ ⎛ CHT
                                                        *
                                                           ⎞ ⎪⎫
 ⎨      ⎜                  ⎟ ⎬ ⎨⎜⎜                 ⎟ ⎜
                                                   ⎟       ⎟ ⎬ = f X with productivity heterogeneity only, and
⎩⎪φ − 1 ⎝ α Aα1−τ β1−τ [n] ⎠ ⎭⎪ ⎩⎪⎝ β1−τ [n] ⎠ ⎝ 1 − n ⎠ ⎭⎪


                                                                        16
                                                         *
only though an increase in demand for aggregate exports CHT , i.e. an increase in trade at the
intensive margin, that the nth firm may experience an overall increase in export profits. If
aggregate exports increase sufficiently to raise variable profits above fixed costs, then new goods
may become traded and trade will increase at the extensive margin (i.e. the equilibrium n falls
and the share of traded goods 1-n increases).
        The increase in aggregate exports reflects increased trade at the intensive margin. The
amount by which aggregate exports rise depends on the elasticity of demand for exports.
Considering the foreign counterpart to equation (10)
         = (1 − θ [n]) ( PHT / P* ) C *
      *                   *         −φ
     CHT
we see that a per unit cost cut induces firms to lower the relative price of tradables (i.e.
 *
PHT / P* falls), which boosts foreign demand for home goods exported to the foreign market. It is
apparent that the magnitude of increased demand for exports falls as the elasticity of demand
declines. Consequently, the effect on the profits of the marginal trader and the incentive for new
entrants is less as well.21 In fact, because of the negative effects of a cut in tariffs on per unit
profits, we cannot rule out the possibility that this effect dominates any increase in export
volume, implying profits of the marginal trader actually decline, leading him to exit the tradables
market. Numerical simulations for a calibrated version of the model will show later that the net
effect tends to be a rise in profits, implying some fall in n, and some increase in trade at the
extensive margin.
          Consider now the alternative policy, a decline in fixed costs ( f X , f X* ). Since fixed trade
costs only enter into the marginal trading condition; they do not enter into the decision rules
about price setting or how much to produce and sell. Hence, in the case of a fixed trade cost
reduction, there is a direct effect raising the export profits of the marginal exporter, since
variable profits will exceed the now lower fixed costs of exports. There is no effect on per unit
profits—unlike the case of a tariff cut—or the relative price of the marginal exporter. The
positive export profits for the marginal trader leads to an increase in trade at the extensive margin
(i.e. decline in n) as it becomes profitable for new goods to enter the traded sector.
           To summarize, a cut in fixed costs will work largely through the entry of new goods
into the traded sector, implying greater trade at the extensive margin. In contrast, a cut in per-unit
trade costs will tend to raise exports mostly through increasing the intensity of trade in

 ⎧⎪ 1 ⎛        1                  i [n] ⎞ −φ ⎛ C * ⎞ ⎪⎫
                         ⎞ ⎫⎪ ⎪⎧⎛ β
 ⎨       ⎜               ⎟ ⎬ ⎨⎜⎜            ⎟⎟ ⎜ 1 − n ⎟ ⎬ = f X with transport cost heterogeneity only.
                                    AT             HT

⎪⎩ φ − 1   α α   β
         ⎝ A 1−τ A ⎠ ⎪⎭ ⎪⎩⎝ A
                   [ n ]          β   [ n ] ⎠ ⎝        ⎠ ⎪⎭
21
  We conjecture that this is most likely to occur as one approaches the limiting case of Cobb-Douglas
preferences between home and foreign goods, where elasticity for imports is unity. In our current
specification with endogenous home bias weights, however, we are precluded from considering this case
because of the constraint that the elasticity between home and foreign goods be the same as that among
individual varieties of home (and foreign ) goods, which must exceed unity with CES preferences. With
exogenous home bias weights, this constraint can be dropped and the different elasticities can be posited.


                                                              17
previously traded goods; i.e. firms already trading, will export more. The extensive effect on
trade is dampened in this case because lower marginal costs lead to proportionately lower prices,
and hence lower per unit profits from exporting. This limits the extent to which new firms find it
profitable to engage in exporting.

C.    Law of One Price and Price Divergence
      We next examine the circumstances under which deviations from the law of one price
may emerge in our model. At the level of individual goods i, it is immediately apparent that
monopolistic pricing—see expressions (15) and (16)—implies the export price exceeds the
domestic price of good i by a wedge associated with transport costs:
          *
         pHi   1          1
             =      =               > 1,   i ∈ [ n, 1] .
         pHi 1 − τ i α1−τ β1−τ [i ]
With homogeneous trade costs the degree of price divergence is constant across sectors.
However, if β1−τ [i ] and 1 − τ i vary with i, the degree of price divergence varies with i as well.
Thus variations across sectors in the degree of LOP deviations depend on the presence of
heterogeneous transport costs; with monopolistic pricing, heterogeneous productivity is not
sufficient.
        We will summarize results for price dispersion in terms of cross-border deviations in
average tradable prices. Expressions (22) and (24) together with (19) and (20) imply
         *
        PHT    AT [n]
            =              >1                                                               (33)
        PHT A(1−τ )T [ n]

since the presence of transport costs implies AT > A(1−τ )T , i.e. the average effective productivity of
tradable goods (i.e., including transport costs) is less than the average productivity of tradable
goods. Consequently, the average price to foreign residents of exported home goods is higher
than the average domestic price of the same goods at home. This relative price ratio roughly
corresponds to the measure of price dispersion used in our empirical results reported in Table 1.22
        How does economic integration affect price deviations? The answer depends on the form
of liberalization – iceberg transport costs or fixed trade costs—and on whether heterogeneity
exits in the form of productivity or iceberg costs. We know from the previous section that both
forms of liberalization induce some increase in trade at the extensive margin, i.e. decline in n,
with this increase being greater in the case of a fixed trade cost reduction. As we shall see, the
effect on trade liberalization depends on how the endogenous change in the degree of tradability
interacts with the nature of heterogeneity. We again consider the effects of cuts in iceberg costs
and in fixed costs in turn, and this time we must also distinguish between alternative types of

22
  Our empirical measure of dispersion is constructed from mean squared errors with equal weights across
goods. Our theoretical measure does not square price deviations and uses CES weights. But because all
deviations are positive here by construction, squaring does not matter and the two measures of price
dispersion are monotonically related.


                                                           18
heterogeneity. The reader will find the results for the four cases discussed here summarized in
Figure 2.
       First, consider a decline in iceberg costs ( α1−τ , α1*−τ rise) under the assumption of
productivity heterogeneity. In this case, (30a) and (31a) imply (33) reduces to
          *
         PHT   1
             =    ,                                                                                (34a)
         PHT α1−τ
indicating that deviations from LOP at the aggregate level depend only on the homogenous
transport cost parameter α1−τ , An increase in α1−τ , i.e. balanced decrease in transport costs,
                   *
implies a fall in PHT / PHT and reduces the average deviation from LOP.
       Next, consider how this policy changes under transport cost heterogeneity. Transport cost
heterogeneity implies that (33) reduces to
          *
         PHT         1
             =                   ,                                                                 (34b)
                  i
         PHT α1−τ β (1−τ )T [ n]
and deviations from LOP at the aggregate level depend on the relative heterogeneity of transport
costs ( βi (1−τ )T ) as well as on the homogeneous transport cost component ( α1−τ ). The direct effect
of a homogenous cut in costs (i.e. increase in α1−τ ) is to reduce price divergence. But there is
also a potentially offsetting effect to consider through the endogenous changes in tradability on
the heterogeneous component of transport costs. Specifically, a decrease in n, implying an
increase in the number of tradable varieties, implies that trade costs are averaged over goods with
higher costs, i.e., lower 1 − τ i . The resulting fall in βi (1−τ )T [n] (since ∂ βi (1−τ )T [n]/ ∂n > 0 ) raises
the degree of price divergence. Our simulation exercises (in Section V) reveal that the latter
effect is dominated by the direct effect of the cut in costs, and price divergence falls on balance.
        Now consider the type of policy that cuts fixed costs ( f X , f X* fall). Fixed costs do not
affect deviations from LOP at the sector level, but they can affect deviations at aggregate level to
the extent they affect n. In the case of productivity heterogeneity, the relation (34a) applies, and
the degree of price divergence is unaffected by any change in fixed costs. Intuitively, given that
price setting is determined by per unit costs and not fixed costs, a cut in fixed costs has no effect
on export prices. Thus in this case there is no reason in this model to expect prices to converge as
the economies become more integrated.
        However, in the presence of transport cost heterogeneity, (34b) holds and deviations from
LOP depend on the heterogeneity of transport costs ( βi (1−τ )T ) as well homogeneous transport costs
( α1−τ ). In this case a decline in fixed costs that fosters decreased n and increased tradability,
reduces βi (1−τ )T [n] and raises price disparity. In words, if the source of heterogeneity is in terms
of iceberg costs, then the newly tradable goods systematically will be those goods with higher
per unit costs. Given the lower fixed costs, it now becomes profitable to trade these goods,
despite the higher per unit costs. Given that price setting responds to these costs, the newly

                                                        19
traded goods will tend to have a greater price wedge between national markets, so that average
price dispersion of all traded goods will increase.
        To sum up, iceberg costs play an important role in explaining market segmentation as
measured in terms of price deviations, because fixed costs have no impact on the pricing
behavior of monopolistically competitive firms. Cuts in iceberg costs reduce price disparities
across markets. Moreover, only heterogeneity in iceberg costs can explain heterogeneity of LOP
deviations. In contrast, fixed trade costs reductions in the presence of transport cost
heterogeneity has the potential to explain why price divergence may actually increase when
account is taken of endogenous changes in the tradability of goods.
        One can also use the model to trace the effects of policies on a third important variable,
the total volume of trade. We find there are several offsetting effects which obscure analytical
conclusions. So we instead present results for this variable in the numerical simulations below,
and refer the reader interested in the analytical discussion to the appendix.

D.      The Possibility of Endogenous Markups
        In this section we briefly deal with another possible channel by which the extensive
margin could affect price dispersion. It is convenient for the analysis above that the equilibrium
conditions governing price setting are not direct functions of the number of firms. This is a result
of following the convention in international macro modeling, where the market structure is
monopolistic competition and preferences have a constant elasticity, together implying that
prices are a constant markup over costs. However, one possible reason offered for price
dispersion across European countries is that there is greater competition in some national
markets than others, implying that trade may reduce price dispersion by increasing competition
in markets where it was especially low.
        Several theories posit reasons why the elasticity of substitution may not be constant, but
instead be a positive function of the number of firms competing in a market. This property would
be implied by the translog preferences of Feenstra (2002) and Bergin and Feenstra (2001), and
the strategic behavior in Jaimovich (2004) and Atkeson and Burstein (2005). Although
combining either of these features in a model with the heterogeneity emphasized here is
prohibitive, we can infer the implications if we specify the elasticity of substitution between
home goods to be a positive function of the mass of home firms in a given national market. In
this case the elasticity faced by home exporters in the foreign market is a negative function of the
share of nontraded goods: φ = φ [1 − n], ∂φ / ∂n < 0 . The elasticity for these home firms in the
domestic market can be expressed as φ [1] > φ [n] for n < 1 ; hence the elasticity of substitution is
greater at home than abroad. Working through the price setting conditions of the model, the
condition characterizing price dispersion (33) is replaced by:




                                                   20
                  ⎛ φ [n] ⎞
                  ⎜
           *
                    φ [n] − 1 ⎟⎠ AT [n]
                 =⎝
          PHT
                                           >1                                                      (33’)
          PHT     ⎛ φ [1] ⎞ A(1−τ )T [ n]
                  ⎜           ⎟
                  ⎝ φ [1] − 1 ⎠
         φ [n]         φ [1]
since              >           and AT [n] > A(1−τ )T [ n] . Because there are fewer home firms in the foreign
        φ [n] − 1 φ [1] − 1
market to compete with, the elasticity is lower and the markup higher, generating a new reason
for price dispersion. Condition (34a) characterizing price dispersion under productivity
heterogeneity becomes
           *
          PHT  ⎛ 1 ⎞ ⎛ φ [ n] ⎞ ⎛ φ [1] ⎞
              =⎜     ⎟⎜            ⎟ ⎜           ⎟.                                                (34a’)
          PHT ⎝ α1−τ ⎠ ⎝ φ [n] − 1 ⎠ ⎝ φ [1] − 1 ⎠
This indicates that a rise in trade at the extensive margin that lowers n can now lower price
dispersion (since ∂φ / ∂n < 0 ), whereas in the previous model it had no effect. Similarly, for the
case of trade cost heterogeneity, condition (34b) becomes
           *
          PHT  ⎛        1          ⎞ ⎛ φ [n] ⎞ ⎛ φ [1] ⎞
              =⎜                   ⎟⎜            ⎟ ⎜           ⎟.                                  (34b’)
          PHT ⎜ α1−τ β(1−τ )T [n] ⎟ ⎝ φ [n] − 1 ⎠ ⎝ φ [1] − 1 ⎠
               ⎝                   ⎠
New trade at the extensive margin now has offsetting effects: still raising average price
dispersion though the average trade cost term ( β(1−τ )T [n] ), but now also lowering price dispersion
through changes in the markup.
        So one certainly can posit a model where price-setting decisions are affected by policies
cutting fixed costs, working though the extensive margin, and not just by policies cutting per-unit
costs, as implied by our benchmark model. But this additional effect on prices would work in the
wrong direction to explain the price observations noted at the beginning of this paper, working
always to reduce price dispersion after new trade, not increase it. For this reason, we chose not to
pursue this modeling path in this paper, instead developing a model in a new direction.

V.       Numerical Results

A.      Calibrations
        In several of the cases discussed above, trade liberalization had ambiguous effects, due to
the fact that they involved multiple effects, sometimes working in offsetting directions. In part to
help resolve these ambiguities, we use numerical simulations below.




                                                            21
        Simulations calibrate the parameter φ at the value 6. This parameter represents the
elasticity between any two varieties, and is set to reflect a price markup over cost of 0.2, which is
a common value used in the literature (see Obstfeld and Rogoff, 2000).23
         Simulations require that particular distributions be specified for the heterogeneous
elements. Productivity will follow the distribution:
                 Ai = α A (1 + i )                     i ∈ [ 0,1] ,
                                     βA
                                          ,                                0 <αA
and iceberg costs follow the distribution
                 1 − τ i = α1−τ (1 + i )             , i ∈ [ 0,1] ,
                                              β1−τ
                                                                           0 ≤ α 1−τ
where α A and α1−τ are scale parameters representing level effects common to all goods, while
 β A and β1−τ are parameters indicating the degree of heterogeneity over firms along the
continuum indexed by i.

B.     Per Unit Cost Reductions
       The first simulation will consider the case where the source of heterogeneity is
productivity, with distribution parameters set at α A = 0.5, β A = 1 , and α 1−τ = 0.9, β1−τ = 0 . This
implies a constant per-unit trade cost near 10% for all firms, which could be interpreted as a tariff
rate. Figure 3 illustrates the distributions for technology and iceberg costs over the continuum of
home goods. The experiment will consider a symmetric rise in α 1−τ of one percent for both
countries, which lifts the 1 − τ i line for all varieties. This could be viewed as a 10% scaled
reduction in the tariff rate. To ensure a share of nontraded goods near fifty percent, the fixed cost
 f X is calibrated at 0.056. The foreign country is exactly symmetric.
         The results of this experiment are shown in Table 4, where column 1 reports initial values
before the tariff reduction. The export share of less than one half indicates some degree of home
bias in consumption, arising from the presence of trade costs that make imported goods more
expensive than domestic goods. Column two reports the percentage change from steady state
values after the tariff reduction. The finding in Section IV regarding clear convergence in
relative prices is confirmed in the last line of the table. The ten percent reduction of per unit
costs, which themselves are ten percent of goods’ value, amount to a one percent reduction in per
unit cost, which directly translates into an exactly 1% reduction in the price deviation of home
traded goods across countries. The last column of the table shows percent changes from steady
state if the share of nontraded goods is assumed to be exogenous at the steady state level. This
column makes clear that this simple price convergence result does not depend upon entry of new
firms into exporting.


23
  Note that this elasticity also doubles as the elasticity between home and foreign goods. Recent work
suggests that this elasticity might be lower than 6, but as discussed earlier in the paper, separating these
two elasticities is difficult when the set of home goods exported is allowed to change endogenously.


                                                                      22
         One ambiguity in the analytical solution is the degree of entry and increase in trade share.
While the fall in export prices raises foreign demand for home exports, thereby increasing the
profitability of paying the fixed cost of exporting, any new entrants will have systematically
lower productivity and hence higher prices than the average among previous entrants. Line 1 of
the table shows that there indeed is entry of new exporters, as the share of nontraded goods (n)
falls. Line 2 shows that this enhances the increase in trade volume, compared to the case where
there was no entry shown in the last column. But line 3 shows that the contribution of this
extensive margin shift is relatively modest, accounting for 20 percent of the increased trade.
         Next, we explore the effects of assuming heterogeneity in terms of transport costs instead
of productivities. Distribution parameters in this case are: α A = 1, β A = 0 , α 1−τ = 0.5 and β1−τ = 1 .
Figure 4 illustrates the distributions. Again consider an experiment where α 1−τ rises one percent,
representing a tariff cut that raises the 1 − τ i line for all varieties.
    The effects of the tariff cut on quantity variables under transport cost heterogeneity are
qualitatively similar to those under productivity heterogeneity above (see Table 5). Once again
there is entry at the extensive margin which enhances export volume; once again the contribution
of the extensive margin is modest, here contributing 23% of the rise in trade. But the response of
price dispersion differs from the case above, in that a 1% tariff reduction no longer translates into
a full 1% reduction in price deviations. Now there is only a 0.75 percent point reduction, due to
the fact that the new entrants systematically have higher iceberg costs than the average trader,
thus putting upward pressure on the average. While this effect moderates the degree of price
convergence, it does not dominate, and on net there is positive price convergence.

C.      Fixed Cost Reduction
        Consider next experiments that instead reduce the fixed cost of trade. The two cases will
use the same pair of distributions graphed in previous section, and this will imply that the
starting values for our variables in the tables below will be the same as those in the two tables
above. The experiment will be a reduction in the term f X by 10%.
        First, compare fixed versus per-unit cost cuts for the case of technological heterogeneity.
The most striking feature in Table 6 is that there is no price convergence, confirming the finding
in the analytical results in the previous section. Simulations have more new things to say about
quantities, since they present more ambiguities in the analytics. Comparing Table 6 to Table 4,
we can confirm the conjecture that there should be much more entry into exporting. However,
despite this greater extensive margin growth, the overall export share in GDP rises less. This is
because as new firms enter the market, firms previously trading experience an actual decline in
their share of the export market. This implies the intensive margin growth is smaller, so that the
share of new trade due the extensive margin exceeds 100%.
        Under transport cost heterogeneity (see Table 7) the price implications are even more
dramatic. Once again the extensive margin effect drives the rise in overall trade. As conjectured


                                                     23
in the analytics, the new entrants systematically have a greater price wedge, and because the
extensive margin dominates here, there is actual price divergence on average. This result
confirms the analytical prediction, showing that the model can offer one potential explanation for
why policies aimed at market integration may sometimes imply negative average price
convergence.

VI.    Concluding Arguments

         This paper suggests a new approach for thinking about international macroeconomic
segmentation and integration. Empirical evidence suggests that price convergence and trade
volume expansion, two common measures for goods market integration, need not coincide.
Recent efforts to promote economic integration in Europe and in North America seem to have
prompted significant increases in trade volume, much of it on the extensive margin. But there
appears to be very little price convergence, and some evidence suggests price divergence for
many traded goods.
         We propose a model of economic integration that is more general in its implications, and
which can explain a range of varied relationships between price and quantities. The model relied
upon two distinctive features. First, as an alternative to heterogeneity in productivity, it allows
for heterogeneity in terms of iceberg trade costs, where the reason some goods are not traded is
that these goods tend to have higher costs of trade. This feature is motivated by recent empirical
work in the trade literature (Hummels 1999, 2001; Anderson and van Wincoop, 2003) which
emphasize that trade costs vary greatly across classes of goods and play an important role in
trade decisions. The existence of heterogeneous trade costs implies that when goods market
integration promotes new trade in the extensive margin, the new entrants systematically have
higher per unit trade costs than average trading firms. Since it is per-unit trade costs that create
price wedges between national markets, the new entrants into export markets put upward
pressure on the average price wedge, possibly increasing price divergence.
         The second model feature is the distinction between fixed costs and per unit costs of
trade. If trade reform exclusively takes the form of lower tariffs paid on a per unit bases, this
tends to lower the price wedge for all goods. However, if the reform takes the form of mainly a
cut in the fixed costs of trade, then it has no effect on the price-setting of goods, and there is no
effect on the price wedge between countries.
         In different combinations, these features permit a range of degrees of price convergence.
First, a tariff cut without trade-cost heterogeneity implies price convergence, which is the
standard result of the literature. Next, the introduction of trade-cost heterogeneity limits this
price convergence, but tends not to reverse it. Further, if trade reform takes the form of fixed cost
cuts, then there will be no price convergence. Finally, when both features are combined, the
model predicts actual price divergence driven by goods market integration.



                                                 24
         While these features are useful theoretical devices for explaining the range of price and
quantity evidence in the empirical literature, we also suspect that they have relevance for recent
episodes of integration. It appears likely that recent episodes of integration have involved
significant reductions in fixed cost components, beyond tariff cuts or other costs that depend
directly on the number of units traded. Regarding NAFTA, McDaniel and Agama (2003) note
“Tariff cuts were an important component of the agreement but the non-tariff-related provisions
were arguably just as important in expanding economic ties among the members.” Examples
include creation of dispute resolution mechanisms, provisions to protect foreign investment
property rights, and protection of intellectual property rights. EMU might also involve significant
fixed-cost reductions, in that it eliminates the need to have a unit for operations in the foreign
exchange market to arrange currency hedging. Moreover, it is common to analyze the benefits of
monetary union in terms of a monetary model with shoe leather costs, where the monetary
arrangement affects the cost of going to the foreign exchange market, and the latter is a fixed
cost not depending on the volume of transactions (see Rodriguez, 2002 for an example).
         However, given that large fixed cost cuts were likely related to earlier EU integration,
when there appears to have been positive price convergence, we suspect that fixed costs by
themselves cannot provide a full explanation for the patterns in the data. Most integration
episodes likely involve a combination of both per-unit and fixed cost cuts. In addition, the
characteristics of new entrants to trade may also vary over time and across integration episodes.
This calls for further microeconomic research on the characteristics of newly traded goods.
         Our theoretical research also raises a basic question regarding the appropriate metric for
gauging international integration policies, analogous to that discussed in Feenstra (1994) for
computing import price indexes when estimating import demand functions. Most past research
has seemed to prefer price-based measures, due to fundamental problems with quantity-based
alternatives. As Engel and Rogers (1998) note, the problem with using trade flows as a measure
is that the amount of trade depends also on things like factor endowments and opportunities for
scale economies. So the fact that impediments to trade are small may not necessarily imply that
the volume of trade will be large. Price measures do not have this problem, but our model
indicates that they might suffer from other fundamental problems. Firstly, certain types of trade
reforms may have minimal or no impact on price decisions and international price wedges, even
while they affect how much is traded. Secondly, if integration takes place at the extensive
margin, especially if new goods are different from those previously traded, standard price
metrics may be misleading.24 This indicates the need for further research to find alternative
metrics of international economic integration.




24
  Feenstra (1994), for example, suggests the idea of assigning an infinite value for prices of goods in
periods where they are not available to consumers in a country.


                                                    25
References
Anderson, James E. and Eric van Wincoop, 2004, “Trade Costs,” Journal of Economic Literature
    42, 691-751.
Atkeson, Andrew and Ariel Burstein, 2005. “Trade Costs, Pricing to Market, and International
     Relative Prices,” mimeo, University of California at Los Angeles.
Baye, Michael R., Rupert Gatti, Paul Kattuman, and John Morgan, 2002. “Online Pricing and the
     Euro Changeover: Cross-Country Comparisons,” Judge Institute of Management Research
     Paper in Management Studies 17/2002, University of Cambridge.
Benassy, J.P. 1996. “Taste for Variety and Optimum Production Patterns in Monopolistic
     Competition,” Economic Letters, 52, 41-47.
Bergin, Paul R. and Robert C. Feenstra, 2001. “Pricing to Market, Staggered Contracts, and Real
     Exchange Rate Persistence,” Journal of International Economics, 54, 333-359.
Bergin, Paul R., Reuven Glick and Alan Taylor, 2004. “Productivity, Tradability, and the Long-
     Run Price Puzzle,” NBER Working paper no. 10569.
Bun, Maurice and Franc Klaassen. 2002. “Has the Euro Increased Trade?” Tinbergen Institute
     Discussion paper no. 108/2.
Crucini, Mario J. and Mototsugu Shintani, 2004. "Persistence in Law-of-One-Price Deviations:
     Evidence from Micro-data" Vanderbilt University working paper.
Crucini, Mario J., Chris I. Telmer and Marios Zachariadis, 2001, “Understanding European Real
     Exchange Rates,” forthcoming in American Economic Review.
Engel, Charles, 1999, “Accounting for Real Exchange Rate Changes,” Journal of Political
     Economy, 107 June, 507-538.
Engel, Charles and John H. Rogers, 1996, “How Wide is the Border,” American Economic
     Review 86, 1112-1125.
Engel, Charles and John H. Rogers, 1998, “Relative Price Volatility: What Role Does the Border
     Play?” International Finance Discussion paper 623. Board of Governors of the Federal
     Reserve System.
Engel, Charles and John H. Rogers, 2004. “European Product Market Integration after the Euro,”
     Economic Policy, 39, 347-384.
Feenstra, Robert, 1994. “New Product Varieties and the Measurement of International Prices,''
     American Economic Review, 84(1), 157-177.
Feenstra, Robert, 2003. “A Homothetic Utility Function for Monopolistic Competition Models,
     Without Constant Price Elasticity,” Economic Letters, 78, 79-86.
Funke Michael and Ralf Ruhwedel, 2003. “Trade, Product Variety and Welfare: A Quantitative
     Assessment for the Transition Economies in Central and Eastern Europe,” Bank of Finland
     Institute for Economies in Transition Discussion Paper 17/2003.


                                              26
Ghironi, Fabio, and Marc J. Melitz, 2004. “International Trade and Macroeconomic Dynamics
     with Heterogeneous Firms,” NBER Working paper no. 10540.
Globerman, Steven and Paul Storer, 2003, “Did the Canada – U.S. Free Trade Agreement Affect
     Economic Integration?” working paper, Western Washington University
Goldberg, Pinelopi and Frank Verboven, 2005. “Market Integration and Convergence to the Law
     of One Price: Evidence from the European Car Market,” Journal of International
     Economics, 65, 49-73.
Hillberry, Russell and Christine McDaniel. July 2002. “A Decomposition of North American
     Trade Growth since NAFTA.” US International Trade Commission working paper 2002-
     12-A.
HM Treasury, 2003. Euro 2003: EMU and Trade.
Hummels, David, 1999. “Toward a Geography of Trade Costs,” working paper, Purdue
   University.
Hummels, David, 2001. “Time as a Trade Barrier,” working paper, Purdue University.
Hummels, David and Peter Klenow, 2005. “The Variety and Quality of a Nation’s Exports,”
   American Economic Review, 95, 704-723.
Imbs, Jean and Haroon Mumtaz, Rorten O. Ravn, and Helene Rey, 2004. “Price Convergence:
     What’s on TV?” mimeo.
Jaimovich, Nir, 2004. “Firm Dynamics, Markup Variations, and the Business Cycle,” mimeo,
     University of California at Santa Cruz.
Kehoe, Timothy. 2003. “An Evaluation of the Performance of Applied General Equilibrium
    Models of the Impact of NAFTA.” Research Department Staff Report, Federal Reserve
    Bank of Minneapolis.
Kehoe, Timothy J., and Kim J. Ruhl, 2002. “How Important is the New Goods Margin in
    International Trade?” working paper, University of Minnesota.
Lutz, Matthias, 2002. “Price Convergence under EMU? First Estimates,” working paper,
      Institute of Economic, University of St. Gallen.
McDaniel, Christine A. and Laurie-Ann Agama, 2003. “The NAFTA Preference and US-Mexico
    Trade: Aggregate-Level Analysis,” World Economy, 26, 939-967.

Melitz, Marc. 2003. “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
     Industry Productivity,” Econometrica, 71, 1695-1726.
Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff, 2000. “The Six Major Puzzles in International
     Macroeconomics: Is there a Common Cause?” in Ben Bernanke and Kenneth Rogoff, eds.,
     NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Cambridge: MIT press, 339-390.
Rodriquez, Hugo, 2002. "Monetary Union and the Transaction Cost Savings of a Single
     Currency," Review of International Economics, 10, 263-277.


                                             27
Rose, Andrew, 2000. “One Money, One Market: The Effect of Common Currencies on Trade,”
     Economic Policy 15 (April), 7–33.
Ruhl, Kim J., 2003. “Solving the Elasticity Puzzle in International Economics” mimeo, Univ.
     Minnesota.




                                              28
Appendix

A.1. Derivation of Consumption Aggregate Expression (1) with Endogenous Bias Weights
       To derive (1), define consumption by domestic residents of the home good and foreign
traded good as cHi , i ∈ [ 0, 1] , an d cFT i , i ∈ ⎡⎣0, 1 − n* ⎤⎦ , respectively. We index all goods available for
consumption in the domestic country by j on the interval ⎡⎣0, 2 − n* ⎤⎦ , and order consumption as
c j = cH i f o r j = i ∈ [ 0, 1] , and c j = cFi fo r j = i + 1 , j ∈ ⎣⎡1, 2 − n* ⎦⎤ , i ∈ ⎣⎡ 0, 1 − n* ⎦⎤ . Accordingly,
assuming the elasticity of substitution between all varieties, domestic or foreign, is the constant
φ , we define aggregate consumption as
                                                  1
              φ −1
                      ⎛ 1 ⎞φ                          ⎡1                φ −1               2 − n*                  φ −1      ⎤
         C     φ
                     =⎜   * ⎟                         ⎢ ∫ ( ci      )    φ     di +          ∫      ( ci       )    φ     di ⎥
                      ⎝2−n ⎠                          ⎢⎣ 0                                   1                               ⎥⎦
                                                  1            1                                                            1          1
                                                                                   φ −1                                                    2 − n*              φ −1
                      ⎛ 1 ⎞φ ⎛ 1 ⎞φ
                                                                   1
                                                                                               ⎛ 1 − n* ⎞ φ ⎛ 1 ⎞ φ
                     =⎜      * ⎟ ⎜ ⎟
                      ⎝ 2 − n ⎠ ⎝1⎠
                                                                   ∫ ( ci
                                                                   0
                                                                               )    φ     di + ⎜      * ⎟ ⎜    * ⎟
                                                                                               ⎝ 2 − n ⎠ ⎝1− n ⎠
                                                                                                                                             ∫
                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                                    ( ci   )    φ     di

                                                      1                                                    1

                       ⎛ 1 ⎞φ          φ −1 ⎛ 1 − n* ⎞ φ          φ −1
                     = ⎜     ⎟ ( C   )  φ +
                                            ⎜        ⎟   ( C    )  φ
                       ⎝2−n ⎠               ⎝2−n ⎠
                           *       H               *         FT




                     = (θ [ n* ])φ ( CH ) φ + (1 − θ [ n* ])φ ( CFT ) φ
                                              1                 φ −1                                       1                    φ −1




                         1                      1 − n*
where θ [n* ] ≡               , 1 − θ [ n *
                                            ] ≡        , 0 ≤ θ [ n* ] ≤ 1 .
                       2 − n*                   2 − n*

A.2. Derivation of Labor Market Equilibrium Condition (26)
       Labor market equilibrium in the domestic country requires that labor employed in
production of nontraded and traded home goods plus labor employed to cover the fixed costs of
exporting equal the (exogenous) domestic labor supply LH : 25
          n                 1

         ∫ lHi di +
          0
                            ∫l
                            n
                                    Hi   di + (1 − n) f X = LH

Substituting for lHi with the production function (13):
          n                     1
              yHi                    yHi
         ∫0
              Ai
                  di +          ∫A
                                n         i
                                                  di + (1 − n) f X = LH or
                                                          *
                                                         cHi
                                1 cHi +
                                                       1 − τi
          n
              cHi
         ∫A
          0     i
                     di +       ∫
                                n
                                                      Ai
                                                              di + (1 − n) f X = LH
                                                                                                       *
                                                                                                          for i ∈ [ n,1] . Substituting with cHi / CH = ( pHi / PH )
                                                                                                      cHi                                                            −φ
since     yHi = cHi for i ∈ [ 0, n ] , yHi = cHi +
                                                                                                     1−τi
                                                  (p                 )
                                                                           −φ
              = (1 − n )
     *     *                             −1               *       *
and cHi / CHT                                             Hi   / PHT                gives

25
  When all home goods are nontraded, i.e. n = 1, then no labor is employed to cover fixed costs of
exporting.


                                                                                                                           29
                        −φ                            −φ                                   −φ
           n
            C H ⎛ pHi ⎞
                              1
                                 ⎛ 1 ⎞ ⎡ ⎛ pHi ⎞           1 ⎛ 1 ⎞ * ⎛ pHi           *
                                                                                          ⎞ ⎤
         ∫0 Ai ⎜⎝ PH ⎟⎠ di + ∫n ⎜⎝ Ai ⎟⎠ ⎢⎢CH ⎜⎝ PH ⎟⎠ + 1 − τ i ⎜⎝ 1 − n ⎟⎠ CHT ⎜⎝ PHT* ⎟⎠ ⎥⎥di + (1 − n) f X = LH
                                          ⎣                                                   ⎦
                                                                 *
Using (14) and (15) in turn to substitute for pHi , pHi and (17) and (20) to substitute for the
definitions of A , A      [n] gives
                          (1−τ )T
                                                                                                                         1
                                                ⎡⎛                  ⎛ * * ⎞                       ⎤φ
                                −1/ φ ⎛ φ − 1 ⎞ ⎢   PH CH ⎞  φ −1 ⎜ PHT
                                                                    ( )                           (                  )
                                                                           CHT ⎟            φ −1
        W = ( LH − (1 − n) f X ) ⎜            ⎟ ⎢⎜⎜         ⎟ A   +              A(1−τ )T [n] ⎥
                                                                    ⎝ ( PHT ) ⎠
                                      ⎝  φ    ⎠ ⎢⎝ ( H ) ⎠
                                                    P
                                                        1−φ
                                                            ⎟       ⎜    * 1−φ ⎟                  ⎥
                                                ⎣                                                 ⎦⎥
                         *
Substituting for PH , PHT with (23), (24) and canceling terms gives
                                                                                                                                     1
                                        ⎡⎛                   ⎞              ⎛                                    ⎞                  ⎤φ
                                        ⎢⎜                   ⎟              ⎜                                    ⎟                  ⎥
                                        ⎢
                        −1/ φ ⎛ φ − 1 ⎞ ⎜                                   ⎜                                    ⎟             φ −1 ⎥
                                                             ⎟
                                                                 ( )                                             (             )
                                                                                         *    *
                                               PH CH                 φ −1              PHT  CHT
W = ( LH − (1 − n) f X ) ⎜            ⎟ ⎢⎜             1−φ   ⎟    A      +⎜                              1−φ   ⎟ A(1−τ )T [n] ⎥
                              ⎝  φ    ⎠ ⎢⎜ ⎛ φ W ⎞                         ⎜⎛ φ                         ⎞       ⎟                   ⎥
                                                             ⎟                              W
                                        ⎢⎜ ⎜ φ − 1 A ⎟      ⎟             ⎜⎜ ⎜⎜                       ⎟⎟      ⎟⎟                  ⎥
                                        ⎢⎣⎝ ⎝         ⎠      ⎠              ⎝  ⎝ φ − 1  A(1−τ ) T [ n ]  ⎠       ⎠                  ⎥⎦
which reduces to (26).

A.3. Model Implications for Trade Volume
       Balanced trade (see (27)) implies that exports and imports as ratios of total aggregate
consumption are equal:
            *   *
           PHT CHT  P C
                   = FT FT
             PC       PC
From the relative demand conditions ((11) and its foreign counterpart ):
                                             1−φ                                               1−φ
            *   *
                                   ⎛ P* ⎞                                  ⎛P ⎞
                   = (1 − θ * [n]) ⎜ HT* ⎟         , FT FT = (1 − θ [n* ]) ⎜ FT ⎟
           PHT CHT                                  P C
             PC                    ⎝ P ⎠              PC                   ⎝ P ⎠
implying that exports relative to consumption—which equals GDP in our single period model—
                                                                             *
depends on two factors: the relative import price for foreign residents PHT     / P* and the (ii) foreign
bias coefficient for imported home goods 1 − θ * [ n ] . A decrease in the relative price of imports
and/or an increase in bias towards imports raises the home country’s exports.
        How does trade liberalization affect exports? We proceed by considering first a reduction
in iceberg costs and then a reduction in fixed costs. We assume a symmetric steady state which,
because the foreign aggregate price level is normalized to unity, implies P = P * = 1 . We also
assume that changes are symmetric across countries and lead to equal declines in n, n* and hence
increases in the number of tradable varieties. Because of the symmetric nature of the experiment,
relative aggregate prices remain constant and equal to unity as well. Hence we may infer the
                                                          *
change in relative prices solely from the change in PHT     given by (24):
               ⎛ φ ⎞ W
           *
          PHT =⎜       ⎟
               ⎝ φ − 1 ⎠ A(1−τ )T [n]
For reference, we express this price in terms of the relevant productivity averages when
productivity is heterogeneous




                                                                       30
                     φ ⎛           W           ⎞
             *
            PHT =         ⎜⎜                   ⎟,
                    φ − 1 ⎝ α1−τ α A β AT [n] ⎟⎠
                                     i
and when transport costs are heterogeneous
              φ ⎛              W                ⎞
        *
       PHT =        ⎜                           ⎟.
             φ − 1 ⎜⎝ α1−τ α A βi (1−τ )T [ n] ⎟⎠
         A fall in iceberg costs (increase in α 1−τ ) directly reduces the price of goods exported to
foreign residents, increases demand, and raises the home country’s level of exports. But there is
an opposing effect, as falling n and increased trade at the extensive margin imply goods with
either lower effective productivity or higher transport costs become traded, raising the average
price of imported goods.26 Wages W rise as well because of increased demand for labor to
produce the greater export volume. The effect on θ * tends also to raise exports: as more varieties
become traded, the weight placed on imported goods in the foreign price index increases, and the
relative demand by foreign residents for imported goods in their consumption basket rises.27
         With a fixed cost reduction, there is no direct effect on the relative price of goods exports
to foreigners. But the decline in n also implies goods with lower effective productivity or higher
transport costs become traded, raising the average price of exported goods.28 In addition, W falls
in this case since less labor is needed to cover the fixed costs of exporting. The effect on θ *
works in the direction of raising home exports, as the increase in imported varieties raises the
demand by foreigners for home country exports.
         The theoretical ambiguities of the effects of trade liberalization on trade volume shares
are resolved in the simulation analysis reported in Section V.




26
     Mathematically, since ∂ βi AT / ∂n > 0 , ∂ βi (1−τ ) T / ∂n > 0 , the fall in n implies that βi AT [n] , βi (1−τ ) T [n] both
decline.
27
   Since ∂ θ * / ∂ n > 0 (recall θ * [n] = 1/(2 − n) ), a decrease in n, i.e. an increase in tradables varieties,
decreases θ * and raises 1 − θ * .
     Mathematically, since ∂ βi AT / ∂n > 0 , ∂ βi (1−τ ) T / ∂n > 0 , the fall in n implies the terms in the denominator
28                                                   *



βi AT [n] , βi (1−τ ) T [n] decline.


                                                                 31
                               Table 1: Price dispersion response to integration
                                                               Change in price dispersion
            Country pairs or region              1990-1994           1994-1998              1998-2004

       Euro zone, all country pairs                  -8.70               -0.14               3.02
          Core-core pairs                            -4.49                0.40               4.14
          Peripheral-core pairs                     -11.11               -0.54                2.44
          Peripheral-peripheral pairs               -24.34               -1.70               -0.91

                                                 1990-1994           1994-2001
       North America, all country pairs             -9.11               7.49
         Mexico-Canada                             -31.95              21.78
         Mexico-US                                 -27.95              16.86
         US-Canada                                  -2.46               3.95
      Notes: Positive values imply price divergence; negative values imply price convergence. Peripheral
      countries in the eurozone are Finland, Ireland, Portugal, Spain; core countries are Austria, Belgium,
      France, Germany, Italy, Luxemburg, Netherlands. Calculations are based on price differences
      across cities. Since some countries are represented by more than one city, the reported dispersion
      figures for all country pairs differ from the average of figures for the subset pairs.
      Data sources: Economist Intelligence Unit Citybase data and authors’ calculations. See Engel and
      Rogers (2004) for the cities used and the product items included in each goods category.



                                     Table 2: Trade response to integration.
                                                                                                   Increase in least
                                          Least traded goods, as                                     traded goods
   Exporting      Importing Country       share of total exports        Total exports (mil$)       exports/ increase
    Country          or Region                  1990          2000      1990        2000            in total exports
Sweden                   EU                     0.10          0.17      40959         44862               2.02
Italy                    EU                     0.10          0.14     111485        124438               1.44
Portugal                 EU                     0.10          0.19      13607         17727               0.86
France                   EU                     0.10          0.13     116917        190043               0.35
UK                       EU                     0.10          0.14      88793        153943               0.34
Spain                    EU                     0.10          0.16      40629         71384               0.25

                                                1989          1999      1989            1999
Canada                   Mexico                 0.10          0.42       525             953              0.99
Mexico                   Canada                 0.10          0.28      1578            5825              0.41
Mexico                    US                    0.10          0.17     27590          101842              0.25
US                       Mexico                 0.10          0.16     24969           80342              0.24
Note: Increase in least traded goods exports relative to increase in total exports defined as col5= [col2*col4-
(co11)*(col3)]/[col4-col3].
Data sources: Exports of least traded goods accounting for 10% or less of total trade in 1989 or 1990, from Kehoe
and Ruhl (2002); total trade figures from Direction of Trade Yearbooks 1996, 2003; 1999 and 2000 figures deflated
by US GDP goods deflator.




                                                         32
    Table 3: OLS estimates: Change in bilateral price dispersion in euro area,
                                1998-2002
                              (1)               (2)
 ExtMargin                          0.12                 0.44 **
                                  (0.22)               (0.22)
 ExtMargin*Dum_CC                                        0.33 ***
                                                       (0.12)
 ExtMargin*Dum_PP                                       -0.25 *
                                                       (0.13)
 Constant                           0.01                -0.04
                                  (0.03)               (0.03)
 R-squared                           0.01              0.25
 No. of country pairs                 46                46
 Notes: OLS estimation, where the dependent variable is the change in bilateral price
 dispersion over the period 1998-2002 across (46) individual country pairs in the
 eurozone. ExtMargin, the extensive margin variable for each country pair, is defined
 as the share of total bilateral trade in 2002 of the (“least traded”) goods that
 accounted for 10% of this trade in 1998. Dum_CC and Dum_PP are dummies for
 country pairs in which both are core countries or peripheral countries, respectively;
 see notes to Table 2. Standard errors in parentheses. Variables significant at 10%,
 5%, and 1% indicated by *, **, and ***, respectively.
 Data sources: price dispersion figures based on EIU citybase data. Extensive margin
 figures based on bilateral trade data from OECD International Trade by Commodity
 Statistics, SITC rev. 3, disaggregated to the 4 digit level.



Table 4: Simulation results: Cut in per unit costs, with productivity heterogeneity
                             steady         % change,          % change,
                              state       endogenous n        exogenous n
      n                       0.50             -1.80               0.00
        Export share1             0.33                3.92                       3.40
                          2
        Extensive share             --                0.20                       0.00
         *
        PHT / PHT                 1.11                -1.00                  -1.00
    1
    Export share: value of exports as ratio to GDP
    2
    Extensive share: fraction of new import value due to new entrants
    Calibration: β A = 1, α A = 0.5, β1−τ = 0, α1−τ = 0.9, φ = 6, f X = 0.056.




                                               33
Table 5: Simulation results: Cut in per unit costs, with transport cost heterogeneity
                                steady          % change,              % change,
                                 state         endogenous n           exogenous n
        n                         0.53              -2.12                  0.00
        Export share1             0.21               4.88                  4.02
                         2
        Extensive share            --                0.23                  0.00
            *
        P / PHT
            HT                    1.12              -0.75                  -1.00
    1
     Export share: value of exports as ratio to GDP
    2
     Extensive share: fraction of new import value due to new entrants
     Calibration: β A = 0, α A = 1, β1−τ = 1, α1−τ = 0.5, φ = 6, f X = 0.04.




     Table 6: Simulation results: Cut in fixed cost of trade, with productivity
                                  heterogeneity
                                steady          % change,              % change,
                                 state         endogenous n           exogenous n
        n                         0.50              -5.85                  0.00
        Export share1             0.33               1.62                  0.00
                         2
        Extensive share            --                1.68                  0.00
         *
        PHT / PHT                 1.11               0.00                  0.00
    1
     Export share: value of exports as ratio to GDP
    2
     Extensive share: fraction of new import value due to new entrants
     Calibration: β A = 1, α A = 0.5, β1−τ = 0, α1−τ = 0.9, φ = 6, f X = 0.056.



    Table 7: Simulation results: Cut in fixed cost of trade, with transport cost
                                  heterogeneity
                                steady          % change,              % change,
                                 state         endogenous n           exogenous n
        n                         0.53              -5.76                  0.00
                     1
        Export share              0.21               2.18                  0.00
                         2
        Extensive share            --                1.49                  0.00
            *
        P / PHT
            HT                    1.12               0.69                  0.00
    1
      Export share: value of exports as ratio to GDP
    2
      Extensive share: fraction of new import value due to new entrants
     Calibration: β A = 0, α A = 1, β1−τ = 1, α1−τ = 0.5, φ = 6, f X = 0.04.




                                              34
                                                        Fig. 1: Change in price dispersion in the euro-11

                           .1




                              0




                          -.1



                                                                                                                     1990-1994
                                                                                                                     1994-1998
                          -.2                                                                                        1998-2004

                                           Clothing &    Alcoholic   Personal   Household Food & Recreation Food &     Non-
                                           Footwear       Bevgs.      Care       Supplies Bevgs.,non-       Bevgs., Tradeables
                                                                                           perishable      perishable

                        Source: Economist Intelligence Unit Citybase data and authors’ calculations. See Engel
                        and Rogers (2004) for the cities used and the product items included in each goods
                        category. Note: positive values imply price divergence; negative values imply price
                        convergence.

                                                        Figure 2: Summary of main model implications
                                                                                Heterogeneity type:
                                                        Technology (A)                            Trade cost ( τ )
                           Per-unit cost




                                             Extensive margin:           SMALL            Extensive margin:    SMALL
Trade policy reduces:




                                             Price convergence: LARGE                     Price convergence: MEDIUM
                           Fixed cost




                                             Extensive margin:            LARGE           Extensive margin:    LARGE

                                             Price convergence: ZERO                      Price convergence: NEGATIVE




                                                                                  35
                     Fig. 3: Distributions in simulation with
                         productivity heterogeneity only

 1


          1-τi
0.8



0.6
            Ai
0.4



0.2



 0
      0      10      20    30   40    50    60   70    80       90   100

                       variety index (i*100)




                   Fig. 4: Distributions in simulation with
                       transport cost heterogeneity only

  1

            Ai
0.8



0.6

            1-τi
0.4



0.2



  0
      0      10      20    30   40    50    60   70    80     90     100

                       variety index (i*100)




                                     36
