NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EXCHANGE-RATE PASS-THROUGH TO
IMPORT PRICES IN THE EURO AREA
José Manuel Campa
Linda S. Goldberg
José M. González-Mínguez
Working Paper 11632
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11632
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2005

The views expressed in this paper are those of the individual authors and do not necessarily reflect the
position of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System. Address correspondences
to José M. Campa, IESE Business School, Camino del Cerro de Aguila 3, 28023 E-Madrid; or Linda S.
Goldberg, Federal Reserve Bank of NY, Research Department, 33 Liberty St, New York, N.Y. 10045. email:
jcampa@iese.edu or Linda.Goldberg@ny.frb.org. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by José Manuel Campa, Linda S. Goldberg and José M. González-Mínguez. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Exchange-Rate Pass-Through to Import Prices in the Euro Area
José Manuel Campa, Linda S. Goldberg and José M. González-Mínguez
NBER Working Paper No. 11632
September 2005
JEL No. F3, F4
ABSTRACT

This paper presents an empirical analysis of transmission rates from exchange rate movements to
import prices, across countries and product categories, in the euro area over the last fifteen years. Our
results show that the transmission of exchange rate changes to import prices in the short run is high,
although incomplete, and that it differs across industries and countries; in the long run, exchange rate
pass-through is higher and close to one. We find no strong statistical evidence that the introduction
of the euro caused a structural change in this transmission. Although estimated point elasticities seem
to have declined since the introduction of the euro, we find little evidence of a structural break in the
transmission of exchange rate movements except in the case of some manufacturing industries. And
since the euro was introduced, industries producing differentiated goods have been more likely to
experience reduced rates of exchange rate pass-through to import prices. Exchange rate changes
continue to lead to large changes in import prices across euro-area countries.

José Manuel Campa
IESE Business School
Camino del Cerro de Aguila 3
28023 E-Madrid
SPAIN
jcampa@iese.edu
Linda S. Goldberg
Federal Reserve Bank of NY
Research Department
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
and NBER
linda.goldberg@ny.frb.org

I. Introduction
While exchange rate pass-through has long been of interest, the focus of this interest has
evolved considerably over time. After a long period of debate over the law of one price and
convergence across countries, beginning in the late 1980s exchange rate pass-through
studies emphasized industrial organization and the role of segmentation and price
discrimination across geographically distinct product markets. More recently, pass-through
issues play a central role in debates over appropriate monetary policies, exchange rate
regime optimality in general equilibrium models, and adjustment scenarios with respect to
country external imbalances. These debates have broad implications for the conduct of
monetary policy, for macroeconomic stability, international transmission of shocks and
efforts to contain large imbalances in trade and international capital flows.
Another issue receiving attention in the recent macroeconomic debate is the stability
of exchange rate pass-through rates over time. Taylor (2000), Goldfajn and Werlang (2000),
Campa and Goldberg (forthcoming), and Chinn and Frankel (2005), have argued that passthrough rates may have been declining over time in some countries. The Brazilian
experience of the late 1990s is often cited. In this experience, consumer prices responded
very little to a large home currency depreciation, in sharp contrast with past depreciation
episodes. Campa and Goldberg (forthcoming) caution against the assumption that passthrough has been declining over time across all OECD countries. While some countries have
experienced reduced transmission of exchange rate changes into import prices, much of their
measured declines are due to a change in the composition of their import bundle toward
goods with lower pass-through elasticities. Other recent studies argue that declining passthrough has been more pervasive, at least for the United States (Marazzi et al. 2005).
However, measurement and interpretation issues leave these findings under debate. The
issue posed in these and related studies is whether this decline in pass-through rates is
statistically significant, and if so whether it stems from improved macroeconomic conditions
in the importing countries, changing competitive conditions facing exporters, changes in the
composition of imports or from some other economic changes.

1

The analysis of aggregate pass-through rates can be divided into two parts. The first
part is a border phenomenon and addresses the extent to which there are changes in passthrough rates at the level of import prices. The second issue addresses the extent to which
these border price changes are transmitted to consumers or even offset by anticipated current
or future monetary policy changes. Our analysis specifically deals with the former question.
This component of the question motivates an analysis that explicitly focuses on the pricing
and invoicing decisions of the foreign exporter.
In this paper, we begin with a review of the conceptual underpinnings of exchange
rate pass through. While debates over pass through elasticities seem to focus on estimates,
theoretical analyses appropriately emphasize that there are clear structural forces at work in
determining the sensitivities of prices to exchange rates (as well as the more general
equilibrium determination of exchange rates). In Section III we apply these lessons to
import prices for the euro area countries. We estimate short- and long-run pass-through
elasticities and allow them to differ by country of destination and by industry. Short-run
pass-through is incomplete and country- and industry-specific. In the long-run, elasticities
are larger, although it can generally be rejected that they are equal to unity. Moreover, longrun pass-through rates are not statistically different for most industries in each country and
for most countries given an industry. Finally, we perform tests of structural stability in the
pass-through rates around the introduction of the euro. Although several arguments point
towards a possible reduction in the rates of transmission of exchange rate movements to
import prices after the start of EMU, there is only very weak statistical evidence in that
direction.

II. Conceptual underpinnings
Pass-through of exchange rate movements into a country’s import prices has been at the
center of macroeconomic debate over the past two decades. The increased openness of most
developed economies and the incidence of large fluctuations in nominal exchange rates have
led to a need for a better understanding of the determinants of the transmission of exchange
rate changes into import prices.

2

In the purely statistical sense the relationship between import prices and exchange
rates is the correlation between those two variables. We will call this relationship the
“statistical beta” = cov(pm, e)/var(e), where pm are the (log) import prices denominated in
the currency of the importer, and e is the (log) nominal exchange rate expressed in terms of
units of the importer currency per unit of the exporter currency. This purely statistical
relationship between exchange rates and prices does not have a meaningful economic
interpretation. First, exchange rates are by definition the relative prices of currencies. They
are endogenous variables and their value gets determined within a general equilibrium
context, alongside other asset prices. The effect of any movements in exchange rates on
prices will therefore depend on three issues: 1) the underlying shock within the economy
that induced the exchange rate to move; 2) the mechanisms within the model that lead to a
relationship between the underlying shock, the exchange rate and import prices; and 3) the
time frame of interest for understanding the relationship between exchange rates and import
prices. The answer to the question of the effect that exchange rate changes has on import
prices in any theoretical framework crucially depends on the approach taken on modelling
these circumstances. These alternative approaches motivate the empirical specifications to
be used in estimating exchange rate pass through elasticities across countries and over time,
and shed light on the implicit assumptions behind the resulting estimates.
The initial research on this topic focused on the modelling of partial-equilibrium
setups arising from the problem of a single exporter/importer or from the industrial
organization of one industry (Dornbusch, 1987). The approach ignores the view that
exchange rates are endogenous economic variables and looks at the impact that an
exogenous exchange rate movement has on the resulting equilibrium price in the industry. In
this context, nominal exchange rates change the import price of the good according to the
interaction of industry participants in oligopolistic markets. The micro-foundations of
pricing behavior by exporters are presented as a useful starting point for understanding the
dynamics of exchange rate pass-through into import prices.1 By definition, the import prices
for any country, Pt m , j , are a transformation of the export prices of that country’s trading

1

Some of the theoretical work in this literature is Froot and Klemperer (1989), Giovannini (1988), Marston
(1990). Goldberg and Knetter (1997) provide a review of this literature.

3

partners, Pt x , j , using the exchange rate Et defined in units of the home (importing country)
currency relative to the foreign (exporting country) currency:
Pt m , j = Et Pt x , j

[1]

The export prices, in turn, are a markup ( mkuptx ) over exporter marginal costs ( mctx ). We
rewrite equation [1] in logarithms as2
ptm = et + mkuptx + mctx

[2]

The industrial organization based literature has a partial-equilibrium approach and
takes the process of the exchange rate (et) as exogenous in the economy. Its focus is on the
modelling of how the markup and the marginal cost of production, mkuptx and mctx , move
with exchange rates. The markup response is often interpreted as an indicator of changes in
the competitive conditions confronting foreign exporters in the destination market. In this
case, the correlation between import prices and nominal exchange rates is different from
one,

1. Estimated pass through elasticities represent the summed effects of the unity

translation effect on imports from the exchange rate movement, the response of markup to
offset some of this translation effect, and any changes in marginal costs that are specifically
attributable to exchange rate movements such as effects of imported inputs in production or
wage sensitivity to exchange rates. Markup responsiveness will depend mainly on the
market share of domestic producers relative to foreign producers, the form that competition
takes place in the industry, and the extent of price discrimination possible in the industry. A
general result in this literature is that a larger share of imports in total industry supply, a
higher degree of price discrimination or a larger share of imported inputs in production in
the destination country leads to higher predicted pass-through rates of exchange rates into
import prices. Exchange rate pass-through may be higher if the exporters are large in
number relative to the presence of local competitors.3 Exchange rate variability and local
monetary volatility could also matter as exporters compete for market share, as discussed in
2

In addition, the country superscript j has been dropped for simplicity.

4

Froot and Klemperer (1989): exchange rate pass-through may be lower when exporters try
to maintain local market share, even if nominal exchange rate variability is high.
The second strand of literature embeds a more general-equilibrium approach,
whereby prices are sticky in one currency, i.e. set in advance of the realization of the
exchange rate by exporters. When prices are determined in the exporter´s currency
(producer currency pricing or PCP) exchange rate pass-through tends to be much larger than
when prices are set in the importer´s currency (local currency pricing or LCP). In the
extreme case of a purely exogenous exchange rate shock, exchange rate pass-through would
be one under producer currency pricing and zero under local currency pricing. As
exemplified by the dialogue between Devereux and Engel (2001) and Corsetti and Pesenti
(2005), the assumptions made on the currency of export pricing generate radically different
conclusions on optimal monetary, fiscal and exchange rate policies. New models of
international macroeconomics have imperfect competition and/or some form of price
stickiness built in, as in Obstfeld and Rogoff (1995), Corsetti and Pesenti (2005), and
Corsetti, Dedola, and Leduc (2004). These new micro-based open-economy general
equilibrium models yield clear predictions for exchange rate behavior, and for pass-through
into import prices as a function of the underlying shocks in the economy and given the
assumed specific competitive structures of the industries involved.
Recent research in this area experiments with integrated production activities and the
interplay between producers and distributors in the supply chain. Imperfect competition in
the intermediate goods sector and the local component value added of the final price both
dampen the pass-through of exchange rates into consumer prices. Corsetti and Dedola
(2002) provide a model of optimal international price discrimination in a world with
nominal wage rigidities and monopolistic competition in production, in which upstream
firms differentially price goods to retailers in different locations.

Bacchetta and van

Wincoop (2003) expand upon the Dornbusch (1987) insights that a pass-through disconnect
may be linked to the optimal pricing strategies of foreign exporting firms who sell
intermediate inputs to domestic firms producing final goods. Empirical research attempts to
3

Dornbusch (1987). One approximation to this point is that pass-through elasticities might be inversely related
to real GDP in the destination country. An alternative approach would be to also consider measures of sector-

5

quantify the importance of distribution margins for pass through and whether such margins
are viewed as parameters, as in Burstein, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2002), or whether
distributors also adjust such margins in response to exchange rate fluctuations, as in Campa
and Goldberg (2005).
Most recently this literature has evolved into endogenously determining the choice
for currency of denomination of exports.4 In much of this research, price stickiness remains
an essential part of the model, but the decision by exporters to set prices in domestic or
foreign currency is endogenous in the model. In so doing, exchange rate risk is considered
ex ante and potentially optimally hedged. Engel (2005) and Goldberg and Tille (2005) show
that optimal invoicing currency choice has a close analogue to optimally chosen rates of
exchange rate pass through. Devereux and Engel (2001) and Devereux, Engel and Storgaard
(2004) argue that in equilibrium, countries with low relative exchange rate variability and
relatively stable monetary policies would have their currencies chosen for transaction
invoicing. All else equal, exchange rate pass-through would be higher for importing
countries with more volatile monetary policy.5
An alternative argument, emphasized by Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2002) and
Goldberg and Tille (2005), is that – even in the context of these models – the role of
macroeconomic variability in currency invoicing choices may be limited. The industry
composition of trade, and in particular the dominance of trade in differentiated products, is
needed for macroeconomic variability to drive invoice currency choices. If trade is largely
in homogeneous or reference-priced goods, the role of macroeconomic variability in invoice
currency choice is substantially damped. For these producers, the most important driver of
invoice currency selection will be the need to have their goods priced in the same way as
specific openness for countries.
4
See for instance Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2002, 2003), Corsetti and Pesenti (2002) and Devereux, Engel,
and Storgaard (2004) for examples in this literature of different ways to endogenize the pricing decision.
5

Engel (2005) shows that, with flexible prices, an industry structure that leads to the variability of prices in the
exporter’s currency being larger than the variability of prices in the importer’s currency will also result in an
equilibrium exchange rate pass-through greater than ½. This same condition will imply in a sticky-price model
that the producer will prefer producer currency pricing to local currency pricing in invoicing exports.
Therefore, an economic setting with pass-through being less than ½ arising from an imperfect competition
setup with flexible prices could be observationally equivalent to a setting with local-currency-pricing,
regardless of whether prices are sticky or not.

6

other competing producers price their products. This herding into a common invoicing
currency will be more important that the volatility hedging motives emphasized elsewhere
in the literature.
This discussion has focused mainly on the relationship between movements in
exchange rates and import prices into an economy. Yet another important observation is that
the degree of pass-through into aggregate price indexes is substantially smaller than into
import prices [Campa and Goldberg (2005), Bachetta and van Wincoop (2003)]. Various
explanations have been offered for these differences in the elasticity of prices to exchange
rate changes. The most obvious, but still an incomplete explanation, is that tradable goods
account for only a portion of consumption in the overall price indices. Burstein, Neves and
Rebelo (2003), in considering the effects of large contractionary devaluations in developing
countries, emphasize both the importance of distribution costs (transportation, wholesaling
and retailing services) and the ability of consumers to substitute away from high quality
imports toward lower quality domestically-produced goods. The distribution costs reduce
the weight of the border price of imports in the aggregate CPI, since the imported goods
ultimately consumed will contain value added from domestic distribution services.6 The
substitutability implies that the weight of foreign products, and the overall quality mix of
consumption, is responsive to exchange rate fluctuations. Moreover, distributors also can
adjust the profit margin that they receive, thereby further dampening the real effects of
exchange rates (Hellerstein, 2004). One only partially countervailing force arises through
the use of imported inputs into production, which can introduce price sensitivity to exchange
rates even among nontraded goods, as in Campa and Goldberg (2005).
Another explanation for the lack of CPI responsiveness hinges on a policy-reaction
function by monetary authorities, as argued by Gagnon and Ihrig (2001) and Baily (2002).
This line of research generates observed price insensitivity to exchange rates because an
inflation shock arising through import prices due to domestic currency depreciation may
trigger contractionary monetary policy. Thus, the prices of domestic non-traded goods will
have to decline to offset the inflationary stimulus through traded goods prices. This research

7

makes the point that CPI unresponsiveness is not because of a lack of pass through of
exchange rates into import or tradables prices. Rather, it is because central banks are so
good at containing price pressures that they pursue policies that immediately insulate
aggregate prices from these exchange rate induced pressures.
Overall, the degree of insensitivity of consumer prices to exchange rates still is
unexplained, given the estimated sensitivity of import prices to exchange rates. This issue
continues to receive attention from the research community. In our exploration of euro area
issues below, however, we focus exclusively on import price sensitivity to exchange rates,
leaving the aggregate CPI insensitivity issue to ongoing research.
III. Import Price Pass-through for the Euro Area
III.1 Introduction7
There have been large movements in exchange rates across euro area countries, with the
euro strongly depreciating against the U.S. dollar in 1998 through 2001, and then
appreciating between 2002 and 2004. As shown in Figure 1 which tracks both real and
nominal exchange rates for the period through the end of 2004, these realignments were not
just a nominal phenomenon. Indeed, such swings in currency values are not unique to this
period, as they were a regular feature of legacy currency valuations relative to the U.S.
dollar and baskets of currencies. Figure 2 shows the real effective exchange rates for sample
legacy currencies – the German mark, the French franc, and the Italian lira – for the period
1985 through 1998. Cycles and sharp quarterly movements in exchange rates have occurred
many times in recent histories.

6

Dornbusch (1987) argued that such distribution costs can help explain why comparable goods are more
expensive in rich countries than in poor countries.
7
This section is based on the methodology used in Campa and Goldberg (forthcoming) and Campa and
González-Mínguez (2005) and provides more updated estimates for the euro area.

8

Figure 1: Euros per dollar, 1998 through 2004
1.20
1.10
1.00
0.90
0.80
0.70
0.60
Jan 1998

Jan 1999

Jan 2000

Jan 2001

Jan 2002

Jan 2003

Jan 2004

Exchange Rate
Real Euro/Dollar Exchange Rate

Nominal Euro/Dollar Exchange Rate

Figure 2: Real Effective Exchange Rates, 1985-1998

Real Effective Exchange Rates (Index 2000=100)

140
130
120
110
100
90
80
70
60
Jan-85

Jul-86

Jan-88

Jul-89

Jan-91

Jul-92

France

Germany

9

Jan-94
Italy

Jul-95

Jan-97

Jul-98

Such movements can put substantial pressures on producers and subsequently be
reflected in pricing. In this section we explore these pricing consequences, estimating
exchange rate pass-through into import prices for euro area countries (Austria, BelgiumLuxembourg, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Portugal and
Spain). We use both aggregated and disaggregated data for this purpose. The aggregate
import price data used for the analysis are monthly unit value indices for the period 1989:1
to 2004:58. The disaggregated import price data for each country corresponds to the 1-digit
level of disaggregation in the SITC classification for nine different industry categories9.
The aim in this exercise is twofold. First, we provide evidence on the degree of
exchange rate pass-through observed and contrast these experiences across countries and
product categories. Second, we explore the stability of the exchange rate pass-through
(ERPT) relationships. Structural shifts in pass-through rates during the sample period could
stem from the establishment of the euro or other environmental changes as motivated by the
theoretical work surveyed in section II. We conclude the section by comparing our results
with existing evidence on pass-through rates to import prices from other studies [Campa and
González-Mínguez (2005) and Anderton (2003)], including from a wider sample of 23
OECD countries (Campa and Goldberg, forthcoming).
The methodology for estimation draws heavily on Campa and González-Mínguez
(2005), whose results are updated here. That analysis obtains estimates of pass-through of
exchange rate changes into the prices of imports made by countries from outside of the euro
area for disaggregated product categories in each country of EMU. In the short run, passthrough rates are smaller than one and differ across industries and countries. In the long-run
neither full pass-through nor equality of pass-through rates across industries and countries
can be rejected. These findings corroborate ones for the broader group of OECD countries.

8

The source for this data is the database COMEXT produced by Eurostat. For Austria and Finland the import
price series start only in 1995:1.
9
There are no data for category 9 (goods considered as “n.e.s.” or not elsewhere specified), which has a
residual nature. The product disaggregation is as follows: 0. Food and live animals, 1. Beverages and tobacco,
2. Crude materials, inedible, 3. Mineral fuels, 4. Oils, fats and waxes, 5. Chemical products, 6. Basic
manufactures, 7. Machines and transport equipment, 8. Miscellaneous manufactured goods.

10

The rest of this section is organised as follows. Section III.2 summarizes the
estimation strategy and presents the results, comparing them with those in the existing
literature. Section III.3 provides arguments for a structural shift in exchange rate pass
through among euro area countries due to the creation of the monetary union. The section
also reports statistical evidence on the existence of such a structural shift for euro area
imports.
III.2. Empirical Estimation of Exchange Rate Pass Through into Import Prices.
Equation (2) expressed import prices as a function of exchange rates, exporter
markups, and exporter marginal costs, forming the basis of our empirical implementation.
We start the implementation of the empirical set-up from equation [2] above:
ptm = α 0 et + α1mkuptx + α 2 mctx + ε t

[3]

where ε t is a regression residual, all variables are in logarithms. Pure currency translation
effects generate the expectation of α 0 = 1 . The specification for markups and marginal costs
determines if there are additional influences that would lead to exchange rate pass through at
levels below one. As in the empirical work of Campa and Goldberg (forthcoming) or the
theoretical analysis of Corsetti, Dedola and Leduc (2004), exporters operating in a given
industry decide to what extent they pass-through exchange rate variations into their prices
expressed in the importing country currency. These firms may decide that this pass-through
is complete, in which case their mark-ups are insensitive to the exchange rate and producer
currency pricing occurs. Alternatively, exporters may decide not to vary prices in terms of
the destination currency, in which mark-ups fully absorb the exchange rate movements and
local currency pricing occurs. Thus, mark-ups in the industry can be broken down into two
components: an industry-specific fixed effect exogenous to exchange rate changes whose
value depends on the specific structure of competition in each industry and a second
component which is correlated with exchange rate movements:
mkup tx = φ + Φet

[4]

11

in which case we expect φ > 0 and Φ < 0 . An additional influence on import price
sensitivity could enter through marginal costs, as earlier discussed in the context of imported
inputs or commodity prices. We assume that exporters marginal costs of production are
increasing as a positive function of demand conditions in the destination country, yt, and of
marginal costs of production (wages) in the exporting country, wtx , and commodity prices
denoted in foreign currency cptx . If commodity prices are determined in world markets
(with invoicing typically in U.S. dollars) then commodity price effects on import prices
may differ, since the wage changes may be exporter specific while commodity price
changes could have effects common to the exporter and his competitors. This suggests
specifying marginal costs as in (5) where the effect of exchange rates on marginal costs
(including the effect on commodity prices) enters through the c2 parameter and the residual
commodity price effects enter through c3.
mctx = c0 yt + c1 wtx + c 2 et + c3 cptx

[5]

Substituting [4] and [5] into [3]:
ptm = α 1 φ + (α 0 + α 1Φ + α 2 c 2 ) et + α 2 c0 y t + α 2 c1 wtx + α 2 c3 cp tx + ε t

[6]

where β = α 0 + α1Φ + α 2 c2 is the pass-through rate10. In empirical specifications, one can
allow for delayed effects of exchange rates and marginal costs on import prices by
introducing a more dynamic specification, for example through also including lags on right
hand side variables.
Equation [6] forms the basis of our empirical model. Empirical implementation
requires specification of the appropriate proxy for foreign costs of production ( wtx and cptx )
and the evolution of domestic demand. Campa and González Mínguez (2005) test for
alternative specifications of the appropriate market to model pass-through into euro import
prices.

The cost of serving the domestic market is a function of the opportunity cost of

10

The exchange rate operating on commodity prices is likely to be a bilateral exchange rate relative to U.S.
dollars, the currency used for pricing most commodities. In general, this choice may differ from the effective
exchange rate appropriate for the marginal cost considerations, which is a weighting of exchange rates relative
to export partners for a particular industry and country.

12

allocating those same goods to other customers. In markets integrated worldwide, this
opportunity cost is reflected in the world price of the product, while in more segmented
markets the opportunity cost may vary. For European markets, they conclude that the model
that best describes the data is that of an integrated world market for the product. This
implies that the appropriate measure proxy of the opportunity cost of exporting is the world
market price of the product.
One obvious critique of equation (6) is the endogeneity of variables on both sides of
the regression equation. Basic purchasing power parity and arbitrage arguments hold that
import prices, exchange rates and foreign prices should be cointegrated, i.e. that a linear
combination of these variables should be a stationary process. While hardly contestable on
theoretical grounds, on empirical grounds we test the validity of the single equation
approach of (6), and explore the possibility of specifying a vector error correction model
accounting for a long-run cointegration relationship between import prices, exchange rates
and foreign prices. Augmented Dickey Fuller tests on the original series (import unit values,
exchange rates and foreign prices) revealed that the null hypothesis of a unit root could not
be rejected for about two thirds of all series. Different specifications of the Johansen tests to
check for the number of cointegrating vectors failed to reject the hypothesis of no
cointegration for a large majority of industries11. This evidence against the presence of a
cointegrating relationship leads us to perform the analysis in a single equation framework
without introducing biases in our associated parameter estimates.12
The empirical model estimated is:
∆p tij = c ij +

4
k =0

a kij ∆etij +

4
k =0

bkij ∆ fp tij + v tij

[7]

11

To be more precise we find that a cointegration relationship cannot be rejected in 34% of all combinations of
import prices, exchange rates and foreign prices for the nine products and 11 countries in our sample. The
cointegration tests were performed in a set-up in which the original series do not have a linear trend and the
cointegration equations have intercepts. Lengthening and broadening the sample in comparison with Campa
and González-Mínguez (2005) resulted in stronger evidence of cointegration, which in that case could not be
rejected just for 14% of all instances.
12
As a further robustness check, we perform the error correction models on the cases where cointegration
could not be rejected. The resulting pass through parameter estimates were not qualitatively different even in
these cases (see Table A in the Appendix).

13

where the superscripts i and j refer, respectively, to an importing country and to an
industry. We denote as ptij the (log) import unit value index (denominated in local
currency) of industry j in country i, eti , j is the nominal exchange rate for industry j of
country i expressed in terms of units of domestic currency per unit of foreign currency.
Finally, fptij stands for the price index of products of industry j into country i in the countries
of origin of these imports and expressed in foreign currency. The presumption is that pricing
to market occurs at the level of industries and countries, in part in relation to local demand
elasticities, as in Corsetti, Dedola and Leduc (2004). The US dollar price of the imports
coming from outside the area is taken as the proxy for the foreign price and the bilateral
exchange rate between the domestic currency and the US dollar is used as our exchange rate
measure13. First differenced variables enter the equation in order to control for the
possibility of nonstationarity, given the existence of unit roots in some of the time series
variables contained in this specification. In the estimation of equation [7], we include a
correction for first-order autocorrelation, given the existence of residual autocorrelation in
many industries when estimating by OLS.
Estimation yields short-run (one month) and long-run (four months) pass-through
elasticities for all the different industry/country combinations, where short-run exchange
rate pass-through elasticities are given by the estimated coefficients a0ij while long-run
elasticities are defined as the sum of the pass-through coefficients for the contemporaneous
exchange rate and its first four lags, i.e.

4
i =0

akij . There are two benchmarks of pass-through

estimates that we will focus on: 1) zero pass-through, in which there is no reaction from
exchange rate movements into import prices, sometimes interpreted as local currency
pricing, and 2) complete pass-through, which is consistent with producers pricing exports in
their own currency and sometimes called producer currency pricing. Two other sets of tests
13

Campa and González-Mínguez (2005) tested for alternative specifications of industry structure that may best
describe these euro area markets, yielding the specification used here. It implies that international markets are
integrated, meaning that there exists a single market for each product, regardless of its origin, destination or
currency of denomination. This leads to select, as appropriate measures of the foreign price and the exchange
rate, a proxy of the world price in a common currency and the bilateral exchange rate between the currency in
which the foreign price is denominated and the home currency (as opposed to measures for the bilateral

14

are reported in this section. First, we estimate short-run and long-run pass-through
elasticities when the restriction imposed is that these elasticities are the same for all
industries within a given country. Second, we estimate while imposing the restriction that
exchange rate pass-through rates are the same for a given industry across the eleven
countries in the sample.
The results from these various procedures are reported in Table 1, which reports the
point estimates for the unrestricted estimates and LCP and PCP tests, Table 2 which reports
the tests of restrictions that elasticities are the same across all industries within a country,
and Table 3 which reports the results under the restriction that industry elasticities are the
same across euro area countries. Columns (3) to (6) in Tables 2 and 3 summarize in a more
tractable way the results for all the different industry and country combinations contained in
Table 1 by reporting summary statistics of the estimated short- and long-run elasticities for
the different industries within a country (Table 2) and for the different countries given an
industry (Table 3).
A number of strong results are generated. The main results can be summarized as
follows. First, the transmission of exchange rate movements to import prices is incomplete
in the short run defined as the month contemporaneous to the exchange rate movement.
Unweighted average rates by country and by industry are, respectively, 0.66 and 0.56. The
evidence that transmission is high, but incomplete, in the short-run is supported by the
rejection in all cases of the hypothesis that the estimated elasticities in the first column in
Tables 2 and 3 are one or zero14 .
Second, in the long-run, average elasticities of transmission are larger than in the
short-run, with values of around 0.8 across countries (column 2 both in Tables 2 and 3).
More importantly, the hypothesis that the transmission is complete in the long run is
rejected for a majority of countries and products. More precisely, this hypothesis is not
supported by the data in 8 out of 11 economies and 6 out of 9 products. It is interesting to
realize that those cases for which this hypothesis is not rejected coincide with economies
exchange rate and the foreign price which are contingent, for a given destination country, on the countries in
which these imports originate).
14
The exception is Spain, for the hypothesis that ERPT is equal to one.

15

which have traditionally moved along a path of higher inflation (Italy, Portugal and Spain)
and with industries in which commodity imports predominate, consistent with tendencies
suggested a priori by theoretical models.
Third, the results of the tests of zero and full transmission when the same elasticity is
imposed for all industries in each country, or for all countries in a given industry, are
replicated quite closely when the pass-through coefficients are allowed to vary by country or
by product (columns 3 into 6 in Tables 2 and 3). It is remarkable that only for one country
(Austria) and for one industry (beverages and tobacco) full transmission in the long run is
rejected in a majority of cases. The hypothesis that pass through is either zero or one in the
short-run can be rejected for a vast majority of industries in most countries (Table 2,
columns 3 and 4), as can the hypothesis that pass-through is zero in the long-run. The
hypothesis that the pass-through is complete in the long-run can be rejected in less than one
third of all industries in every country but Austria and France.
The last four columns in Table 3 show (as a counterpart to the columns in Table 2)
that, in the short-run, the hypothesis that industry-specific pass-through is either zero or one
is rejected for a vast majority of countries. In the long-run, zero pass-through is again
rejected for most industries, but full pass-through is rejected in a minority of industries.
Finally, we perform tests for the equality of pass-through rates across countries and
industries, both in the short and the long run (Table 4). In general, one can reject that ERPT
rates in the short-run are equal for all industries within a given country and for a given
industry across the eleven countries in our sample. In the long-run, the equality of the
elasticities of transmission among the different industries of a country can be rejected only
in the cases of Germany and Spain. The equality of industry pass-through across countries is
rejected only in two of the nine industries: basic manufactures, and machinery and transport
equipment. The latter result supports the idea that exporters price discriminate to a larger
extent in manufacturing than in commodities, since these industries are more likely to show
product differentiation and, thus, different degrees of pass-through in different countries.
This finding is consistent with the theoretical predictions of Bacchetta and van Wincoop
(2002) and Goldberg and Tille (2005).

16

The estimated pass-through elasticities reported here are in line with previous
estimates reported in the literature. Campa and Goldberg (forthcoming) find elasticities of
ERPT into aggregate import prices for a sample of 23 OECD countries which average 0.46
and 0.64 in the short and long run, respectively. The corresponding average elasticities for
the ten euro area countries reported in this broader sample (all but Greece and Luxembourg)
are, respectively, 0.47 and 0.70. These reported estimates of ERPT are slightly lower, but
not significantly different from those reported here in Table 1 of 0.66 and 0.80 respectively.
These latter estimates are the same as those reported in Campa and González-Mínguez
(2005) for the same countries but shorter time period (1989:1 to 2001:3). The average
unweighted elasticities for the euro area countries reported in that paper are 0.66 and 0.81 in
the short and long run, respectively15. Anderton (2003), using a somewhat different
approach, estimates an average long-run ERPT between 0.5 and 0.7 for the aggregate
manufacturing sector in the euro area. This slightly lower estimate is not surprising given
that the estimation explicitly excludes commodity industries for which pass-through rates
are expected to be substantially larger.16
The difference between average elasticities reported here and the aggregate
elasticities reported in Campa and Goldberg (forthcoming) highlight the importance of the
different point estimates across importing industries and the importance of each industry in
the aggregate imports of the countries. The weighted average pass-through elasticities for
each country computed using the disaggregated industry elasticities reported in Table 2 are
significantly lower. The average of these weighted elasticities for the 11 EU countries is
0.52 in the short-run and 0.72 in the long-run17. These weighted estimates are very close to
the 0.47 (0.70) reported in Campa and Goldberg for the short-run (long-run) euro area
countries in their sample. As that study demonstrated, pass-through elasticities differ by
industry and estimates of aggregate pass-through elasticities are dependent on the industry
structure of imports of each country.
15

The averages without Greece, in order to make comparable these figures with those in Campa and Goldberg
(forthcoming) are 0.68 and 0.81, respectively.
16
Anderton (2003) focuses on a model of imperfect competition among euro and non-euro area producers in
which foreign exporters to the euro area set their prices partly as a mark-up on their production costs (which
represents the degree of ERPT) and partly holding them in line with those of their euro area competitors
(pricing-to-market). The paper focuses on industries where imperfect competition may exist and thus chooses
to exclude from the estimation commodity industries for which the law of one price is more likely to hold.

17

III.3. The euro and the stability of the exchange rate pass-through
The literature suggests several reasons why the rate of pass-through may have changed
for the euro area members as a result of the introduction of the euro. Firstly, the process of
monetary union has entailed some convergence of average inflation rates in euro area
Member States towards the levels of countries with historically lower inflation. Since
higher inflation levels and volatility contribute, theoretically, to higher exchange rate pass
through, the countries that have experienced the largest declines in inflation and nominal
volatility may have seen the largest reductions in pass through elasticities.
Secondly, EMU induced changes in the pattern of trade could influence exchange
rate pass through into import prices. The creation of EMU has resulted in a higher
proportion of trade being done in the common currency. Thus, a smaller proportion of
industry output is exposed to the exchange rate fluctuations associated with trade with noneuro area countries. Some recent research suggests that the creation of EMU might have
stimulated intra-area trade at the expense of that taking place with the rest of the world
(Faruqee, 2004). Such trade diversion could have led to a change in the transmission of
exchange rate movements to import prices by reducing the market power of exporters from
outside the euro area. From a pure accounting perspective, the transmission of exchange
rates into import prices would have declined as the proportion of final demand of the area
satisfied with extra-EMU imports diminished. Likewise, the transmission from exchange
rates to import prices is lower the larger the share of imports denominated in local currency.
To the extent that the creation of a large-scale monetary union, such as the EMU, has
favoured an expansion of the euro as a currency of denomination of its external trade, ERPT
rates to import prices would have tended to reduce. The European Central Bank (2005)
reports that the proportion of extra-euro trade denominated in euro has increased for all EU
members. This change in currency invoicing is particularly apparent with respect to former
accession countries like Poland and Estonia. We discuss each of these arguments in more
detail.

17

For these calculations we have used the import share for each industry in 1998.

18

III.3.1. Convergence in inflation rates.
As previously indicated, one of the reasons for differences across countries in ERPT has
been the inflation history of the country. Those countries which are currently members of
EMU and which experienced higher nominal inflation and larger exchange rate
depreciations during the eighties and nineties had larger ERPT rates, especially in the shortrun. To the extent that these countries share now the same currency, it could be the case that
the differences among their short-run pass-through rates have tended to attenuate. In order to
explore this hypothesis, we performed separate estimations for two subperiods (1989:01 to
1997:12 and 1998:1 to 2004:5) and then correlated the change in average inflation between
the two periods for each country with the change in the ERPT. The results of this exercise
show that changes in both variables are basically uncorrelated18. The correlation across
countries between changes in average short-term (long-term) pass-through rate and changes
in inflation were -0.34 (-0.09). This is a crude exploration that neither takes into account the
significance in the estimated changes in pass-through nor introduces other control variables.
Nevertheless, the results are consistent with changing inflation regimes not being a primary
driver of changes in rates of exchange rate pass-through into import prices.
III.3.2. Changes in the share of extra-EMU imports
The introduction of the single European currency has resulted in a change in the
respective shares of trade exposed to exchange rate fluctuations. Trade conducted among
EMU economies is increasingly done in the same currency, although evidence on the
pervasiveness of this phenomenon across manufactured goods versus commodities is largely
lacking. Furthermore, the elimination of the risk associated to the fluctuations in nominal
exchange rates in intra-EMU flows or the reduction in transaction costs suggest that
monetary union might have stimulated trade among EA Member States at the expense of
trade with non-EMU countries (trade diversion), or even net of any diversion effect. For
instance, small-sized firms for which the existence of the transaction costs associated with
multiple currencies posed barriers to their participation in international trade might have
18

The selection of 1997:12 as the break point between subsamples is somewhat arbitrary. Disinflation was a
common feature in current euro area members since 1996. This was not only the result of policies in inflation-

19

decided to enter euro-area markets after the beginning of EMU (trade creation). A lower
share of foreign currency imports in total industry supply should lead to higher pass-through
rates.
Evidence accumulated since the inception of the euro does not show extensive
changes in the composition of import flows into the area according to the country of origin
(Faruqee, 2004). Indeed, observed changes seem to run in the opposite direction. In
particular, as shown in Chart 1 the share of imports coming from outside the area has
increased in seven of the eleven Member States, whether measured as a proportion of total
imports or a proportion of GDP by country19. The ratio of extra-EMU imports to GDP has
increased in all Member States except Ireland and, to a lesser extent, Portugal.
Even if the total share of imports coming from the rest of the world into the euro
area has not changed significantly, changes in the product composition of those flows could
have occurred. In this way, if transmission elasticities from exchange rate variations into
import prices were to differ substantially by product categories, possible modifications in
the structure of imported goods since the start of EMU might significantly alter overall
ERPT rates as observed for the broader OECD countries since the 1970s. While possible,
Chart 2 demonstrates that the size of such variations in the structure of imports according to
the type of product has been relatively limited since the start of EMU. In particular, the
shares of energy products and, to a lesser extent, machinery and transport equipment within
total imports have increased, while those of food, other commodities and basic manufactures
have declined.
III.3.3. The currency of price denomination in international trade.
Engel (2005) and Goldberg and Tille (2005) show that there is a direct mapping
between the determinants of the currency of denomination of international trade and those
of exchange rate pass through rates. Within the euro area, if foreign exporters tend to fix
their prices in their own currency, the degree of transmission of exchange rate movements
into the prices in euros will be high. If, alternatively, extra-EMU exporters tend to fix their
prone countries as a result of efforts to fulfill the corresponding convergence criterion, but also a more general
phenomenon related to the negative oil price shock at the time.

20

prices in euros, a relatively reduced transmission of exchange rate movements into euro area
prices and activity will be observed. There are two key factors explaining the currency in
which exporters fix their prices: hedging exchange rate and cost volatility, and the degree of
market competition or elasticity of substitution in foreign demand for an exporter’s goods
which influences a producer’s willingness to deviate from the invoicing patterns of the rest
of his competitors. Based on Goldberg and Tille (2005) and Bacchetta and van Wincoop
(2002), the choice of invoice currency is expected to differ across industries, even in trade
transactions between common partner countries. The role of macroeconomic variability will
matter most for invoice currency selection among producers of goods facing low elasticities
of substitution. Macro variability will not be important for transactions in commodities or
highly substitutable products, which may even choose a vehicle currency for their
transactions. Within a monetary union, the relevant market shares are not those of domestic
and foreign producers within each country, but those of producers of all countries sharing
the same currency and of the exporters from the rest of the world. Thus, the larger the area
of influence of a given currency, the larger the share of foreign trade denominated in that
currency. For this reason, the creation of EMU likely resulted in a larger proportion of
imports denominated in euro within total imports in comparison with the joint share of the
euro area constituent currencies. This argument would be particularly relevant for producers
of differentiated goods, since producers of commodities priced in world markets in dollars
may continue this pricing standard, even with the advent of the euro.
Existing evidence regarding the use of the euro as the currency of denomination of
international trade is incomplete. Since the beginning of EMU, data shown in Table 5 point
to an increase in the share of imports coming from (and share of exports going to) outside
the area with prices denominated in euros. An increased use of the euro as the currency of
denomination has been observed in trade in both goods and services20.

This finding is

consistent with an expectation of lower exchange rate pass through into EMU country
import prices.

19

Belgium and Luxembourg are treated as a single country in this data.
In the case of France, a decrease was recorded between 2002 and 2003 in the shares of euro-denominated
imports of both goods and services and euro-denominated exports of goods.
20

21

It is useful to note, however, that the creation of EMU may have had different effects
on different industries. In commodity markets and for “reference priced goods”, goods with
a large degree of homogeneity are traded. For these goods, a single world market exists, in
which imports into the area are denominated neither in euros nor in the exporters'currency,
but usually in dollars (Goldberg and Tille, 2005). These markets are characterised by the
fact that the location of buyers and sellers is irrelevant as far as the price of transactions is
concerned. In this case, it is unlikely that the creation of EMU has caused, so far, relevant
changes in invoicing patterns. Consequently, reductions in exchange rate pass through into
import prices in EMU countries might be more a feature of differentiated goods than it is of
highly substitutable goods.
III.3.4 Evidence on the existence of a structural break
To determine whether evidence exists that a break took place around the time of the
decision to fix permanently the exchange rates among the euro countries, we perform tests
on the time stability of the estimated pass-through elasticities. Alternatively, a break might
have occurred with the actual adoption of the euro among these countries. We perform two
types of tests for the time stability of the estimated parameters. First, we follow the
approach by Andrews (1993) and Andrews and Ploberger (1994) to detect endogenously
structural changes in the pass-through relationship assuming that the break point is
unknown. This procedure essentially searches for the strongest break point any time during
the sample period. It is an appropriate test mainly to the extent that structural breaks in the
data are large and discrete (Elliott and Muller 2005). For each estimation (i.e. for every
pair-wise combination of country and industry), we perform two tests of structural breaks: a
test that the contemporaneous coefficient on the exchange rate is stable (i.e. that short-run
pass-through is stable) and a test that the sum of all coefficients on the exchange rate is
stable (i.e. that there is a structural break in long-run pass-through).
We find little evidence in favour of the existence of a (statistically significant)
structural break in the transmission of exchange rate movements into import prices across
euro area countries. Table 6 reports those instances in which the null hypothesis of no
structural break is rejected. In those instances, the p-value of the tests appears in parenthesis

22

and the suggested break date is reported in italics. An empty cell means that, for that
combination of product and country, the hypothesis of absence of a structural break cannot
be rejected either in the short or the long run. There is very little evidence in favour of the
alternative hypothesis that the transmission is not stable (7 out of 198 cases). This evidence
is concentrated in the estimated long-run elasticities. Only two of the identified structural
breaks took place around the dates of the creation of the euro (Oils, fats and waxes in the
Netherlands, and Mineral fuels in Finland). The two breaks detected in the case of Ireland
might be linked to pricing policies of British exports after the sterling left the ERM. For the
remaining instances, it is more difficult to find any plausible explanation.
Given the low power of the Andrew and Ploberger tests in small samples, and the
large confidence intervals around indicated structural break points (Elliott and Muller,
2005), we also perform Chow tests of the hypothesis that a structural break took place at the
time of the adoption of the euro. We select May 1998, the month on which the parities
among currencies replaced by the euro were announced, as the date for the break. The white
cells in Table 6 represent those combinations of industry and country for which this test
rejects the stability of transmission rates, both in the short and the long-run.
The Chow test results do not systematically reject the hypothesis of stability of rates
of transmission of exchange rates into European import prices. The test rejects stability, in
the short-run, for 20 out of the 99 combinations of industry and country. Stability is rejected
more frequently among manufacturing industries (Basic manufactures, Machinery and
transport equipment, and Other manufactures), which is consistent with the expectation that
changes in ERPT should be rather expected in industries producing differentiated goods.
Across countries, the stability is rejected more frequently (in three or four industries) for the
countries which composed the core of the EMS (France, Germany, Belgium-Luxembourg
and the Netherlands). As far as long-term elasticities are concerned, the stability of the
relationship can only be rejected in 6 out of 99 cases. This is, approximately, what should be
statistically expected at a 5% confidence level. Jointly considered, this evidence suggests
that a significant change in transmission rates has not taken place as a result of the
introduction of the euro.

Tendencies toward instability are more prevalent within

manufactured goods.

23

The results reported in Table 6 do not provide evidence on whether this change in
pass-through has implied an increase or a decline in pass-through rates. The point estimates
strongly suggest that a decline in pass-through rates may be taking place. Estimated shortrun (long-run) pass-through rates were lower in the post-euro period for 69 (61) out of 99
cases. This evidence would be consistent with the arguments put forward in Section III.3 of
a decline in pass-through. As discussed above, this evidence is not statistically significant in
most cases. What is more revealing is that the change in pass through is negative in all but
one of the instances where the Chow test rejects stability21.
IV. Conclusions
This paper has performed an empirical analysis of transmission rates from exchange
rate movements to import prices of the countries in EMU. The paper has estimated short and
long-run elasticities for all euro countries, allowing them to change according to the type of
product imported. The results obtained confirm that this transmission is high, although
incomplete, in the short-run, and different across industries and countries. Long-run
elasticities are higher, although estimated elasticities are still lower than unity, except for the
traditionally more inflationary economies and for commodities. In general, the equality of
pass-through elasticities among the different industries in each country or for the different
countries given an industry cannot be rejected in the long-run.
One of the aims of this chapter has been to evaluate to what extent the start of the
monetary union has implied a structural break in the transmission of exchange rate
movements in the currencies of Member States to their import prices. Several reasons point
towards the possibility that a change might have taken place. These reasons include the
move to an environment characterised by higher macroeconomic stability and lower
inflation rates for several Member States, a hypothetical increase in the share of intra-EMU
trade at the expense of trade with countries outside the euro area, possible modifications in
the competitive structure of the markets for tradable products, and the impact that the
creation of the euro might have had on the currency of denomination of imports coming
21

More precisely, in the short-run, in 19 out of the 20 cases for which the pass-through rate is significantly
different between both periods, point estimates indicate a reduction in pass-through. This is also the case for 5
of the 6 statistically significant changes in long-run pass-through.

24

from the rest of the world. Some of these factors may be occurring. Average inflation rates
have declined, and the share of trade in goods and services against third countries whose
prices are fixed in euros has increased substantially for all Member countries. The evidence
is not so clear for other predictions. The creation of the euro has not implied a decline in the
share of extra-EMU imports within total imports.
We have tested for structural changes in pass-through rates since the introduction of
the euro. There is an apparent decline in the estimated point elasticities for two-thirds of the
industries. However, this evidence is not statistically significant. At this point, we find that
there is a statistically significant trend towards lower pass-through rates for manufacturing
industries. Tests for structural break are known to have very low power, especially in short
samples like the recent history of the creation of the euro. A wider decline in pass-through
may be taking place, but it is too early to ascertain whether this change is taking place and
too early to determine the structural explanations for such declines. Exchange rate changes
continue to lead to large changes in import prices across euro area countries. While pass
through is clearly incomplete, on average it remains more than 60 percent one quarter after
exchange rate moves and 80 percent over the course of a year.

25

References:
Andrews, D.W.K., 1993, “Tests for Parameter Instability and Structural Change With
Unknown Change Point,” Econometrica 61, pp. 821-856.
Andrews, D.W. K. and W. Ploberger, 1994, “Optimal Tests When a Nuisance Parameter Is
Present Only Under the Alternative”, Econometrica 62, pp. 1383-1414.
Anderton, Robert. 2003. “Extra-euro area manufacturing import prices and exchange rate
pass-through”, ECB working paper no. 219 March 2003.
Bacchetta, Philippe, and Eric van Wincoop, 2002, “A Theory of the Currency Denomination
of International Trade,” National Bureau of Economic Research, working paper no.
9039. Journal of International Economics, forthcoming.
Bacchetta, Philippe, and Eric van Wincoop, 2003, “Why Do Consumer Prices React Less
Than Import Prices to Exchange Rates,” Journal of the European Economics
Association 1, 662-670.
Baily, Martin N. 2002. “Persistent Dollar Swings and the US Economy.” In Dollar
Overvaluation and the World Economy, eds. C. Fred Bergsten and John Williamson.
Washington: Institute for International Economics.
Burstein, Ariel, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo. 2002. “Why are Rates of Inflation
so low after large devaluations?” NBER working paper #8748 (February).
Burstein, Ariel, Joao Neves, and Sergio Rebelo (2003), “Distribution costs and real
exchange rate dynamics during exchange rate based stabilisations", Journal of Monetary
Economics 50, 1189-1214.
Campa, Jose and Linda Goldberg, 2005. “Distribution Margins, Imported Inputs, and the
Insensitivity of the CPI to Exchange Rates” manuscript.
Campa, Jose and Linda Goldberg. Forthcoming. “Exchange Rate Pass Through into Import
Prices.” NBER working paper 8934. Review of Economics and Statistics.
Campa, Jose and J.M. González-Mínguez, 2005, "Differences in Exchange Rate PassThrough in the Euro Area", European Economic Review, forthcoming.
Corsetti, Giancarlo and Luca Dedola. 2002. “Macroeconomics of International Price
Discrimination”. European Central Bank working paper no. 176.
Corsetti, Giancarlo, Luca Dedola, and Sylvain Leduc. 2004. “Pass Through and Exchange
Rate Fluctuations in a DGSE model of price discrimination”. Manuscript.

26

Corsetti, Giancarlo, and Pesenti, Paolo. 2005. “International Dimensions of Optimal
Monetary Policy.” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 281-305.
Devereux, Michael, 2001, Monetary Policy, Exchange Rate Flexibility and Exchange Rate
Pass-through. In Revisiting the Case for Flexible Exchange Rates (Bank of Canada) 4782.
Devereux, Michael and Charles Engel. 2001. “Endogenous Currency of Price Setting in a
Dynamic Open Economy Model”. NBER working paper no. 8559.
Devereux, Michael, Charles Engel, and Peter Storgaard. 2004. “Endogenous exchange rate
pass-through when nominal prices are set in advance” Journal of International
Economics, Vol. 63, no. 2, July, pp. 263-291.
Dornbusch, R., 1987. “Exchange Rates and Prices”, American Economic Review 77, 93-106.
Elliott, Graham and Ulrich Muller. 2005. Confidence Sets for the Date of a Single Break in
Linear Time Series Regressions. Manuscript, Princeton University.
Engel, Charles. 2005. “Equivalence Results for Optimal Pass-Through, Optimal Indexing to
Exchange Rates, and Optimal Choice of Currency for Export Pricing.” NBER working
paper no. 11209
European Central Bank. 2003. Review of the international role of the euro, December.
European Central Bank. 2005. Review of the international role of the euro, January.
Faruqee. Hamid, 2004, “Measuring the Trade Effects of the EMU,” International Monetary
Fund Working Paper WP/04/154.
Froot, Ken and Paul Klemperer. 1989. “Exchange Rate Pass-Through When Market Share
Matters,” American Economic Review (September), 637-54.
Gagnon, Joseph and Jane Ihrig. 2001. “Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate Pass-Through.”
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, International Finance Discussion
Papers #704 (July).
Giovannini, Alberto. 1988. “Exchange Rates and Traded Goods Prices,” Journal of
International Economics vol.24, pp.45-68.
Goldberg, Pinelopi and Michael Knetter, 1997, "Goods Prices and Exchange Rates: What
Have We Learned?", Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 35, 1243-92.
Goldberg, Linda and Cédric Tille. 2005. "Vehicle Currency Use in International Trade",
NBER working paper 11127, February.

27

Hellerstein, Rebecca. 2004. “Who Bears the Cost of a Change in the Exchange Rate? The
Case of Imported Beer.” Staff Reports no. 179 (February), Federal Reserve Bank of New
York.
Marazzi, Mario, Nathan Sheets, Robert Vigfusson, Jon Faust, Joseph Gagnon, Robert
Martin, Jaime Márquez, Trevor Reeve, and John Rogers. 2005. “Exchange Rate Passthrough to U.S. Import Prices: Some New Evidence”, International Finance Discussion
Papers no. 833 (April), Federal Reserve Board of Governors.
Marston, Richard. 1990. “Pricing to Market in Japanese Manufacturing.” Journal of
International Economics. Vol. 29, 217-36.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff. 1995. “Exchange Rate Dynamics Redux,” Journal
of Political Economy 103, 624-60.
Taylor, John B. 2000. “Low Inflation, Pass-Through, and the Pricing Power of Firms.”
European Economic Review, June volume 44 issue 7, 1389-1408.

28

EMU. IMPORTS OF GOODS FROM OUTSIDE THE EURO AREA
1998

CHART 1

2003

% of total imports

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
UEM

FR

BE-LU

NL

DE

IT

IE

1998

GR

PT

ES

FI

AT

GR

PT

ES

FI

AT

2003

% of GDP

40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
UEM

FR

BE-LU

NL

DE

IT

IE

SOURCES: Eurostat and national statistics.

29

COMPOSITION BY PRODUCT OF EXTRA-EMU IMPORTS OF GOODS

Food and live animals
Crude materials, inedible
Oils, fats and waxes
Basic manufactures
Miscellaneous manufactured goods

1998

CHART 2

Beverages and tobacco
Mineral fuels
Chemical products
Machines and transport equipment
Miscellaneous goods

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
FR

BE-LU

2003

NL

DE

IT

IE

GR

PT

ES

Food and live animals

Beverages and tobacco

Crude materials, inedible

Mineral fuels

Oils, fats and waxes

Chemical products

Basic manufactures

Machines and transport equipment

Miscellaneous manufactured goods

Miscellaneous goods

FI

AT

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
FR

BE-LU

NL

DE

IT

IE

GR

SOURCE: Eurostat.

30

PT

ES

FI

AT

Table 1

Country
Industry
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

ELASTICITIES OF EXCHANGE RATE PASS-THROUGH INTO IMPORT PRICES IN THE SHORT- RUN AND LONG-RUN

France

Belgium –
Luxembourg

Netherlands

Germany

Italy

Ireland

Greece

Portugal

Spain

Finland

Austria

Pool

SHORT RUN

0.72 *+

0.61 *+

0.55 *+

0.60 *+

0.49 *+

0.22 +

0.28 +

1.12 *

0.58 *+

0.48 *+

0.32 **+

0.54*+

LONG RUN

0.73 *+

0.98 *

0.85 *

0.96 *

0.89 *

0.43 *

0.55 +

0.57

1.02 *

0.87 *

0.77 *

0.78*+

SHORT RUN

0.23 +

0.44 *+

0.21 +

0.15 *+

0.70+

0.16 +

0.78 **

0.52 *++

2.47 *+

0.19 +

0.51 **++

0.56*+

LONG RUN

0.37 +

0.55 *+

0.33 **+

0.26 *+

0.85 *

-0.08 +

0.50

0.78 *

2.15 *+

0.17 +

0.46

0.64*+

SHORT RUN

0.73 *+

0.92 *

0.65 *+

0.65 *+

0.58 *+

0.35 *+

0.07 +

0.69 *+

0.78 *+

0.57 *+

0.43 *+

0.57*+

LONG RUN

1.03 *

1.07 *

0.85 *

0.87 *

1.06 *

0.81 *

0.73 *

0.94 *

1.09 *

0.82 *

0.71 *+

0.93*

SHORT RUN

1.07 *

0.60 *+

1.26 *+

0.83 *+

0.92 *

0.64 *

0.68

0.81 *

0.77 *+

0.98 *

0.57 *+

0.85*+

LONG RUN

1.12 *

0.93 *

0.84 *

0.94 *

1.03 *

1.10 *

1.52 *

0.89 *

1.08 *

0.97 *

0.71 *+

1.02*

SHORT RUN

0.88 *

0.52 *+

0.78 *++

0.62 *+

0.49 *+

0.24 +

0.82 *

0.54

1.18 *

0.63 *

0.22 +

0.64*+

LONG RUN

0.83 *

0.74 *

1.06 *

0.88 *

0.98 *

0.46

0.75

1.08 *

1.00 *

0.39

0.43

0.84*

SHORT RUN

0.61 *+

0.72 *+

0.58 *+

0.97 *

0.85 *

1.25 *

-0.42 +

0.58 **

0.48 *+

0.43 *+

0.50 *+

0.62*+

LONG RUN

0.85 *

1.03 *

0.74 *

1.09 *

0.94 *

0.97

0.48

0.18

0.78 +

0.76 *

0.62

0.78*+

SHORT RUN

0.58 *+

0.62 *+

0.71 *+

0.42 *+

0.56 *+

0.61 *+

0.35 **+

0.36 *+

0.51 *+

0.24 *+

0.31 *+

0.50*+

LONG RUN

0.89 *

0.97 *

1.11 *

0.73 *+

1.07 *

0.58 *+

0.85 *

0.94 *

0.98 *

0.66 *+

0.56 *+

0.87*+

SHORT RUN

0.60 *+

0.46 *+

0.91 *

0.58 *+

0.56 *+

1.04 *

0.04 +

0.22 **+

0.36 *+

0.34 *+

0.14 +

0.51*+

LONG RUN

0.58 *+

0.92 *

1.07 *

0.81 *

0.99 *

1.26 *

0.18 +

0.65 *++

0.75 *+

0.76 *

0.04 +

0.76*+

SHORT RUN

0.62 *+

0.60 *+

0.76 *+

0.60 *+

0.65 *+

0.51 *+

0.08 +

0.58 *

0.58 *+

0.18 *+

0.23 *+

0.50*+

LONG RUN

0.62 *+

0.84 *

1.02 *

0.74 *+

0.84 *

0.55

0.19 +

0.91 *

0.76 *

0.39 *+

0.23 +

0.64*+

*(**) the null hypothesis H : a = 0 ( short run ) or
0
0

4
i=0

ai = 0 ( long run ) is rejected at 95% (90%) level. +(++) the null hypothesis H 0 : a0 = 1 or

4
i=0

ai = 1 is rejected at 95% (90%) level.

The product disaggregation is as follows: 0. Food and live animals, 1. Beverages and tobacco, 2. Crude materials, inedible, 3. Mineral fuels, 4. Oils, fats and waxes, 5. Chemical
products, 6. Basic manufactures, 7. Machines and transport equipment, 8. Miscellaneous manufactured goods.

31

Table 2

DIFFERENCES IN RATES OF EXCHANGE RATE PASS-THROUGH INTO IMPORT PRICES BY COUNTRY
Pass-through rates by country
Country

(1)

(2)

Short-run

Long-run

Percentage of total industries for which the specified hypothesis can be rejected (a)
Short-run
(3)
Pass-through rate
is zero

Long-run

(4)
Pass-through rate
is one

(5)
Pass-through rate
is zero

(6)
Pass-through rate
is one

France

0.77 *+

0.79 *+

0.89

0.78

0.89

0.44

Belgium-Luxembourg

0.58 *+

0.83 *+

1.00

0.89

1.00

0.11

Netherlands

0.76 *+

0.79 *+

0.89

0.89

1.00

0.11

Germany

0.63 *+

0.75 *+

1.00

0.89

1.00

0.33

Italy

0.69 *+

0.94 *

0.89

0.78

1.00

0.00

Ireland

0.50 *+

0.56 *+

0.67

0.67

0.56

0.22

Greece

0.47 *+

0.78 *+

0.33

0.67

0.33

0.33

Portugal

0.80 *+

0.82 *

0.89

0.44

0.78

0.11

Spain (b)

0.81 *

1.04 *

1.00

0.88

0.88

0.25

Finland

0.75 *+

0.77 *+

0.89

0.78

0.78

0.33

Austria

0.54 *+

0.77 *+

0.78

1.00

0.44

0.56

Average

0.66

0.81

Sources: Eurostat (Comext database) and own calculations.
(a) The total number of industries is 9.
(b) Excluding Beverages and tobacco.
*/+ :It can be statistically rejected at 5% level that the pass-through rate is zero/one.

32

Table 3

DIFFERENCES IN RATES OF EXCHANGE RATE PASS-THROUGH INTO IMPORT PRICES BY INDUSTRY
Pass-through rates by industry
Industry

Percentage of countries for which the specified hypothesis can be rejected (a)
Short-run

(1)
Short-run

(2)
Long-run

(3)
Pass-through rate
is zero

Long-run

(4)
Pass-through rate
is one

(5)
Pass-through rate
is zero

(6)
Pass-through rate
is one

Food and live animals

0.54 *+

0.78 *+

0.82

0.91

0.82

0.18

Beverages and tobacco (b)

0.31 *+

0.44 *+

0.50

0.90

0.50

0.60

Crude material, inedible

0.57 *+

0.93 *

0.91

0.91

1.00

0.09

Mineral fuels

0.85 *+

1.02 *

0.91

0.45

1.00

0.09

Oils, fats and waxes

0.64 *+

0.84 *

0.73

0.55

0.64

0.00

Chemical products

0.62 *+

0.78 *+

0.91

0.64

0.64

0.09

Basic manufactures

0.50 *+

0.87 *+

1.00

1.00

1.00

0.36

Machines and transport equipment

0.51 *+

0.76 *+

0.82

0.82

0.82

0.36

Miscellaneous manufactured goods

0.50 *+

0.64 *+

0.91

0.91

0.73

0.45

Average

0.56

0.79

Sources: Eurostat (Comext database) and own calculations.
(a) The total number of countries is 11.
(b) Excluding Spain.
*/+ :It can be statistically rejected at 5% level that the pass-through rate is zero/one.

33

Table 4

TEST OF THE EQUALITY OF SHORT AND LONG-RUN PASS-THROUGH ESTIMATES (P-values)

This table reports the p-values from a test of the restrictions that the estimated short-run and long-run pass-through elasticities are the same for all industries within each country (left
panel) and that they are constant for a given industry in the eleven countries in the sample (right panel).

COUNTRY
France

EQUALITY ACROSS
INDUSTRIES WITHIN EACH
COUNTRY
SHORT RUN
LONG RUN
0.00
0.11

INDUSTRY
0. Food and live animals

EQUALITY ACROSS
COUNTRIES WITHIN EACH
INDUSTRY
SHORT RUN
LONG RUN
0.00
0.28

Belgium-Luxembourg

0.43

0.39

1. Beverages and tobacco

0.54

0.52

Netherlands

0.00

0.45

2. Crude material, inedible

0.00

0.52

Germany

0.00

0.00

3. Mineral fuel

0.13

0.83

Italy

0.00

0.98

4. Oils, fats and waxes

0.21

0.89

Ireland

0.01

0.08

5. Chemical products

0.00

0.73

Greece

0.19

0.45

6. Basic manufactures

0.02

0.02

Portugal

0.47

0.86

7. Machines and transport equipment

0.00

0.02

Spain

0.00

0.00

8. Miscellaneous manufactured goods

0.04

0.20

% of rejections (at 5% level)

66.7%

22.2%

Finland

0.00

0.40

Austria

0.72

0.78

63.6%

18.2%

% of rejections (at 5% level)

34

Table 5 SHARE OF THE EURO AS THE CURRENCY OF DENOMINATION OF EMU TRADE WITH THE REST OF THE WORLD
(As a % of the total) (a)
IMPORTS

2000

Goods
2001
2002

2000

Services
2001
2002

2003

2003

Belgium (b)

43.6

47.2

53.6

57.0

44.4

44.4

57.7

France

35.0

39.8

46.8

45.1

47.6

54.6

Germany

-

-

48.0

55.2

-

Greece

-

29.3

35.8

39.6

Italy

-

40.8

44.2

Luxembourg

-

-

Portugal

47.0

Spain

44.0

EXPORTS

2000

Goods
2001
2002

2003

2000

Services
2001
2002

64.3

42.0

46.7

53.5

55.3

45.4

-

55.5

64.4

54.7

51.7

48.0

49.2

55.3

52.4

57.3

60.4

56.9

57.9

-

-

-

-

-

49.0

63.0

-

-

-

-

-

15.3

16.8

20.1

-

23.5

39.3

47.3

-

11.3

13.3

16.3

44.5

-

49.9

56.1

62.9

-

52.7

54.1

58.2

-

50.7

57.0

62.1

35.3

41.7

-

-

28.5

36.0

-

-

51.5

52.7

-

-

40.4

43.0

53.6

57.5

60.2

53.7

55.6

58.3

64.3

40.1

43.5

48.4

54.6

37.4

37.4

44.1

48.6

49.7

55.8

60.3

42.4

45.3

49.4

54.6

49.0

52.0

57.5

60.8

50.5

52.9

59.5

63.8

2003

Source: ECB (2003 and 2005).
(a) Data refer to the use of the euro as a settlement currency, except for Germany (invoicing currency).
(b) Data for 2000 and 2001 for Belgium refer to Belgium and Luxembourg.

35

Table 6
Product
Country

STRUCTURAL BREAK TESTS (a)
0
Food and live
animals

France

SR-C

BelgiumLuxembourg

SR-C
LR-C

1
Beverages
and tobacco

2
Crude
materials,
inedible

3
Mineral fuels

SR-C
LR-C

Italy

LR-C

5
Chemical
products

LR-S
1992:9
(0.10)
LR-S
1998:12
(0.10)

Netherlands
Germany

4
Oils, fats and
waxes

Greece

Spain

Finland

Austria

7
Machines and
transport
equipment

8
Miscellaneous
manufactured
Goods

SR-C

SR-C

SR-C

SR-C

SR-C
LR-C

SR-C

SR-C

SR-C

SR-C

SR-C
LR-C

SR-S
1991:10
(0.03)
LR-S
1993:1
(0.02)

Ireland

Portugal

6
Basic
manufactures

SR-C

SR-C
LR-S
1993:3
(0.00)

SR-C
SR-C
SR-C
LR-S
2002:10
(0.02)
LR-C

LR-S
1998:9
(0.07)
SR-C

(a) SR-S (LR-S) stands for a rejection of the null hypothesis of absence of an endogenous structural break in the short (long) run. The break takes place at the date shown in italics. In
parenthesis, p-value of the test.
SR-C (LR-C) stands for a rejection of the null hypothesis of absence of a structural break in May 1998 in the short (long) run

36

Appendix:
Table A: Vector Error Correction Model Results for Exchange Rate Pass Through Elasticities in the Import Price Equation
Industry
0. Food and live animals
1. Beverages and tobacco
2. Crude material,
inedible
3. Mineral fuel
4. Oils, fats and waxes
5. Chemical products
6. Basic manufactures
7. Machines and
transport equipment
8. Miscellaneous
manufactured goods

France
SHORT RUN
LONG RUN
SHORT RUN
LONG RUN
SHORT RUN
LONG RUN
SHORT RUN
LONG RUN
SHORT RUN
LONG RUN
SHORT RUN
LONG RUN
SHORT RUN
LONG RUN
SHORT RUN
LONG RUN
SHORT RUN
LONG RUN

BelgiumLuxembourg

Netherlands

0.73
0.96

-0.01
1.08
0.62
1.32

0.35
1.06

0.11
0.92

Germany

Italy

Ireland

0.52
-0.04

0.05
1.04

0.61
0.56
0.33
1.12
1.57
1.07

0.09
1.05

0.33
0.84

0.39
1.07
0.06
1.00

0.39
0.90

0.01
0.74
-0.06
1.18

Greece

Portugal

Spain

Finland

Austria

0.25
0.94
-0.11
0.25

0.53
0.70

0.70
0.85
0.56
1.15
0.95
0.01
0.44
0.11

1.05
1.03

0.77
1.11

0.10
0.33

0.25
0.92

0.35
0.31
0.54
1.62

0.27
0.70
-0.15
0.65

0.39
0.72

0.13
0.42

Note: Estimation results are shown only for those cases in which it can be rejected that there is no cointegration.
VECM are specified assuming that (i) there is only one cointegration equation, (ii) there is no linear trend in the series, (iii) the cointegration relationships include
an intercept, (iv) two lags of the first differences of the variables are included in the specification.

