NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE LAW AND ECONOMICS OF
ANTIDISCRIMINATION LAW
John J. Donohue III
Working Paper 11631
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11631
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2005

The author wishes to thank Mitch Polinsky, Steve Shavell, and Peter Siegelman for their extremely valuable
comments, and Stanford and Yale Law Schools for research support. Michael Gottfried, Christopher Griffin,
and Seth Stephens-Davidowitz provided outstanding research assistance. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by John J. Donohue III. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Law and Economics of Antidiscrimination Law
John J. Donohue III
NBER Working Paper No. 11631
September 2005, Revised September 2006
JEL No. H, J, K
ABSTRACT

This essay provides an overview of the central theoretical law and economics insights concerning
antidiscrimination law across a variety of contexts including discrimination in labor markets, housing
markets, consumer purchases, and policing. The different models of discrimination based on animus,
statistical discrimination, and cartel exploitation are analyzed for both race and sex discrimination.
I explore the theoretical arguments for prohibiting private discriminatory conduct and illustrate the
tensions that exist between concerns for liberty and equality. I also discuss the critical point that one
cannot automatically attribute observed disparities in various economic or social outcomes to
discrimination, and illustrate the complexities in establishing the existence of discrimination. The
major empirical findings showing the effectiveness of federal law in the first decade after passage
of the 1964 Civil Rights Act are contrasted with the generally less optimistic findings from
subsequent antidiscrimination interventions.

John J. Donohue
Yale Law School
PO Box 208215
New Haven, CT 06520-8215
and NBER
j.donohue@yale.edu

Abstract:
This essay provides an overview of the central theoretical law and economics insights
and empirical findings concerning antidiscrimination law across a variety of contexts
including discrimination in labor markets, housing markets, consumer purchases, and
policing. The different models of discrimination based on animus, statistical
discrimination, and cartel exploitation are analyzed for both race and sex discrimination.
I explore the theoretical arguments for prohibiting private discriminatory conduct in light
of the tensions that exist between concerns for liberty and equality. I also discuss the
complexities in empirically establishing the existence of discrimination and highlight the
critical point that one cannot automatically attribute observed disparities in various
economic or social outcomes to discrimination. The major empirical findings showing
the effectiveness of federal law in the first decade after passage of the 1964 Civil Rights
Act are contrasted with the generally less optimistic findings from more recent
antidiscrimination interventions.
Keywords: Discrimination, disparate impact, disparate treatment, profiling, statistical
discrimination, Antidiscrimination law and economic welfare.
JEL classification: J70, J71, J78, K31, K42, D72

I.

INTRODUCTION

The last century of world history has been marred by episodes of appalling
mistreatment of various racial, ethnic, and religious groups.1 While the acts of
discrimination against and mistreatment of women around the world may have been less
visible, their consequences have been even more arithmetically compelling if one credits
Amartya Sen’s conclusion that 100 million women are missing.2 In this country, the
horrors of slavery and the Civil War ultimately led to the first great body of American
antidiscrimination law, which was followed by a century of rigid racial discrimination in
the Jim Crow South. The evils of the Holocaust gave considerable impetus to the
emergence of the second great body of antidiscrimination law after World War II when
New York and New Jersey became the first states to prohibit discrimination in
employment. In the ensuing decades, most states followed their lead.
The final phase of expanding federal antidiscrimination law began with the
adoption of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. This federal ban on discrimination, which
played a critical role in dismantling the rigid discriminatory social order of the South, is
1

See Power (2002). Turkey's killing of nearly one million Armenians, the Nazi’s killing of six million
Jews, Iraq's slaughter of more than one hundred thousand Kurds, Bosnian Serbs' murder of some two
hundred thousand Muslims and Croats, and the Rwandan Hutu’s slaughter of 800,000 Tutsi -- among the
most horrific events of the last century -- were all motivated or aggravated by racial/ethnic/religious
antagonism.
2
Sen (1990) claims this is primarily because women have not received comparable care to men in health,
medicine, and nutrition. Oster (2005) argues that perhaps half of this shortfall is due not to discrimination
but to an unusual effect of prevalent Hepatitis B virus that results in a greater percentage of male births
(perhaps because of higher miscarriage rates of female fetuses).

2

now used to regulate an enormous array of social practices from the workplace and
schools to public accommodations and policing. Other important developments in the
federal effort to dismantle southern racial segregation were the Supreme Court’s rejection
of the separate but equal doctrine in Brown v. Bd. of Education (1954) and the Voting
Rights Act of 1965. Antidiscrimination law has been growing dramatically in scope for
at least the last half century, and has revolutionized the American conception of the
proper role of government.3
Today, most Americans -- and virtually all public officials -- have embraced
prohibitions on discrimination as an important constraint on both private contracting
and public action. Moreover, even as issues such as a ban on discrimination against
gays and certain types of affirmative action have generated opposition, the reach of
antidiscrimination law has never been greater.
The growth in the scope of antidiscrimination law can be seen in the language of
Section 12920 of California’s Fair Employment and Housing Act (FEHA), which states:
It is hereby declared as the public policy of this state that it is necessary to
protect and safeguard the right and opportunity of all persons to seek,
obtain, and hold employment without discrimination or abridgment on
account of race, religious creed, color, national origin, ancestry, physical
disability, mental disability, medical condition, marital status, sex, age, or
sexual orientation.
When employers are not subject to such legal restrictions, advertisements seeking
workers described along these precise characteristics – such as “young, white females” or
“married, white male” – are abundant. In 1960, American newspapers were full of such
now-prohibited advertisements, and in areas of the world that don’t have
antidiscrimination laws such ads are common today.4 The growing power of
antidiscrimination law in the United States represents a dramatic rejection of classical
liberal notions of freedom of contract. Again, Section 12920 of California’s FEHA offers
the following, sweeping rationale for the legal prohibition:
It is recognized that the practice of denying employment opportunity and
discriminating in the terms of employment for these reasons foments
domestic strife and unrest, deprives the state of the fullest utilization of its
capacities for development and advancement, and substantially and
adversely affects the interest of employees, employers, and the public in
general.
The California statute goes on to set forth a similarly long list of prohibited bases for
actions concerning housing accommodations (excluding the prohibition on age
discrimination while adding a prohibition based on familial status). Many states have
3

For further materials on the issues raised in this paper, see Donohue (2003).
See Darity and Mason (1998). For example, want ads seeking candidates specified by race/ethnicity,
gender and age are published online in the classifieds of the New Straits Times in Malaysia, which has no
law prohibiting private employment discrimination in a country that is roughly 1/3 Bumiputra (ethnic
Malay and religiously Muslim), 1/3 Indian, and 1/3 Chinese.
4

3

responded to tobacco industry lobbying and now prohibit “discrimination” against
cigarette smokers,5 and a few jurisdictions even ban discrimination on the basis of all
physical characteristics.6 With crime dropping sharply throughout the United States in
the 1990s, the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) launched a major campaign
against discrimination in policing – so-called “racial profiling” – which was gaining wide
support, at least until the events of 9/11 rekindled the argument that some types of
profiling might serve useful law enforcement functions.7 Meanwhile, lawsuits
challenging discriminatory practices in mortgage lending, housing practices, insurance
sales, and the financing of automobiles have been prominent elements of the attack on
allegedly discriminatory business practices.
Judged by any measure of legal significance, American antidiscrimination law has
continued to grow in importance. It has assumed a large place in current domestic legal
consciousness and has been a major legal export as other countries have emulated the
U.S. legal prohibitions. Another noteworthy reflection of the importance of this topic is
the caliber of the contributors to the scholarship in this area -- the Nobel economists
alone include Gary Becker, Kenneth Arrow, Milton Friedman, George Akerlof, Amartya
Sen and James Heckman. Within the legal academy, major contributions have come
from many top law and economics scholars, including Richard Posner, Robert Cooter,
Richard Epstein, Ian Ayres, and Christine Jolls. While a simple vision of animus-based
discrimination, which Becker fashioned into the first economic theory of employment
discrimination, has motivated elected officials and the public to support an elaborate
body of law committed to the eradication of “discrimination” against an ever-widening
group of claimants, the issue is far too multi-faceted and the nature of the protected
classes far too diverse to be adequately encompassed by a single theoretical framework.
In addition, the goals of antidiscrimination law have evolved: initially, legal and
economic notions of “discrimination” were broadly compatible, but over time an
increasingly expansive legal conception of discrimination has come into greater conflict
5

Finkin (1996) describes the recent trend as follows:
Employers commonly forbid drinking on the job and, more recently, prohibit smoking on the
premises. But some employers have gone much further, and refuse to hire or retain employees
who drink or smoke at all, in an effort to reduce medical insurance costs attendant to such
behavior. Unlike many of the other invasions of individual autonomy, these policies have drawn
the attention of politically influential groups, i.e., the tobacco and alcohol interests. Consequently,
eighteen states now expressly forbid discrimination on the basis of off-premises use of tobacco;
one forbids discrimination on the basis of off-premises use of tobacco or alcohol; and six forbid
discrimination on the basis of off-premises use of any "lawful product." Absent such legislation,
however, nothing prohibits such employer commands…. Colorado forbids discrimination by
employers for engagement in "any lawful activity" off the employer's premises and New York
forbids discrimination for engagement in "legal recreation activities."

Moreover, a new argument designed to protect smokers is that smoking is an addiction protected by the
Americans with Disabilities Act. While it is doubtful that this argument will prevail, it does underscore the
continued pressure for extending the reach of American antidiscrimination law.
6
For example, the city of Santa Cruz has an antidiscrimination ordinance [Chapter 9.83.02(13)] that goes
beyond the law of California to ban discrimination on the basis of “height, weight or physical
characteristic.”
7
As Schauer (2003) notes: “As a generalization, the principle of treating all equally is a principle that
ignores real differences—and consequently comes at a price.”

4

with the economic notion of discrimination. As the ambitions of antidiscrimination law
have advanced beyond the narrow task of eliminating economic inequities to promote
broader goals of distributive justice, the costs imposed by the regulatory framework and
the tensions between the demands of law and the forces of the market have grown. This
chapter will address these issues from both a theoretical and empirical basis, while
shedding light on what antidiscrimination law has accomplished in the past and what it is
achieving today.
Section II begins with a brief overview of American antidiscrimination law that
defines the key legal concepts of disparate treatment and disparate impact discrimination,
and notes the breadth of American social life that is governed by the far-reaching
regulatory apparatus. Section III discusses the basic economic theories of discrimination,
and highlights their virtues and shortcomings. Section IV then explores the theoretical
arguments for prohibiting private discriminatory conduct and illustrates the tensions that
exist between concerns for liberty and equality. Section V makes the critical point that
one cannot automatically attribute observed disparities in various economic or social
outcomes to discrimination, and Section VI illustrates the complexities in establishing the
existence of discrimination. Section VII discusses some practical problems with
antidiscrimination law, revolving around the difficulties of motive-based litigation and
the dangers of Type I and Type II error as well as the costs of preventing the use of
efficient statistical discrimination. Section VIII then discusses some of the major
empirical studies evaluating the impact of antidiscrimination law. One important
message from this literature is that the initial adoption of Title VII of the 1964 Civil
Rights Act aided black economic welfare but that further efforts to strengthen federal
antidiscrimination law have been subject to the law of diminishing returns. Section IX
discusses the evidence on whether antidiscrimination law has aided female workers,
examines the data on premarket factors that may influence female labor outcomes, and
describes the development of one particular strand of the ban on sex discrimination –
harassment on the basis of sex. The literature on discrimination in mortgage lending and
major consumer markets is outlined in Section X. Section XI discusses “racial profiling”
in policing, and Section XII concludes.
II.

THE CONTOURS OF ANTIDISCRIMINATION LAW

Since the various legislative mandates against “discrimination” generally offer
little further guidance on what those prohibitions mean, the development of the precise
contours of antidiscrimination law over the last half century has largely been the product
of judicial decision-making. For example, the prohibition embodied in Title VII of the
1964 Civil Rights Act was initially thought to extend only to intentional employment
discrimination, or so-called “disparate treatment” discrimination. The courts would ask
whether the plaintiff would have been treated differently if he or she did not have the
particular trait in question.8 In the 1971 case of Griggs v. Duke Power, the Supreme
Court fashioned an additional and potentially more sweeping theory of discrimination.
This so-called “disparate impact” doctrine prohibited facially neutral acts that had an
8

One major issue of contention raised by this definition was whether it would prevent employers from
engaging in voluntary affirmative action that provided some advantage to workers having one of the
protected characteristics. This issue will be discussed below.

5

adverse impact on certain protected classes unless the employer could offer a sufficiently
compelling justification for the practice. In the workplace, typical practices that might be
challenged include the use of screening tests for employment or for promotion. In
policing, a disparate impact charge might be used to challenge drug enforcement efforts
that involved targeting certain cars or driving conduct. Determining what legally
“justifies” conduct generating a disparate racial or ethnic impact involves some balancing
of the benefits generated by the practice in question versus the costs to the group that is
differentially impacted.
The Supreme Court has held, though, that this disparate impact doctrine is not
available to litigants who base their claim of discrimination on the Constitution (typically
under the Fifth or Fourteenth Amendments) or to those suing under Section 1981 of the
federal code (which provides a remedy only for intentional racial discrimination).9 One
or both elements of this disparate treatment/disparate impact structure have been applied
to legal challenges to discrimination in a large array of different domains:
a. labor markets (Title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act is the primary
federal law and most states have similar -- or in states such as
California, more stringent -- prohibitions. The major judicial
expansions were the creation of the disparate impact standard in
1971 and bringing sexual harassment within the ambit of the
prohibition of sex discrimination in 1986.10 The Age
Discrimination in Employment Act and the Americans with
Disabilities Act represent the two major non-Title VII legislative
expansions of federal antidiscrimination law, with the latter
explicitly going beyond the prior notion of prohibiting
discrimination to mandating that employers provide “reasonable”
accommodations to “qualified” disabled workers.11)
b. education (Title VI prohibits discrimination in any program that
receives federal funds)
c. criminal justice and racial profiling (the Fourteenth Amendment and
Title VI have been used to challenge racially disparate outcomes
in death penalty cases, drug and traffic enforcement, and street
policing)
d. the provision of health care services (Fourteenth Amendment and
Title VI)
9

The enduring disagreement within the federal judiciary as to whether the disparate impact doctrine is
applicable to cases brought under the federal Age Discrimination in Employment Act has recently been
answered in the affirmative Smith v. City of Jackson, 125 S. Ct. 1536 (2005). The same decision had been
imposed legislatively in California in 1999.
10
In 1980, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission issued “Guidelines on Discrimination Because
of Sex,” which declared sexual harassment a violation of Title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act. These
guidelines defined two distinct categories of sexual harassment: “quid pro quo” and “hostile environment”
harassment. In the 1986 case of Vinson v. Meritor Bank, the U.S. Supreme Court affirmed that “hostile
environment” sex harassment violated Title VII.
11
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, in 1997 about 52.6 million people (19.7 percent of the population)
had some type of disability and among those with a disability, 33 million people (12.3 percent of the
population) had a severe disability.

6

e. housing and lending (The Fair Housing Act and Equal Credit
Opportunity Act)
f. purchase of goods and services (Section 1981 prohibits intentional
racial discrimination).
The threat of employment discrimination litigation, along with pressure on federal
government contractors to comply with the antidiscrimination and affirmative action
requirements of Executive Order 11422, has led many firms to develop affirmative action
plans to reduce perceived shortfalls in the employment share of minority and female
workers.12 There is an obvious tension between the establishment of a race or genderbased affirmative action plan and the statutory language of Section 703(m) of the Civil
Rights Act of 1991, which states that “an unlawful employment practice is established
when the complaining party demonstrates that race, color, religion, sex, or national origin
was a motivating factor for any employment practice.” The courts have resolved this
tension by allowing private employers to grant preferences on race or gender grounds but
only in the limited circumstances where there is a manifest imbalance in the employer’s
workforce and any preferential treatment does not unduly burden members of the nonpreferred group.13 Governmental affirmative action is subject to strict scrutiny under the
equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment (or under the Fifth Amendment in
the case of federal governmental action), and the permissible scope of such affirmative
action has been defined through a series of Supreme Court decisions. California has
adopted a constitutional amendment -- Proposition 209 -- that prohibits any form of
preferential treatment based on race or gender in state employment or in the operation of
other state functions, such as education and contracting for construction and other
services. Private employers and universities in California are still free to pursue such
race and gender-based preferences as long as they do not overstep the bounds of federal
(or state) antidiscrimination law.
III.

THEORIES OF DISCRIMINATION

Although the contexts in which discrimination is found vary widely, ranging from
labor markets and health care to housing, education and the purchase of automobiles, the
reasons for such discrimination are relatively few. In fact, the implicit internal
justification of discriminators in any area generally falls into one of four categories: 1)
“we don’t like you” (aversion) or, what is often functionally equivalent, “we prefer
someone other than you” (nepotism); 2) “it is in our self-interest to cater to the aversion
or nepotism of others even though we don’t share those feeling ourselves”; 3) “we can
further our independent interests by acting to subordinate another group, either because
such actions enhance our self-esteem or undermine economic competition from your
group”; and 4) “taking your particular trait into account can help us achieve a legitimate
goal more effectively.” As we will see, the first two of these are predicated on certain
individuals having a “taste” for discrimination, which actually tends to harm the one
having such a taste, at least if it is being expressed in a competitive market setting. The
12

See Leonard (1984a), Leonard (1984b), Ashenfelter and Heckman (1976), and Heckman and Wolpin
(1976).
13
United Steelworkers v. Weber, 443 U.S. 193 (1979).

7

third and fourth categories involve the strategic use of discrimination to further one’s
own interests, in some cases intentionally imposing burdens on the disadvantaged group
(Category 3 – the cartel model) and in others simply burdening certain members of the
group without necessarily harming the group as a whole unless the group’s incentives to
invest in their human capital is impaired (Category 4 – statistical discrimination).
To illustrate, the employer who dislikes blacks and therefore refuses to hire black
applicants or the police officer who stops a black driver out of animus and gives a ticket
when he would not have done so had the driver been white is engaging in animus-based
discrimination (Category 1). The airline that exclusively hires young female flight
attendants to cater to the preferences of its passengers or the restaurant that hires only
white servers in response to customer preferences is acceding to the bias or nepotism of
others (Category 2). The prototype of Category 3 discrimination was the informal Jim
Crow restrictions that kept blacks out of the southern textile industry throughout the first
two-thirds of the 20th Century. The drug enforcement agent who finds that using race or
ethnicity can increase the likelihood of making drug seizures, or the employer who feels
that such traits are useful proxies for certain productivity-related traits is engaging in
statistical discrimination (Category 4). Such behavior, though likely widespread, is
illegal, whether the stereotypes are accurate or inaccurate.
Importantly, an actor who doesn’t consider any protected characteristic but who
acts directly on factors that are universally accepted as legitimate is not engaging in
discrimination, even if a racial or ethnic disparity emerges.14 Thus, the FBI reports that
51 percent of homicide offenders in 2002 were black, while 50 percent of those arrested
for homicide were black. Even though only 12.7 percent of the population is black, the
close correlation between the race of homicide offenders and race of homicide arrestees
undermines the view that the police are invidiously discriminating in making homicide
arrests. Assuming all the arrests are accurate, this is not discrimination by the police.15
The next four subsections will discuss the four categories of discrimination in the context

14

Determining what factors constitute “legitimate” bases for action has been complicated since the
Supreme Court created the disparate impact theory of discrimination. Disparate impact discrimination,
which is prohibited in the employment realm by Title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act, involves the use of
a neutral proxy other than race or some other protected trait. Because the decision-maker in such
disparate impact cases is not relying on a directly relevant factor, this conduct differs from my illustration
of a nondiscriminatory judgment, and because it does not rely directly on race (or other protected trait), it
differs from my definition of statistical discrimination. (This distinction can break down if a court allows a
disparate impact challenge to a subjective employment process that uses only factors “universally accepted
as legitimate.”)
15
Of course, the pattern may result from discrimination elsewhere in society, but in a system where
“discrimination” is often penalized heavily (both in terms of social opprobrium and through monetary
damages), it is important to be clear about who is -- and is not -- engaging in discriminatory conduct.
Similarly, the results of the recent New Haven taxi-cab study in Ayres et al. (2005) suggest that black
drivers receive considerably smaller tips than white drivers. If this differential accurately reflected
differences in driver service (for example, less help with bags or knowledge about locations), then there
would be no discrimination. Instead, the authors conclude the disparity results from the animus-based
discrimination of taxi passengers. Note, though, that a system designed to reduce discrimination by
including tips in the cab fare would help black drivers, while hurting black customers since the latter tended
to provide lower tips than white customers (which may not be surprising given the links between race and
income).

8

of employment discrimination, but, as we have just seen, they apply to other contexts as
well.16
A.
Employer Discrimination
The core understanding of the electorate about the nature of discrimination and
the motivating dynamic propelling the expanding prohibitions against discrimination has
consistently been that animus by prejudiced employers is pervasive and seriously harms
the employment prospects of women and minorities. According to this view, elderly and
disabled workers are disadvantaged, not only because on average their age and
incapacities lower their productivity but also because of irrational bias. As will be
discussed below, one of the key features of this type of discrimination is that it burdens
not only the victim, but also imposes a cost on the discriminator.
1.
The Becker Employer-Animus Model
Gary Becker’s theory of employer animus-based discrimination attempts to model
this conception of discrimination by positing that a discriminating employer must bear
not only the wage, w, when he or she hires a disfavored worker but also pay a
discriminatory psychic penalty, δ.17 The following condition should hold for the last
disfavored worker hired: mp = w + δ, (1) where mp is marginal productivity. Becker’s
model of the discriminating employer is mathematically equivalent to a case in which the
government imposes a variable tax on employers who hire workers of a certain group
(defined by race, gender, or other immutable trait), where the tax ranges from zero (for
the non-discriminators) to the maximum value M (the value of δ for the most highly
discriminating employer).18 Just as an employment tax would be expected to lower the
quantity demanded and earnings of workers, the psychic “tax” lowers the quantity
demanded and earnings of disfavored workers. Of course, if there is enough
heterogeneity in the population of employers, the actually observed psychic tax should be
far less than M, since disfavored workers will tend to gravitate to employers who bear a
smaller (or no) psychic penalty.
Conversely, the greater the number of disfavored workers in any labor market, the
greater the observed value of δ will be in that labor market as the marginal disfavored
workers will have to deal with employers characterized by higher values of δ in order to
be absorbed into the market. Indeed, this was one of the primary motivations of Becker’s
model: it provided an explanation for the greater apparent discriminatory penalty in the
South without resorting to differences in tastes for discrimination between northern and
southern employers. Even if employers in both regions were identical in the extent of
their racial prejudice, the much higher percentage of black residents in the South meant
that to find jobs, blacks had to associate with increasingly higher δ employers, leading to
widening earnings disparities between black and white workers. The Becker model of
16

The theories and empirical studies discussed in subsequent sections have been chosen for their
applicability to the functions and forms of antidiscrimination law. For a more general discussion of the
theoretical and empirical literature on discrimination, see Altonji and Blank (1999) and Cain (1986).
17
The variable δ is also known as the discrimination coefficient.
18
Conceivably, the tax could be negative, suggesting that the relevant group of workers is preferred rather
than disfavored. This, then, could be thought of as a model of nepotism (or attraction to workers
possessing certain non-productivity-related desirable traits).

9

employer animus thus provided an explanation for an important observed phenomenon –
the greater black-white earnings disparity in the South than the North – without resorting
to “difference in tastes” as the cause.
The model also generates a number of other predictions, which can be illustrated
with the simple supply and demand model of Figure 1. The intersection of demand curve
D1 and the supply curve S illustrates the short-term equilibrium for the market for black
workers in a world without discrimination. Black workers would earn a wage of W1, and
Q1 black workers will be hired. Becker models the introduction of employer
discrimination by positing a downward shift in the demand curve to D2 (which, as a way
of reflecting the higher “cost” of black workers, could alternatively be modeled as a
pseudo-upward shift in the supply curve, as indicated by equation (1) above – see
Donohue (1986) and Donohue (1989)). In this simple case, it is assumed that the vertical
distance AC reflects the uniform psychic penalty associated with hiring black workers.
The consequence of this discriminatory animus is that fewer blacks would be hired (only
Q2 instead of Q1) and black wages would fall from W1 to W2. Thus, at least in the shortrun, the Becker model predicts that the disfavored group will experience job losses and
receive lower pay relative to the non-discriminatory equilibrium given by point A in
Figure 1.
As Donohue (1987) underscored, the Becker model predicts that discriminating
employers are hurt by their discriminatory preference in that their net profit (monetary
minus psychic penalty) is actually larger in the non-discriminatory world than in the
discriminatory world.19 Note, too, that in the example illustrated in Figure 1, while the
discriminatory employer’s net benefit is lower, this employer’s total monetary reward is
greater (because the entire psychic cost denoted by AC represents money that ends up in
the pocket of the discriminator). In summary, the presence of discrimination can cost
jobs and money to the disfavored group and increase income inequality as black earnings
fall and the monetary profits of discriminators rise (even as their total psychic welfare
declines). One might use these conclusions as the basis for constructing an equity
argument for prohibiting employer animus-based discrimination. In this case, equity
would be defined by reference to the non-discriminatory equilibrium, and thus legal
efforts to move closer to that equilibrium would be defined as promoting equity.20
Conversely, if one were willing to value all preferences expressed in the market and no
others (as many economists are inclined to do), then any attempt of law to move away
from the discriminatory equilibrium would undermine efficiency (since the efficient
solution would be defined by intersection B in Figure 1). If preferences for redistribution
or racial justice (or against racial discrimination) are honored, however, then

19

Note that the “employer surplus” is the area under the demand curve above the relevant wage. Clearly,
this is lower for demand curve D2 than for demand curve D1.
20
Note that this is not the customary equity argument based on the perceived social benefit of enhancing
the wealth of the least well off members of society, although coincidentally this value may be served by
antidiscrimination policy because of the lower wealth of women and minorities. For this reason, taxes and
transfers, which are generally preferred to the use of the legal system as a way to redistribute wealth may
not be appropriately targeted to achieve the non-discriminatory equilibrium. Still, it is possible that tax
incentives to hire women and minorities might be a more efficient mechanism to reach the nondiscriminatory equilibrium at least cost (in light of the not inconsiderable costs of a litigation-based
antidiscrimination regime in which difficult issues of motives must be determined by judges and juries).

10

antidiscrimination law can have a role.21 Note that the Becker model assumes away any
possible harm to victims other than lost wages. Since juries now routinely award
compensatory damages in addition to back pay to victims of discrimination, this suggests
that the dishonor or psychological costs of discrimination are deemed to be significant.
An important conclusion from the Becker model is that, if there are enough nondiscriminatory employers around, disfavored workers may not suffer any monetary
penalty. In this event, blacks would work for the non-discriminators and would be paid
equally to white workers working for the discriminatory employers. Thus, even in the
presence of discriminatory attitudes by some employers, effective discrimination (in
terms of lower black wages and employment) may be eliminated by the operation of the
market, albeit by encouraging the segregation of workers. Correspondingly, mandated
segregation will increase the Beckerian psychic costs of discrimination by increasing the
interaction between discriminatory employers and disfavored workers.
2.
An Empirical Challenge to the Becker Model
Note that we have been discussing the short-run predictions of the Becker model,
which at first would appear to explain lower black wages and employment -- at least for
the case of the Jim Crow South and the discrimination confronted by southern black
workers prior to the adoption of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. But what would happen in
the long run under the Becker model? The market should discipline such discriminators,
and, at least under constant returns to scale, should ultimately drive out the
discriminators. For this reason, Milton Friedman argued that legal prohibitions on
discrimination in employment would be unnecessary since the market would solve the
problem. But this is where the Becker employer-animus model ran into problems. It
failed to explain the enduring exclusion of blacks from entire industries in which they
were fully capable of performing the work.22 In the competitive market that Becker
premised, the cost to discriminators of forsaking talented black workers should have
engendered a painful market response, ultimately leading to the elimination of the
discriminators if the employers operated in a world of constant returns to scale. Indeed,
Kenneth Arrow observed that Becker had developed a theory of employment
discrimination that “predicts the absence of the phenomenon it was designed to
explain.”23 Becker anticipated Arrow’s point by asserting that the shortage of

21

One can craft a theoretical argument based on the Coase Theorem that in a zero transactions cost world,
one would expect discrimination to be banned if the costs of discrimination exceeded their benefits. In this
calculus, the preferences of those who are offended by racism and other forms of prejudice would be
weighed fully. The outcome would then depend on whether the victims of discrimination and those who
decried their plight would be willing and able to compensate those who gained from discrimination. The
operation of free labor markets in a discriminatory environment will not reveal the answer to this empirical
question since transactions costs will prevent the opponents of discrimination from contracting with the
discriminators. (Query whether in practice an effort to bargain for respect will ipso facto be futile, since a
Coasean payment to induce someone to respect the payer in itself undermines the payer’s sense of selfworth. Of course, this problem can always be elided by considering it to be a violation of the zero
transactions costs assumption.)
22
Heckman and Payner (1989) note that blacks were largely excluded from the low-skill southern textile
industry for the entire 20th Century -- until the effective date of Title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act. I
analyzed the strengths of this article in Donohue (2002).
23
Arrow (1972).

11

entrepreneurial skill prevented the elimination of the discriminating employers.24 This
claim is unpersuasive, though, since very little talent was needed to see that blacks could
be hired at lower cost into low-skilled industries such as textiles. Yet this never
happened until Title VII took effect. Clearly, Title VII and not some newfound
entrepreneurial talent explains the large gains of blacks in the decade from 1965 to 1975
(as discussed in Section VIII (A) below).
Thus, while Becker’s theory of employer animus generated some useful
predictions, it failed to explain perhaps the key feature of racial discrimination in the
South -- its relentless persistence in excluding black workers from entire industries over
more than half a century. Nor can the employer model explain another common
characteristic of the pre-Title VII world -- occupational segregation (as opposed to
segregation across firms).
3.
Is the Becker Model Undermined By Positive Search Costs?
Black (1995) attempts to address the empirical inadequacies of the Becker
employer model of discrimination by introducing search costs into the analysis of
discrimination. Black relaxes the assumptions of frictionless hiring and perfect
competition to conclude that victims of discrimination may not be protected from
earnings discrimination even when numerous nondiscriminating firms are present. Two
assumptions about market behavior drive Black’s model: workers participate in a costly
search process and employers have some degree of monopsonistic power. In the
population of available workers, some portion λ is male (m) and the other 1 – λ is female
(f).25 Members of each group have a reservation utility Uj (j = m, f) that they compare to
wage offers from firms, which are labeled prejudiced (p) or unprejudiced (u). Prejudiced
firms, with market share θ, are known to employ only men at the wage w mp while
unprejudiced firms with market share 1 – θ employ both men and women at wages, wum
and wuf , respectively. Total utility for workers is the sum of wages received plus some
non-pecuniary job satisfaction parameter α kj (k = u, p). This value, which for instance
measures the success in matching individuals to occupation, is a random variable with
cumulative distribution function F(α) and density f(α).26 For ease of exposition, let α be
distributed uniformly over the unit rectangle.
The essence of the Black (1995) model is the search process involved in matching
workers with employers. When considering employment at a particular firm, a worker
accepts a wage offer whenever wkj ≥ Uj – α kj . If a match does not take place, the worker
incurs cost C. In equilibrium, the marginal worker will be indifferent between accepting
a job and continuing search. For men, this condition yields the equation:

24

Becker (1968).
Black’s model, although formulated here in terms of sex discrimination, applies to any type of
preference-based discrimination on the part of the employer.
26
In order to ensure that second order conditions are satisfied, the hazard function f(α)/[1 – F(α)] must be
strictly decreasing.
25

12

C =θ

1

∫ (w

m
p

α mp

1

)

(

)

+ α pm − U m f (α )dα + (1 − θ ) ∫ wum + α um − U m f (α )dα

(2)

α um

which, given our assumptions about α, becomes:
⎡ m 1 + α pm
⎤
⎡
⎤
1 + α um
C = θ ⎢ wp +
− U m ⎥ + (1 − θ ) ⎢ wum +
−Um ⎥
2
2
⎣
⎦
⎣⎢
⎦⎥

(3)

Equation (3) states that the cost of search must equal its expected benefits, or the net gain
derived from employment at either a u or p firm weighted by the probability of meeting
that firm type. According to equation (3), the derivative of Um with respect to w mp is θ and
with respect to wum is (1 – θ), which means that reservation utility increases with wage
offers but at a lower rate than the wage increase.
Women, however, can gain no utility from visits to prejudiced firms since such
firms refuse to hire them. Therefore, their equilibrium condition is characterized by:
1

(

)

C = (1 − θ ) ∫ wuf + α uf − U f f (α )dα

(4)

α uf

or
⎡ f 1 + α uf
⎤
C = (1 − θ ) ⎢ wu +
−U f ⎥
2
⎣
⎦

(5)

The comparative statics of equation (5) again imply that reservation utility increases with
the wage offer, but now on a one-for-one basis. However, an increase in the number of
prejudiced firms (given by θ) reduces reservation utility. The intuition for this result is
that a higher share of prejudiced firms increases search costs for women, which allows
unprejudiced firms to offer a lower wage and still attract female employees.
Unprejudiced firms therefore enjoy some degree of monopsonistic power due to the
costly search process.
Turning to the employer’s decision, let V denote the marginal product of labor,
which is assumed to be the same for men and women. Then, an unprejudiced firm’s
expected profit per applicant is given by:

π uj = [1 − F (U j − wuj )](V − wuj )

(6)

or

π uj = (1 − U j + wuj )(V − wuj )

(7)

and profit maximization entails a wage offer of:

13

(

)

wuj = 0.5 V + U j − 1

(8)

On the other hand, prejudiced firms that only hire men can expect a per applicant profit
of:

π pm = (1 − U m + w mp )(V − w mp )

(9)

and will offer the wage:

(

)

w mp = 0.5 V + U m − 1

(10)

Constant returns to scale ensure that wage offers are equalized for men across firm types,
which in turn equates the “male” profits of prejudiced and unprejudiced employers.
From Equations (8) and (10) we see that wages increase by one half for a unit increase in
either male or female reservation utility. However, so long as there is at least one
prejudiced firm, the negative effect of their presence on women’s reservation utility
guarantees that wf < wm. Thus, even when workers are equally productive, the existence
of any employers harboring taste-based discrimination against a minority group (or
women) will result in lower earnings for the members of that group – whether or not they
work for non-prejudiced employers.27
4.
Will Increased Competition Reduce Labor Market Discrimination?
For both the Becker employer discrimination model and the Black search cost
model, one would expect greater competition would dampen the degree of labor market
discrimination. This claim has recently been invoked as part of an argument in support of
globalization. Specifically, Jagdish Bhagwati’s latest book In Defense of Globalization
considers the impact of greater world economic integration on the fortunes of women by
posing the question: “has globalization accentuated, or has it been corrosive of, the
discriminations against women that many of us deplore and wish to destroy?” Bhagwati
answers this question by arguing that increased trade flows tend to narrow the male female wage gap.
According to Becker’s theory of the taste for discrimination, the decision to hire a
male rather than a female of equal or greater potential productivity places the firm at a
competitive disadvantage relative to its counterparts. In an autarkic world, uniform taste
discrimination will not affect the home country, since all firms are making hiring
decisions in the same way. However, once foreign trade is allowed, the forces of external
competition reduce the viability of such prejudice since relative productivity now matters.
Thus, “[t]he gender wage gap will then narrow in the industries that must compete with
imports produced by unprejudiced firms elsewhere.” In general, Bhagwati notes,
competition, regardless of its source, will elevate the price to the firm of indulging in

27

Duleep and Zalokar (1991) had previously observed that even if we do see equalization of gross wages, if
minorities have to search harder, then the cost of discrimination shows up as lower net wages including
search costs.

14

prejudiced behavior. As a result, “all fat [must] be removed from the firm” and the wage
gap will contract.
Bhagwati cites Black and Brainerd (2002) as empirical validation of this theory.
Specifically, they report that American firms that experienced an
openness/competitiveness shock displayed a faster decline in their gender wage gap.
Using Current Population Survey (CPS) data from 1977 through 1994, the authors try to
proxy the degree of discrimination against women by computing a “gender wage gap” for
63 industry groupings.28 The authors then estimate the following equation:
∆(ln(wage)xm - ln(wage)xω) = α + β∆tradex + γconcenx + ψ(trade*concen)x

(11)

where the dependent variable is the change in the residual gender wage gap, trade is the
import share and concen is an indicator of whether in 1977 the industry was concentrated
(i.e., had a four-firm concentration ratio of at least .4). Using the measure of the residual
gender wage gap reduces confounding from other sources of variation in earnings such as
education and labor market experience. Estimation of equation (11) focuses on the
coefficient on the trade-concentration interaction term, which is found, as hypothesized,
to be negative and statistically significant. The authors conclude that “a 10 percentage
point increase in import share in a concentrated industry would lead to a 6.6 percent
decline in the residual gender wage gap.”
Black and Brainerd’s paper constitutes evidence that increased competition, in
this case engineered by increased trade, can narrow discriminatory wage gaps.29 I am
skeptical, though, that the U.S. gender wage gap narrowed because of “imports produced
by unprejudiced firms elsewhere,” since many of our trading partners over this period
were much less oriented towards womens’ rights than we were. But note that even if
employers in a country such as China are biased against women, the competitive pressure
that their lower wage structure puts on U.S. firms gives American employers an incentive
not to pass up lower cost but equally productive female workers. (The pressure would
presumably be greater still if the Chinese employers were not discriminating against
women since their costs would be even lower, but competition from low-cost producers
should discipline American discriminators in any event).
If the Black and Brainerd study is correct, then two conclusions follow: (1) there
was considerable discrimination against women more than a decade after Title VII was
enacted and (2) increased international trade following 1977 eliminated some portion of
the discriminatory male-female wage gap differentially across the 63 industry

28

Black and Brainerd (2002) describes the derivation of the gender wage gap, the within-year earnings
disparity between men and women at the industry level, as follows:

The log wage is first regressed on four categorical education variables, age, age squared, and a
non-white dummy variable; this regression is estimated for the pooled sample of men and women
in each year of interest. The residual gender wage gap is then generated as the difference in the
average residual wage for men and women, calculated at the industry- or MSA-level.
29
Query whether the Black and Brainerd results suggest that men earned rents in concentrated industries
and that increased competition from trade dissipated these rents, leading to an observed shrinking of the
male-female earnings disparity.

15

groupings.30 I suspect, however, that the black-white earnings gaps did not narrow in the
same fashion. If this surmise is correct, then either there was less discrimination against
blacks by 1977 or Bhagwati’s claim needs to be refined.
Neither the Becker model of animus-based employer discrimination nor the Black
search cost model can explain the enduring exclusion of blacks in the southern labor
market from entire industries, such as textiles. The following sections will discuss three
rival theories to the notion of employer animus to explore whether these other types of
discrimination better explain the empirical evidence of the past or present.
B. Customer and Fellow-Worker Discrimination
The first alternative theory of discrimination, also originally crafted by Becker,
posits that discrimination emanates not from the employer but from customers and fellow
workers. This model has very different implications from the employer animus model in
that the market tends to punish employer animus but clearly rewards efforts to
accommodate the discriminatory preferences of customers and fellow workers. This
model would seem to have at least one major advantage over the employer animus model
since it can explain an enduring pattern of discrimination. Several recent papers have
tested empirically for customer discrimination and found evidence of unequal treatment
for minorities.31 The most basic theoretical formulation of customer discrimination posits
that buyers in the prejudiced group base their decisions on an adjusted price p(1 + δ) for
minority sellers, where δ again represents the discrimination coefficient. Realizing this,
firm managers will attempt to assign minorities to jobs with the least amount of customer
contact. In the polar case in which labor is perfectly mobile and positions within the firm
are easily segregated by group characteristic, then any wage disparity between majority
and minority workers of equal productivity will vanish as firms compete for the cheaper
supply. When the stringent assumptions of the polar case are not met, however, the
Becker model of customer discrimination can explain enduring wage shortfalls for the
dispreferred group.

1.
Borjas and Bronars’ Customer Discrimination Model
In contrast, the Borjas and Bronars (1989) model of self-employment and
customer discrimination introduces imperfect information and search costs, which
generate not only workforce segregation but also income inequality. The model assumes
that individuals can be divided on two dimensions: (1) between white (w) and black (b),
and (2) between buyers and sellers of each race. The percentage of black sellers in the
population is given by γ, while that of white sellers is 1 – γ. Assume also that these
fractions hold for the buyer population. The mechanism through which discrimination
30

Mulligan and Rubinstein (2005) conclude that the primary factors leading to the narrowing of the
measured gender wage gap are that women are investing more in their market productivity and there is a
positive selection effect operating in that, unlike in the 1970’s, “women working in the 1980’s and 1990’s
typically had better backgrounds (in terms of own schooling, cognitive test scores, and parental schooling)
than did non-working women.”
31
Nardinelli and Simon (1990) discover that baseball trading cards featuring nonwhite players sell at a
discount compares to white athletes and List (2004) uses an experimental design to uncover discriminatory
bargaining offers between white and nonwhite card traders. Holzer and Ihlanfeldt (1998) find that the
racial composition of a firm’s clientele affects hiring decisions with respect to race (especially for positions
with customer contact) as well as the wages that workers receive.

16

operates is the price markup that the representative white buyer perceives to pay for the
product of a black seller, denoted by δ.32 Therefore, the maximum price that a white
buyer will pay for a good produced by a black seller is R(1 – δ), where R is the
consumer’s valuation of the product.
The value of a price offer from a seller of race i to a buyer of race j, V(P, i, j), can
take one of three values. In the event that a transaction occurs, the price paid may equal
the buyer’s reservation price (which yields a net payoff of zero) or there may be some
positive net gain R – D(i, j)P, where P is the seller’s price offer. If the buyer rejects a
proposal, then she incurs cost C and has expected valuation EV(P, i, j) in the next round
of search.
Sellers, on the other hand, seek to maximize the utility function U = I – (Hλ / λ),
where I is income, H represents hours worked and λ > 1. They produce goods at the rate
β, conduct α transactions per unit of time and a fraction τ of those transactions result in
sales. The variable τ is determined by the segregation strategy of the seller, which equals
one for sales to all consumers or γ and 1 – γ, respectively, for exclusive sales to blacks or
whites. If production and sales cannot be performed simultaneously, then the efficient
portion of the workday devoted to production is s = ατ / (ατ + β).33 Substituting these
values into the function U and maximizing over H yields an optimal number of hours
worked, which in turn generates the indirect utility function:
σ

⎤
y
⎛ 1 ⎞ ⎡ ατβ
U * = ⎜ ⎟⎢
P (τ ) ⎥ =
σ
⎝ σ ⎠ ⎣ ατ + β
⎦

(12)

where σ = λ / (λ – 1) and y represents income consistent with utility maximizing behavior.
The segregation strategy is then chosen to maximize indirect utility according to equation
(12). Finally, the model allows for differences in seller productivity with high-ability (h)
and low-ability (l) individuals in each race group.
Borjas and Bronars close the model by characterizing the equilibrium
distributions of prices and income for the various types of market actors. Based on their
assumptions about preferences and production technologies, the equilibrium set of prices
is described by the following observations:
1) The price that sellers charge is the minimum of the reservation prices of the
consumers they opt to serve.
2) The order of reservation prices is: P*(w, w) ≥ P*(w, b) = P*(b, b) ≥ P*(b, w).
3) If the market segregates by race, then sellers will be of the same race as buyers.
4) Since high-ability sellers segregate only if their low-ability counterparts do, then
the offer price distribution is ordered as: Pwl ≥ Pwh ≥ Pbl ≥ Pbh.

32

It is assumed that white consumers do not discriminate against white sellers and that black buyers are
indifferent between sellers of either race.
33
Efficiency dictates that the part of the work day spent in production, sβH, equals the portion spent
conducting transactions, ατ(1 - s)H. Solving for s gives the equation in the text.

17

Thus, the price schedule of white sellers constitutes a ceiling above which black sellers
will never charge. Perhaps more striking is the result that high-ability sellers of both
races never price above their low-ability equivalents.
These results determine the first two moments of the income distributions for
white and black sellers. From the fourth condition above for prices, it is clear that even if
both black and white sellers are retaining all contacts (τ = 1), the latter can always charge
a higher price and, on average, generate more revenue. Therefore, the mean of the white
income distribution will be greater than that of the black sellers. As for the variance of
the distributions, Borjas and Bronars note that higher returns to ability follow from
greater variance in the distribution of income.34 They define the variable ∆ to be the ratio
of the relative incomes of high-ability sellers:
∆=

( y wh / y wl )
( ybh / ybl )

(13)

Whenever ∆ > 1, the returns to ability for whites exceed those for blacks, and Borjas and
Bronars derive a set of outcomes for the variance based on different market segregation
patterns.
These features of the price and income distributions indicate that incomplete
information (and attendant search costs) for consumers coupled with discriminatory tastes
will not only affect the size of the minority class in the market but also its quality
composition. Since high ability members of the minority class face lower returns to their
skill, they also have fewer incentives to engage in the prejudiced market.
2.
Chiswick’s Employee Discrimination Model
In addition to customer discrimination, Becker identified fellow employees’ tastes
as an alternative source of biased outcomes. Chiswick (1973) developed a model of
employee discrimination (which was then used to conduct an empirical analysis) as
follows. Consider the case in which white workers in some location prefer not to work
with non-whites. For a given amount of human capital, the wage for white employees
will be:
Yi = Yi * (1 + δ i X i )

(14)

where Yi * is the wage of a white worker who works only with other whites, Xi equals one
if he works with nonwhites and zero otherwise, and δi is the discrimination coefficient,
which may vary with i. Furthermore, let µx be the mean of the Xi’s, or the proportion of
white workers in integrated firms, p represent the share of nonwhites in the population, µδ
the mean of the δi’s and k = µ / p an index of integration.
As in the customer discrimination model, Chiswick’s analysis focuses on the
degree of income inequality. Taking first the natural log and then the variance of
equation (14) yields the following two equations (for small δi):
34

Borjas and Bronars specifically examine the variance of log income, a standard measure of income
inequality, given in this model by π(1 – π)[ln(yih/yil)]2. Since this variance measure increases with the ratio
of high-ability to low-ability incomes, greater variance is suggestive of a higher return to ability.

18

ln(Yi ) = ln(Yi* ) + δ i X i

(15)

σ 2 (ln Yi ) = σ 2 (ln Yi * ) + σ 2 (δ i X i ) + 2 cov(ln Yi * , δ i X i )

(16)

After invoking the formula for the variance of the product of random variables and
applying some additional algebra, Chiswick presents the final version of the model as:

σ 2 (ln Y ) = σ 2 (ln Y * ) + {k (µ δ2 + σ 2 (δ ) )}p + (− µ 2 k 2 ) p 2 + U

(17)

where U is the residual capturing the unmeasurable covariance term in equation (16).
Inspection of equation (17) generates several hypotheses governing the
relationship between income inequality and the level of integration in the workforce. For
a fixed variance of Y*, white wage disparity increases with the nonwhite population (p).35
Holding constant the discriminatory preferences of white workers, the more labor market
integration, the greater the inequity of white earnings. Finally, inequality increases with
the prevalence of discriminatory tastes (holding integration constant) and with the
variance in those tastes (holding integration and mean tastes fixed). In fact, Chiswick’s
empirical analysis suggests that white employee discrimination against nonwhites raises
average white income inequality by 2.3 percent in the entire U.S. and 3.1 percent in the
South.36 However, discrimination against whites by nonwhites was not found to be a
significant factor in explaining their income inequality.
3.
Did Ideology Influence the Acceptance of the Employer Animus Model?
Given the relative value of the various models in explaining persistent labor
market discrimination, it is important to consider why the employer-animus model
(henceforth “the employer model”) became the dominant economic model of
discrimination from the time Becker advanced it in 1959 and Milton Friedman
championed it in the early 1960s. One possible answer is that ideology often trumps truth
when high political stakes are involved, and both the left and right had reasons for
preferring the employer model. The left found it more palatable to blame employers
instead of customers and fellow workers for the ravages of discrimination, and with the
enormous political battle brewing over adoption of a federal antidiscrimination law, it
was better strategy to say that the law was needed to deal with bad southern employers
than with the bad citizens of the South (the rest of the country had already adopted state
antidiscrimination laws, so the heart of the debate was whether Congress should impose
an antidiscrimination law on the South). At the same time, the right embraced the Becker
employer-animus model out of dislike for antidiscrimination law and the desire to follow
the lead blocking of Milton Friedman (a major opponent of the state antidiscrimination
laws) in arguing that legal intervention was unnecessary since the market would
effectively discipline discriminatory employers. Writing in 1963 and hoping to derail the
federal efforts to adopt an antidiscrimination law, Milton Friedman clearly did not want
to draw attention to the fact that the market rewards and hence encourages obeisance to
the discriminatory preferences of fellow employees and customers: rather than driving
35
36

For this result to hold, Chiswick observes that µx must be less than ½.
Chiswick (1973).

19

out these discriminators, the market will serve to entrench those who cater to the
discriminatory tastes of fellow workers and customers.
Friedman engendered much antagonism for the discipline of economics by his
strident opposition to the 1964 Civil Rights Act. While his equation of this federal law to
the Nazi Nuremberg laws (see the quote below in the text at footnote 66) was puzzling,
and his claim in the early 1960s that blacks would be better off without the law has now
been widely rejected, Friedman’s opposition to an antidiscrimination law that injected
government into a large realm of hitherto unregulated private contracting is consistent
with his larger goal of promoting freer markets and less government. It is not implausible
that he believed that in the long-run even southern blacks would be better off with this
policy mixture. One sees this sentiment expressed in the work of Bhagwati (discussed
above), in which he invokes the Becker employer model in stressing the benefits of
competition and free trade in reducing earnings disparities by sex. The bottom line then
is that market incentives can encourage discrimination in some settings and discourage it
in others, and therefore, one needs to know a considerable amount about the nature of the
discrimination and the institutional context before one can predict which of these
outcomes will occur. In the Jim Crow South, federal law was needed to protect blacks
since both the market and the local judicial/political system had failed, but that doesn’t
necessarily imply that federal antidiscrimination law is serving a similarly important
function today. Nor can one conclude that because the market catered to the
discriminatory preferences of workers and customers at an earlier time, increased market
pressures today from free trade and globalization will cause more discrimination
(although these economic forces might harm workers at the bottom end of the socioeconomic scale, who are disproportionately black, not because of discrimination but
because of the downward pressure on the wages of low-skill workers).
In certain settings, customers have demonstrated strong discriminatory
preferences. In the early days of Title VII, the courts addressed the issue of whether an
employer could lawfully accommodate the discriminatory preferences of customers in a
series of cases challenging airline rules that favored the hiring of young, unmarried, and
attractive women to be flight attendants. The law is now well-established that such
conduct constitutes unlawful employment discrimination. Clearly, the market and the
law have clashed in this arena.37
Fellow-worker discrimination is also a problem, but it need not undermine
employment prospects (in terms of jobs and wages) if firms simply move to more
segregated workforces. Of course, because current law prohibits segregation, the market
and the law are in direct conflict in this area as well. But while customer and fellowworker discrimination can explain the enduring character of racial discrimination in the
South (in contrast to the employer model), neither customer nor fellow-worker
discrimination can explain the pattern of exclusion from the southern textile industry.
Customers would have no way of knowing, nor presumably would they care about, the
race of the workers in textile plants. Although fellow-worker discrimination might
37

Indeed, the airline run by the restaurant chain Hooters has found a way around the prohibitions of Title
VII by structuring its service of Hooters Girls on its planes as a way of selling sex appeal (since federal law
allows sex discrimination if it is based on a bona fide occupational qualification) rather than hiring these
women for customary flight attendant jobs, for which the airline would have no right to discriminate on the
basis of sex.

20

explain exclusion from a particular plant, if this problem were rampant, it would, again,
only lead to segregated plants -- not the complete exclusion of blacks from the industry
that Heckman and Payner (1989) have so thoroughly documented in the pre-Title VII
world.38
C.
The Cartel Model of Discrimination
The second rival to employer animus models is the cartel model of discrimination,
which was designed to explain the enduring discriminatory patterns of the Jim Crow
South. While Becker premised his models of discrimination on the operation of a
perfectly competitive market operating without constraint, the cartel model posits that
white employers and workers managed to thwart the operation of the market by
exploitatively relegating blacks to low-paying positions.39 While Becker argued that
discriminators were hurt by their discriminatory attitudes, the cartel model posits that
discrimination generates supra-competitive profits for the discriminators.40 The cartel
model has a clear advantage over the Becker employer-discrimination model by better
conforming with the reality that “the market” never seemed to thwart Jim Crow
restrictions, which endured for decades until federal intervention finally brought them
crashing down. Similarly, the cartel model conforms to the historical evidence better
than the customer and fellow-worker discrimination models. Specifically, the customer
discrimination model founders because discrimination was present even when customers
could not identify workers, and the fellow-worker discrimination model predicts
segregation (not wholesale exclusion as was observed in the southern textile industry).
Libertarians, such as Richard Epstein, have also endorsed the cartel model since it has an
appealing built-in remedy -- simply destroy the power of the cartel, and the market will
be able to operate in the protective manner that it should. Government might be needed
to break up the cartel, but once competition is restored, government should revert to its
more limited role of preventing the use of force and fraud.41 In short, the libertarian
argument is that no antidiscrimination law is needed once the stranglehold of the racist
cartel is broken.
What is still unclear, though, is whether the “cartel” was the product of pernicious
governmental restrictions and private violence, as Epstein insists, or the product of statusenhancing norms that generated utility gains for the white community, as Richard
McAdams has argued.42 While both Epstein and McAdams agree that whites clearly
collaborated to help themselves at the expense of blacks, and while some of this action
38

One Chicago scholar responded to hearing of the findings of Heckman and Payner (1989) by pointing out
that a powerful industry-wide union could have explained the exclusion of blacks. While the point is
correct as a matter of theory, it fails as a matter of fact – such powerful unions were largely absent in the
southern textile industry throughout the first sixty-five years of the 20th Century.
39
See Altonji and Blank (1999) for an excellent review of the theoretical literature on occupational
exclusion.
40
Recall from the discussion of the Becker employer model depicted in Figure 1 that the monetary profits
of the discriminators rose even though their utility fell because of the psychic cost of having non-preferred
workers. In the cartel model, the employers are able to restrict the hiring of black labor exactly as depicted
in Figure 1, but in the cartel model they do so in order to increase their monetary profits without paying the
psychic cost. The absence of competition enables the discriminatory employers to maintain the supracompetitive price.
41
Epstein (1992).
42
McAdams (1995).

21

was enforced by law -- for example, many aspects of segregation were legally mandated - there were many arenas in the South in which the law did not speak, yet the cartel was
maintained. For example, there was no legal requirement that firms refuse to hire blacks,
yet entire industries in the South did this for decades without any sign that the market was
eroding this pattern -- until the passage of the 1964 Civil Rights Act. McAdams and
Epstein then stand in contrast to Becker and Friedman in arguing that federal
governmental action was necessary to break up the power of the white cartel. But
McAdams rejects the Epsteinian view that the cartel could only have been sustained by
virtue of discriminatory governmental action, which itself was the problem. According to
McAdams, legal intervention was needed to overcome discriminatory patterns that were
not backed up by governmental restrictions. Whites had a vested interest in policing the
informal cartel because they benefited from the increase in prestige and status, as well as
the monetary benefits that were derived from subordinating blacks. McAdams marshals
the social science literature showing that groups can enforce norms which enable a cartel
to persist and thwart the power of those whose efforts to cheat on the cartel -- for
example, firms hiring cheap black labor -- might eliminate the discriminatory conduct.
Interestingly, even if McAdams’ hypothesis provides a better theoretical
explanation for discrimination during the Jim Crow era than that offered by Becker or
Friedman, there remains a question about its relevance to current American conditions.
Are self-enforcing discriminatory norms still powerful enough to undermine the
protective forces of competitive labor markets? Current stories of American companies
establishing customer service call centers in foreign countries suggest a type of
aggressive pursuit of profits that is hard to square with any pure taste for discrimination
or self-enforcing discriminatory norms.43
D.
Statistical Discrimination
The models of statistical discrimination are the third set of rivals to the employer
animus models. A central feature in these models is that unobservable attributes of
workers that differ by sex, race or ethnicity prevent employers from ascertaining their
true individual capabilities. Consequently, the existence of imperfect information
induces employers to form hiring and wage decisions based on whatever observable
information they can gather (including the worker’s race or sex) as well as their prior
beliefs about the expected ability of potential workers. This concept was first introduced
by the models of Phelps (1972) and Arrow (1973). Since then, extensions of these
theories have been highly prominent in the economic analysis of discrimination. Section
1 begins with a discussion of “statistical discrimination” in which the underlying
43

Query whether these global shifts only suggest that enormous profit opportunities can overcome
discrimination. According to “Financial Firms Hasten Their Move to Outsourcing” (2004):
in 2003 the average M.B.A. working in the financial services industry in India, where the cost of
living is about 30 percent less than in the United States, earned 14 percent of his American
counterpart's wages. Information technology professionals earned 13 percent, while call center
workers who provide customer support and telemarketing services earned 7 percent of their
American counterparts' salaries. Experts say that with China, India, the former Soviet Union and
other nations embracing free trade and capitalism, there is a population 10 times that of the United
States with average wage advantages of 85 percent to 95 percent.

22

productivities of the two groups are unequal, perhaps because of poorer schooling and
lower SES (blacks) or because of expected differences in tenure (women). Section 2 then
discusses two models of statistical discrimination in which the underlying productivities
of the two groups are equal yet because of the imperfection of the signal available to the
employer which is more variable for the dispreferred group, earnings disparities emerge
between equally productive groups of workers. The two models are the standard, static
model of statistical discrimination as depicted in Aigner and Cain (1977) and the
dynamic extension in Oettinger (1996), which allows for learning over time.
1.
“Statistical Discrimination” Where Group Productivities are Unequal
Statistical discrimination models would appear to have greater explanatory power
than the Becker employer model in that they are consistent with the persistence of
discrimination over long periods of time. Note, though, that while statistical
discrimination as here defined is clearly prohibited under federal law, it does not
necessarily constitute discrimination in the economist’s sense of the term. Specifically, if
on average Group A is less productive than Group B (perhaps because of poorer
schooling options), then it is not discriminatory (in the economist’s definition) for
members of Group A to be paid less than those of Group B. Indeed, to the economist, a
situation in which the earnings shortfall accurately reflects the productivity shortfall is the
definition of a non-discriminatory outcome. Federal law is clear, however, that ascribing
the qualities of a racial or gender group to an individual member of that group (even if
correct on average) constitutes unlawful discrimination against that individual. The
greater individualized treatment in the hiring process that the law mandates will tend to
help the more elite members of the group, who will not be tainted with the lower-average
quality predictions that would otherwise be ascribed to them.44 Conversely, eliminating
statistical discrimination tends to harm those with the least human capital, as more
individualized consideration will confirm their likely lower-than-average productivity.
Thus, unless reliance on statistical discrimination impairs human capital accumulation or
on the job performance -- a subject addressed below -- the legal attack on statistical
discrimination should not be expected to improve overall welfare of any disfavored group
but only to redistribute wealth from the poorest members of that group to its more
affluent members.
Three main points should be made about this simple model of statistical
discrimination. First, while the practice will be persistent to the extent that it is profitable
to employers (presumably in helping them select good workers at low cost), there are
ways for the above-average members of the group to protect themselves by signaling
their high productivity to employers. Of course, without the benefit of Title VII, these
workers would have to pay the costs of such signaling, which may be an argument for the
44

The divergence between the economist’s conception of discrimination and the legal or popular
conception of discrimination is illustrated by the manner in which the law tries to encourage employers not
to consider the fact that young women are highly likely at some point to have children, which may impose
costs on the employer. Indeed, if the only salient difference between male and female workers was that
women needed to take time off for childbirth and subsequently spent more time in child-rearing than their
male counterparts, and these traits were costly or less desirable to employers, than an economist would say
that paying women identically for what is on average a less valuable contribution to an employer would be
discrimination. Any attempt to pay women less on these grounds would clearly violate both the legal and
popular conception of discrimination.

23

legal prohibition if these signaling costs are high relative to the costs of legal
enforcement. Second, there is a potential inefficiency associated with statistical
discrimination in that it undermines ex ante incentives for investment in human capital if
workers perceive that they will be treated ex post as “average” members of their group
when seeking employment.45 Unless a signal can overcome this treatment – note the
distinction between a directly productive investment in human capital and a pure signal
that is merely revelatory but unproductive -- a worker who invests in greater human
capital incurs a cost that is not fully rewarded, which will therefore result in inefficient
underinvestment. Again, this inefficiency can provide a second basis for the legal
prohibition of statistical discrimination. But while the risk of underinvestment in human
capital as a response to statistical discrimination may have been more problematic in the
past, the current empirical evidence raises doubt that this is a major concern today since
returns to education are as high for blacks and other groups as they are for whites.46
Whether underinvestment induced by statistical discrimination has been a major problem
for other protected workers, such as women or the disabled, is unclear.
The third point may be the most telling criticism of statistical discrimination when
practiced against previously subordinated groups. In this situation, it may be unrealistic
to assume that employer judgments will be correct on average since cognitive biases may
tend to confirm the negative stereotypes that are retained from the time of subordination.
Indeed, numerous studies find that individuals focus more on confirming evidence while
tending to discount disconfirming evidence, which suggests that a legacy of past
subordination may tend to be self-perpetuating if stereotypes tend to be reinforced.47 Of
course, competitive markets will tend to discipline firms that are subject to such cognitive
biases and reward those who more accurately set the price of labor. But as Bhagwati
suggested in his discussion of the gains from introducing external competition, a social
consensus can develop about the attributes of previously subordinated groups that is
highly resistant to change. Psychologists have developed an implicit attitudes test that
reveals that most Americans strongly associate -- albeit at an unconscious level -positive attributes with being white and negative attributes with being black.48 As
Kenneth Arrow has observed:
“Suppose Blacks and Whites do in fact differ in productivity, at least on the
average. This is in turn due to some cause, perhaps quality of education,
perhaps cultural differences; but the cause is not itself observable. Then the
experience of employers over time will cause them to use the observable
characteristic, race, as a surrogate for the unobservable characteristics which in
fact cause the productivity differences.”49

45

Lundberg and Startz (1998).
One might still argue that, perhaps owing to lower parental investment and lower quality education, the
costs of greater personal investment in human capital are higher for blacks, which might suggest that blacks
would need more than equal percentage returns to elicit the optimal level of human capital investment.
47
Loury (2002). It appears that certain beliefs are important to many as a basis of providing a sense of
order or security, and these beliefs can be highly resistant to change even in the face of compelling
evidence to the contrary.
48
Greenwald, Banaji, et al (2002).
49
Arrow (1998).
46

24

At some point, the repeated association of race and lower productivity may become an
embedded truth for many, as well as a factor that systematically undermines the
productivity and performance of the victims of this stereotype, through what
psychologists have called the “stereotype threat.”50 Indeed, once this “self-confirming”
stereotype becomes entrenched, it might well lead to the type of Beckerian animus-based
discrimination that was discussed above.51 The growing literature that supports this view
strengthens the case for legal prohibition of such discrimination.52
Arrow also believes that none of the economic models of discrimination can fully
explain the observable patterns of behavior. For example, he finds that there is no
market-based explanation for discrimination against black consumers, yet he considers
the evidence in support of such discrimination to be compelling. Arrow also conjectures
that beliefs and individual preferences may themselves be the product of social
interactions unmediated by prices and markets. He focuses on the non-market network of
social acquaintances and friends in the labor market that are often stratified by sex and
race. Arrow emphasizes that this “network model” may be the most appropriate for the
labor market, because each transaction within the employment sphere is a social event.53
Since employment may occur by means of referral from current employees, labor
segregation and discrimination can easily arise, particularly if profit maximization takes a
subordinate role to maintaining a social network.
True Discrimination – Equally Productive Groups yet Unequal Pay
2.
If employers simply generalize about individuals based on group difference in
average productivity, we have seen that true discrimination is difficult to generate. Seeing
every women as the average woman does hurt some women, but helps others (those
below the average for women) and hence can not really explain group differences in
average pay that are not based on group differences in average productivity. To explain
this kind of discriminatory outcome, we need to focus on differences in the reliability of
productivity-related information across groups. This approach is taken by Aigner and
Cain (1977), whose model develops as follows. Consider again a labor market comprised
of two groups, X and Y, and let their underlying productive ability, α, be a random
variable distributed such that α ∼ Ν( µ , σ α2 ) . Aigner and Cain assume that the employer
does not know the value of α for a job applicant but possesses information about the
distribution of ability in the overall population. Although the employer ex ante cannot
learn α, he observes a noisy signal s (such as the score from an aptitude test) which
equals the sum of true ability and a normally distributed error term with mean zero and
variance σ g2 for g = X, Y. The crucial assumption of the model is that σ X2 > σ Y2 , which

means that the signal more accurately reflects latent ability for Group Y. Presuming that

50

Steele and Aronson (1995).
Loury (2002) and Ramirez (2004).
52
Arrow finds the model of statistical discrimination can also explain discrimination in the mortgage
market because blacks default more on loans than whites. Discrimination in this market is statistical rather
than taste-based because the mortgage-lender is simply attempting to minimize risk when providing more
loans to whites.
53
See Bayer, Ross and Topa (2005) for empirical evidence revealing a significant effect of social networks
on a variety of labor market outcomes.
51

25

workers and firms are risk neutral, competition for workers bids wages up to their
expected productivity conditional on the signal. Therefore, the wage is set according to:
⎛ σ g2
w = E (α s ) = µ ⎜ 2
⎜σ +σ 2
α
⎝ g

⎞ ⎛ σ α2
⎟ + s⎜
⎟ ⎜σ 2 +σ 2
α
⎠ ⎝ g

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

(18)

In words, the wage is a weighted average of mean ability (group characteristic) and the
signal (individual characteristic) where the weights are derived from the projection of α
onto s. Differences in the information content of s alter the two weights but do not
generate differences in the average wage of the two groups.54
The Oettinger (1996) model explores the simplest form of learning using a twoperiod horizon. Let those periods be indexed by t = 1, 2 and allow α and s to vary with
time. As before, α t ∼ Ν (µ , σ α2 ) and s t = α t + ε t where ε t ~ N (0, σ g2 ) and the variance of
the error term for Group X exceeds that for Group Y. With only two periods, workers
may either remain in their period 1 job during period 2 or switch to another position.
Oettinger continues to assume a wage structure based on expected productivity but also
allows for piece rate wages; therefore the wage in period t is wt = θαˆ t + (1 − θ )α t where
α̂ t is the conditional expectation of ability and 0 ≤ θ ≤ 1. This setup departs from the
static model of statistical discrimination most notably in its assertion that productivity is
match-specific. In other words, neither employee nor employer knows the former’s
ability in a given position before a match takes place. Thus, Oettinger remarks that for
this model of learning to matter, “the arrival of this new information…must vary across
job matches, and job mobility must be feasible.”55
Since the firm will discover α1 for a worker that stays in period 2, the wage
schedule over time will be:
w1 = θαˆ1 + (1 − θ )α 1
⎧α 1
w2 = ⎨
⎩θαˆ 2 + (1 − θ )α 2

if α 1 ≥ αˆ 2 (true for stayers)
if α 1 < αˆ 2 (true for movers)

(19)

Recall from above that the conditional expectation of α1 under risk neutrality does not
differ between Group X and Group Y; it is simply µ. Since period 1 wages are a
weighted average of that conditional expectation and its true value, initial wages for X
and Y are then expected to be equal.

54

Taking the expectation of wages over s, it is evident that the average wage will be the mean level of
ability µ since that is the mean of s. For this reason, Aigner and Cain take issue with the original Phelps
(1972) model because differences in mean ability or signal variances do not engender average wage
inequality. Thus, in order to get true discrimination, they demonstrate that employers must also be risk
averse. This means that employer utility depends on signal variances, which causes the group with the less
informative signal to receive a lower average wage. The model is subject to criticism, not only on the
grounds that the signals are not less reliable for different groups, but also because it would seem to be
unlikely that employers are sufficiently risk averse to penalize blacks to a large degree.
55
Oettinger (1996).

26

The model then analyzes expectations of between-period wage changes and
second period wages to derive hypotheses about the effects of signal extraction on wage
disparities. Workers will choose to remain in their period 1 jobs if they expect a wage
decrease from moving. Hence their expectation, conditional on staying, is:

(

)

⎛ 1 − ρ 2 θ ⎞⎛ 2σ 2
⎟⎜ α
E (θ (α 1 − αˆ 1 )α 1 − αˆ 2 ≥ 0 ) = ⎜
⎜ 1 + ρ 2 ⎟⎜⎝ π
⎝
⎠

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

1/ 2

(20)

where ρ is the signal to noise ratio. The implication of equation (20) is that the expected
value of staying decreases as the signal becomes more precise. Therefore, under the
model’s assumptions, X stayers can expect larger average wage gains than Y stayers. On
the other hand, a mover faces an expected wage of:

(

) (

)

⎛ 1 + ρ 2 − 1 − ρ 2 θ ⎞⎛ 2σ 2
⎟⎜ α
E (θ (αˆ 2 − αˆ 1 ) + (1 − θ )(α 2 − α 1 ) αˆ 2 − α 1 > 0 ) = ⎜
2
⎜
⎟⎜⎝ π
1+ ρ
⎝
⎠

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

1/ 2

(21)

Now, enhanced signal precision (higher ρ) raises expected wages and thus predicts
greater wage gains for Y movers.
In the second period, only the level of w2 matters since the decision to move or
stay has already been made. The expectations of a worker that remains at his first period
firm and one that relocates are, respectively:
⎛
1
E (α 1 α 1 − αˆ 2 ≥ 0 ) = µ + ⎜
⎜ 1+ ρ 2
⎝

⎞⎛ 2σ 2 ⎞1 / 2
⎟⎜ α ⎟
⎟⎜⎝ π ⎟⎠
⎠
⎛ ρ2
E (θαˆ 2 + (1 − θ )α 2 αˆ 2 − α 1 > 0 ) = µ + ⎜
⎜ 1+ ρ 2
⎝

(22)
⎞⎛ 2σ 2
⎟⎜ α
⎟⎜⎝ π
⎠

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

1/ 2

(23)

These two equations differ solely by the factor ρ2 in the second term on the right hand
side. Since that coefficient is necessarily positive but less than one, the model suggests
positive returns to job tenure. However, as ρ rises, so too does the return to job
switching. Therefore, Group X should benefit more from staying in period 2, whereas
Group Y profits from changing positions. Using equations (22) and (23), one can
compute the unconditional second period wage to be:

(

)

⎛ 1 + ρ 2 σ α2 ⎞
⎟
E (w2 ) = µ + ⎜⎜
⎟
2
π
⎝
⎠

1/ 2

(24)

This equation unambiguously predicts that Group Y, with a higher value of ρ, will have
higher wages in the second period. Thus, “the model predicts that while no wage gap
should exist at the time of labor force entry, one should develop as time in the labor force
accumulates.” Oettinger’s intuition for this outcome is that the random draw that
27

characterizes period 1 matching precludes any wage gap. However, more successful
matches in the future lead to higher wages, and minorities (in our case, Group X) are
disadvantaged because of their noisy productivity signal.56
The theoretical models discussed in this section are interesting in that they purport
to explain how groups of equal productivity receive unequal compensation without resort
to animus or bias. Nonetheless, Cain (1986: 729) does “not find the empirical
counterparts to [these] models of statistical discrimination and signaling to be
convincing.” Altonji and Blank (1999: 3190) concur: “we are unaware of any empirical
work that systematically investigates the proposition that the ‘signal to noise’ in employer
assessment of workers is lower for women than men or for blacks than whites, despite the
prominence of the idea in the discrimination literature. For this reason, we are not clear
how much weight should be placed on the statistical discrimination/information quality
explanations for differences in group outcomes…”
IV.

SHOULD PRIVATE DISCRIMINATION BE PROHIBITED?

Although the American public overwhelmingly endorses the view that labor
market discrimination on the basis of race and gender should be unlawful, standard
economic theory can be invoked to argue that such discrimination should not be
prohibited. This argument proceeds from a basic assumption of neoclassical economics
that utility maximization is an attractive principle of social welfare. As a first
approximation, permitting individuals to make choices that may reflect discriminatory
preferences maximizes utility. In essence, a partial equilibrium analysis invests the
intersection of supply and demand curves with normative significance, and neoclassical
economics tends to view discrimination as simply one more preference that shapes those
curves.
Put differently, standard neoclassical economics usually begins with the
assumption that, in the absence of market failure, there is no economic argument for
government intervention into a competitive labor market. In the various taste-based
models, discrimination merely reflects a personal preference of an employer, fellow
employee, or customer not to associate with a certain category of individuals.57 This
model of personal preference implies that discrimination does not constitute a “market
failure” in that competitive markets will still generate the most efficient allocation of
resources. In terms of the partial equilibrium analysis of a labor market depicted in
Figure 1, discrimination is a factor that influences the contours of the relevant supply and
demand curves, but the intersection of those curves still represents the efficient solution
in that any deviation from that outcome would lower welfare (as long as one honors
discriminatory preferences). Similarly, under the statistical discrimination models, firms
are assumed to be profit-maximizing, so again there is no market failure, which ordinarily
implies that there is no efficiency argument for governmental intervention.58
56

One should keep in mind that these results are predicated on the assumption that θ does not vary between
the two groups. If it did, the results would be ambiguous.
57
Becker (1957).
58
For an argument that antidiscrimination law can promote efficiency in a world of Becker employer
discrimination by driving the discriminators from the market more rapidly, and thereby reducing the costs
of discrimination, see Donohue (1986), the reply in Posner (1987) and a final rejoinder in Donohue (1987).

28

In a competitive market, the price of a good or service should equal its value to
the marginal buyer (if not, competitive pressures will cause the price to rise or fall to
restore the equality.) Thus, from the perspective of consumer sovereignty, a free market
economist might even say that, in a competitive market, there can be no “discrimination”
in the sense that the price paid for any good or service should equal the value that the
marginal purchaser places on it. Figure 1 reveals that the marginal purchaser of black
labor values the marginal worker by BQ2, which is clearly lower than AQ1, the value of
the marginal worker in the absence of discrimination. This is somewhat of a semantic
point, but one would ordinarily not say that a customer who prefers the voice of Singer A
to that of Singer B and thus is willing to pay more for recordings of A’s music is
“discriminating” against Singer B. The willingness to spend more to enjoy A’s music
reflects the customer’s preference for that artist, and the market will ordinarily cater to
that preference. In essence, the modern legal prohibition of “discrimination” posits that
any preference based on race, gender, and a host of other factors is illegitimate and
therefore, the goal of law is to ascertain the equilibrium intersection of the supply and
demand curves -- point A in Figure 1 -- that would exist if no economic agent had any
awareness of these traits (or at least no differential valuation of them). Of course, the
pure preference distinction between Singer A and Singer B does not capture the historical
context in which blacks have endured a long history of oppression and subordination.
This example does raise the issue of whether discrimination in the absence of such
history of oppression should be treated differently from other market preferences. Would
white males over 40 – the primary litigants in age discrimination cases – have a strong
claim for legal protection on these grounds?
The moral judgment that discriminatory preferences should not enter the social
welfare calculus might be analogized to the standard philosophical argument that
malicious preferences -- those benefits that derive from the suffering of others -- must be
outside the welfare calculus. Clearly, some discrimination has been of this type in that it
has been used to subordinate certain groups as a means to elevating the well-being of
members of the dominant group.59 But not all discrimination has this malicious, otherregarding character, and philosophers have had trouble justifying why non-malicious
discriminatory preferences should be disregarded. Consider in this regard the words of
Ronald Dworkin arguing against Catherine MacKinnon’s view that pornography should
be prohibited because it represents impermissible discrimination against women.60
Dworkin argues that the “principle that considerations of equality require that some
people not be free to express their tastes or preferences anywhere” is “frightening” and
that if liberty and equality really conflict “we should have to choose liberty because the
alternative would be the despotism of the thought-police.”61
But in the realm of discrimination in employment, housing, and education, we do
have to choose between liberty and equality (at least in the negative conception of liberty
implying freedom from external restraint). As Dworkin states:
Exactly because the moral environment in which we all live is in good part
created by others … the question of who shall have the power to help
59

See the discussion of McAdams (1995) in Section III (C), above.
Dworkin (1993).
61
Dworkin (1993).
60

29

shape that environment, and how, is of fundamental importance, though it
is often neglected in political theory. Only one answer is consistent with
the ideals of political equality: that no one may be prevented from
influencing the shared moral environment, through his own private
choices, tastes, opinions, and example, just because these tastes or
opinions disgust those who have the power to shut him up or lock him up.
Of course, the ways in which anyone may exercise that influence must be
limited in order to protect the security and interests of others. People may
not try to mold the moral climate by intimidating women with sexual
demands or by burning a cross on a black family’s lawn, or by refusing to
hire women or blacks at all, or by making their working conditions so
humiliating as to be intolerable (emphasis supplied).
But we cannot count, among the kinds of interests that may be protected in
this way, a right not to be insulted or damaged just by the fact that others
have hostile or uncongenial tastes, or that they are free to express or
indulge them in private. Recognizing that right would mean denying that
some people -- whose tastes these are -- have any right to participate in
forming the moral environment at all.
…This is an old liberal warning -- as old as Voltaire -- and many people
have grown impatient with it. They are willing to take the chance, they
say, to advance a program that seems overwhelmingly important now.
Their impatience may prove fatal for that program rather than essential to
it, however. If we abandon our traditional understanding of equality for a
different one that allows a majority to define some people as too corrupt or
offensive or radical to join in the informal moral life of the nation, we will
have begun a process that ends, as it has in so many other parts of the
world, in making equality something to be feared rather than celebrated, a
mocking, ‘correct’ euphemism for tyranny.62 (Emphasis supplied.)
There is an interesting contradiction here. At first, Dworkin seems to be making a
strong philosophical argument for why individuals should be allowed to exercise their
private tastes and choices by discriminating against other groups even if society finds that
offensive (note specifically the language in italics). But then, in the language highlighted
in bold, he specifically exempts employment discrimination from his general view that
liberty interests must trump equality. Note that in detailing the types of conduct that
society can legitimately curtail, Dworkin includes acts of intimidation and coercion -which were traditionally prohibited as common law torts -- as well as simple refusals to
deal with certain groups, which have traditionally been permitted. Richard Epstein notes
that “the parallel between force and discrimination has an apparent verbal seductiveness,
but the differences between the two types of behavior are so profound that it is unwise to
move from a condemnation of force to an equal condemnation of discrimination…”63

62
63

Dworkin (1993).
Epstein (1992).

30

As Epstein notes, acts of coercion and force undermine security because even if
99 percent of the populace is not a threat, we must be concerned about the one percent
that “bears us the most ill will.” But with competitive labor markets, we need not worry
about the person who most dislikes us, but can seek out and contract with those who bear
us the least ill will. As long as a few employers are willing to hire members of any
protected class, these workers will have options that are far more attractive than if they
had to deal with the most discriminatory employer. Although violence and
discrimination have often gone together, Epstein argues that, if government had to choose
which it would focus on stopping first, it should choose violence.64 Compared to
discrimination, violence is easier to identify and hence sanction (with lower Type I and
Type II error), and the benefits of stopping violence will be more far-reaching. This
distinction is also important in evaluating the results of audit experiments that seek to
uncover the proportion of employers who harbor bias against certain groups. If, for
example, 20 percent of potential employers would discriminate against a particular group,
this does not necessarily tell us whether the members of that group will suffer significant
harm in the labor market -- as long as a considerable portion of the labor market is open
to them. Thus, competition dampens the “effective discrimination” experienced by those
who are victims of bias – at least in terms of wage impairment, even if not in terms of the
psychological harm of being rejected.65
While some economists stress the pragmatic point that competitive markets can
reduce the need for antidiscrimination law, Milton Friedman, writing in Capitalism and
Freedom, argues that such laws are not only unnecessary from a consequentialist
perspective, but also defective as a matter of deontology:
[Antidiscrimination] legislation involves the acceptance of a principle that
proponents would find abhorrent in almost every other application. If it is
appropriate for the state to say that individuals may not discriminate in
employment because of color or race or religion, then it is equally
appropriate for the state, provided a majority can be found to vote that
way, to say that individuals must discriminate in employment on the basis
of color, race or religion. The Hitler Nuremberg laws and the law in the
Southern states imposing special disabilities upon Negroes are both
examples of laws similar in principle to [antidiscrimination legislation].66
Note that Friedman’s dubious equation of governmental prohibition and mandates of
discrimination would be correct if liberty interests always trump equality interests as
Dworkin argues because curtailing liberty is to be avoided regardless of whether the law
promotes equality (Title VII) or is designed to stifle it (Nuremberg laws and Jim Crow).
64

Epstein urges that the notion of “rounding up” or enslaving certain groups is completely different from
merely refusing to deal with the group or choosing only to deal on more favorable turns. The first is
imposing harm and the second is simply failing to confer a benefit, which explains why at common law the
first was unlawful and the second was not.
65
This applies for both victims of labor market discrimination as well as victims of product market
discrimination. Still, the transaction costs of having to seek out the non-discriminators are real (and in one
respect tend to be exacerbated by an antidiscrimination law since employers can’t advertise only for their
desired candidates on racial or ethnic grounds).
66
Friedman (1962).

31

In the latter case, both liberty and equality are infringed, so the argument against the
Nuremberg laws is particularly strong. One can easily imagine arguments -- contrary to
the views of Dworkin and Friedman -- that limited curtailments of liberty could be
justified by important enhancements of equality (and indeed Dworkin seems to have
embraced exactly this principle with his endorsement of employment discrimination law).
Still, one should be mindful of the admonitions of Dworkin, Friedman, Isaiah Berlin and
others, that governments have inflicted much harm not only when deliberately curtailing
freedom in order to inflict greater inequality, but also when sacrificing liberty in the name
of greater equality.67
Ironically, we have the great liberal Dworkin arguing for what seems to be a
libertarian position vis-à-vis employment discrimination (although he denies this
conclusion), while the conservative Frank Easterbrook has rather forcefully articulated an
argument for societal concern about the harm caused by discriminatory attitudes and
behavior. In a judicial decision striking down an Indianapolis anti-pornography
ordinance, Judge Easterbrook offers the following argument for why equality should
trump liberty in the domain of employment discrimination (although on First Amendment
grounds he then rejects the force of this argument):
Indianapolis enacted an ordinance defining “pornography” as a
practice that discriminates against women. “Pornography” is to be
redressed through the administrative and judicial methods used
for other discrimination…Indianapolis justifies the ordinance on
the ground that pornography affects thoughts. Men who see
women depicted as subordinate are more likely to treat them so.
Pornography is an aspect of dominance. It does not persuade
people so much as change them. It works by socializing, by
establishing the expected and the permissible. In this view
pornography is not an idea; pornography is the injury.
There is much to this perspective. Beliefs are also facts. People
often act in accordance with the images and patterns they find
around them. People raised in a religion tend to accept the tenets
of that religion, often without independent examination. People
taught from birth that black people are fit only for slavery rarely
rebelled against that creed; beliefs coupled with the self-interest
of the masters established a social structure that inflicted great
harm while enduring for centuries. Words and images act at the
level of the subconscious before they persuade at the level of the
conscious. Even the truth has little chance unless a statement fits
within the framework of beliefs that may never have been
subjected to rational study.
Therefore we accept the premises of this legislation. Depictions
of subordination tend to perpetuate subordination. The
subordinate status of women in turn leads to affront and lower
67

See Berlin (1969).

32

pay at work, insult and injury at home, battery and rape on the
streets.68 In the language of the legislature, “[p]ornography is
central in creating and maintaining sex as a basis of
discrimination. Pornography is a systematic practice of
exploitation and subordination based on sex which differentially
harms women. The bigotry and contempt it produces, with the
acts of aggression it fosters, harm women's opportunities for
equality and rights [of all kinds].” Indianapolis Code Section 161(a)(2). American Booksellers Ass'n, Inc. v. Hudnut, 771 F.2d
323, C.A.7 (Ind.), 1985, at 323, 328-29.
Note that while the specific Indianapolis statute in question was aimed at
pornography, the statute was deemed to be a form of discrimination against women and
the arguments advanced in support of the legislation are frequently advanced in support
of all antidiscrimination law. If one accepts the view that acts of discrimination serve to
construct and buttress a powerful and subconscious framework of discriminatory beliefs,
then the case for governmental intervention is greatly strengthened. In contrast, if
discrimination is simply one of the infinite tastes or preferences that individuals express
through their private choices and labor markets are highly competitive and governed by
Beckerian notions of discrimination, then it is difficult to construct either an economic or
philosophic argument for why government intervention would be needed. The two
moves that those arguing for employment discrimination law have advanced are that 1)
the Becker model is incorrect in that it fails adequately to capture the causes and
consequences of discrimination, and 2) there is some other impediment that keeps the
labor markets from operating competitively (thereby undermining confidence that
competition will protect workers from exploitation). One can translate these two
arguments into economic terms. The Becker model is inadequate if discrimination (1)
creates important negative externalities, (2) is perpetuated by other types of market
failure, or (3) leads to socially undesirable distributional outcomes, as in the various
search models described above. In that event, the Beckerian vision of the competitive
laissez-faire equilibrium maximizing social welfare is no longer theoretically assured
even if the discriminatory preferences are fully honored.69 The second argument posits
either that discriminators have been able to act as an exploitive and anticompetitive cartel
in which blacks were essentially denied access to jobs, or there is some other friction that
prevents the discriminators from being driven from the market at the optimal rate, as
discussed in Donohue (1986). Of course, the enduring apparatus of Jim Crow in the
South prior to the adoption of the 1964 Civil Rights Act would seem to support this
characterization, as discussed in Section III (C), above.
In the end, it is important to realize that both opponents and supporters of bans on
discrimination have at times relied on rhetorical excess to advance their positions. Milton
Friedman’s attempt to equate a law like Title VII to something that is now universally
68

“…In saying that we accept the finding that pornography as the ordinance defines it leads to unhappy
consequences, we mean only that there is evidence to this effect, that this evidence is consistent with much
human experience, and that as judges we must accept the legislative resolution of such disputed empirical
questions….”
69
See generally, Sen (1970).

33

reviled (the Nazi Nuremberg laws) is one obvious example. A law that is designed to be
an integral part of a mandated system of subordination and ultimate extermination simply
cannot be equated with one that prohibits discrimination. Similarly, supporters of laws
such as Title VII link the prohibition of discrimination to a battle against slavery and
violence against subordinated groups, but again this link need not exist if the only
practice that is being banned is the individual decision not to deal with a certain group (or
not to deal in as favorable terms as those given to some other group). Presumably, acts of
slavery and violence can (and of course should) be prohibited directly, regardless of
whether discrimination is tolerated or banned.
Nor is every act of discrimination so obviously malicious or mean-spirited. There
is considerable evidence that employers pay more for “attractive” workers.70 According
to one study: “The 9 percent of working men who are viewed as being below average or
homely are penalized about 10 percent in hourly earnings. The 32 percent who are
viewed as having above-average looks or even as handsome receive an earnings premium
of 5 percent.” The study goes on to note that the findings for women are similar although
somewhat smaller: the best looking women earned 4 percent more, while the least
attractive earned 5 percent less than average looking workers.71 Another study found that
obese women suffer in the labor market, but that 95 percent of their lower economic
status comes from their poorer prospects in the marriage market (in terms of lower
probability of marriage and a lower earning spouse if married).72 Consequently, if race or
ethnicity influences one’s notion of attractiveness, it would not be surprising if some
employers gravitated more to certain racial or ethnic groups in making their employment
decisions. Employers also may gravitate to certain personalities, which could again be
influenced by the culture of certain racial or ethnic groups. While society seems to
accept preferences for attractive physical or personality traits, the distinction between
such permissible preferences and impermissible discrimination when the preferences
correlate with race or ethnicity is not easy to discern either conceptually or in practice.
Nonetheless, federal antidiscrimination law embodies the judgment that society is willing
to allow discrimination against “unattractive” individuals as long as the reason for the
judgment of unattractiveness is not one of the precluded traits of race, sex, religion,
ethnicity, disability, or age.

70

Hamermesh and Parker (2003) examine the effect of physical attractiveness on student evaluations of
professors. Relying on student evaluations of 94 professors in 463 courses at the University of Texas at
Austin, they found that teachers’ attractiveness directly impacts the student’s evaluations of their teachers:
increasing attractiveness by 1 standard deviation increased the evaluation of the professor by roughly onehalf a standard deviation. The authors consider, but do not resolve, the question of whether the good looks
correlate with better teaching skills or effectiveness, which might provide a productivity-based explanation
for the disparity. But Hamermesh (2005) shows that, in elections for officers of the American Economic
Association, more attractive pictures in the election brochure increased the votes for the election
candidates. Indeed, based on his examination of all 312 candidacies over the period from 1966 – 2004,
Hamermesh finds that “a particular real-world outcome becomes more favorable for the same person when
perceptions of his/her looks improve exogenously.” This finding underscores that perceived attractiveness,
not some underlying productivity-enhancing characteristic, influences the votes of economists in officer
elections for a person that they will likely never see in person. Presumably this effect would be stronger
still if the decisionmaker were choosing a person with whom he or she would be working.
71
Hamermesh and Biddle (1994).
72
Averett and Korenman (1996).

34

V.

DISCRIMINATION VERSUS DISPARITIES

Continued concern about the existence and consequences of discrimination is
primarily driven by large and enduring racial/ethnic disparities in poverty and
unemployment rates as well as earnings and wealth. For example, 22.7 percent of all
blacks earned wages below the poverty line in 2001 as opposed to only 9.9 percent of
whites.73 For decades, black unemployment rates have typically been twice those of
whites: recent data in December 2002 shows the unemployment rate was 11.5 percent for
blacks and only 5.1 percent for whites.74 For full-time workers, the median white male
full-time worker had an income of $40,790 in 2001 while the median black male fulltime worker only made $31,921 (see Table 1). Moreover, racial disparities in wealth are
vastly greater.
Wide gaps in various employment measures also exist between male and female
workers. Perhaps not surprisingly, the employment-to-population ratio for females was
56.3 percent in December 2002 but 68.8 percent for males.75 Even for full-time workers
who worked the entire year, women earned less than men: the median male full-time
white worker had an income of $40,790 in 2001, while white female workers earned only
$30,849.76 The comparable numbers for black full-time, full-year workers were $31,921
for men and $27,297 for women, as shown in Table 1. Note that black men are earning
more on average than white women.
Table 1 indicates that blacks (both male and female) made considerable progress
in narrowing the earnings gap for full-time, full-year workers (FTFY) in the decade
following the implementation of Title VII (from 1965 to 1975). During that decade, this
black-white earnings gap narrowed to roughly 75 percent for men and 95 percent for
women. Since 1975, the earnings growth of black women has not kept pace with white
women, although FTFY black men have kept pace with white men (and even narrowed
the gap to 78 percent by 2001, although the weakening of the economy thereafter may
have undercut this progress to some degree).77
Two other notable points can be seen in Table 1, although significant selection
effects are likely operating in both cases. First, while their declining earnings ratio
suggests that Hispanics have lost out relative to whites in the 1990s, the huge influx of
low-skilled, low-education Hispanics obscures this comparison. Note that the number of
Hispanics in FTFY employment more than doubled between 1988 and 2001. Second, the
table reveals that Asians have done extremely well in the labor market, but immigration
may have generated the opposite selection effect from the Hispanic in-migration. Asian
FTFY employment also more than doubled over the 1988-2001 period. The selection of
Asian immigrants from the right tail of the skill distribution at least raises the possibility
that if one controlled for education and hours worked, one might also observe an
73

See Table B-33 of The Economic Report of the President (2003).
See Table B-42 of The Economic Report of the President (2003).
75
See Table B-39 of The Economic Report of the President (2003).
76
Part of this disparity is explained by the fact that, on average, male full-time, full-year workers work
longer hours than female full-time, full-year workers.
77
Greater rates of departure from the labor market by lower wage black men may have artificially
improved these black-white earnings ratios to some degree. See Carneiro, Heckman, and Masterov (2005).
Couch and Daly (2002) conclude that the black-white wage gap had indeed narrowed in the 1990s and by
1998 was the narrowest gap ever.
74

35

unexplained earnings shortfall for Asians. Nonetheless, it is striking that Table 1 reveals
that the raw median earnings ratios for FTFY workers show Asians at or above the white
levels (despite the difficulties imposed by the need to learn English for some recent
immigrants).
Clearly, there are substantial disparities in earnings and other economic and social
outcomes among groups, but, of course, labor market disparities can exist even in the
absence of employment discrimination. Indeed, one of the greatest challenges in
ascertaining the presence of employment discrimination is that most employment
discrimination cases are filed by groups that we would expect to have lower earnings
even in the absence of discrimination. For example, lower socioeconomic status
correlates with lower levels of education obtained in lower quality schools and,
consequently, lower levels of human capital attainment, which is an unfortunate fact of
life in America for many blacks and Hispanics. While one would not expect to see
women disadvantaged in schooling (at least in this country), the fact that women become
pregnant and tend to assume primary care for young children imposes burdens on them
that male employees less frequently shoulder. The result is that hiring female workers of
a certain age predictably imposes certain higher costs on employers that are not borne if
male workers are hired.78 Obviously, individuals with physical or mental disabilities,
medical conditions, or advanced age will have attributes that for many jobs will be less
attractive to employers, again even in the absence of “discrimination.” To the extent that
the baseline for determining disparate impact is equality among groups that are not
equally productive, employment discrimination law becomes a mechanism for providing
preferences in the guise of enforcing an antidiscrimination mandate.79 To the extent that
the protected groups are encumbered by taste-based discrimination in addition to the
productivity-based reasons for lower pay or other differential treatment, then the current
approach of unacknowledged preferences may be helping to achieve the nondiscriminatory equilibrium. If, however, the degree of preference exceeds any true
economically discriminatory disadvantage, then the law is providing welfare benefits
through the antidiscrimination framework.80
78

Males of course have their own disadvantages in that they tend to be more violent and more prone to
criminal conduct than women are. Age and marriage, as discussed below, seem to dampen these antisocial
tendencies. Moreover, the percentage of males that engage in serious antisocial conduct is substantially
lower than the percentage of women who have children, so employers may be able more effectively to
identify less desirable male employees.
79
In a disparate treatment case, a plaintiff would ordinarily buttress the claim of intentional discrimination
with a simple showing that the protected group was being treated less favorably than the comparison group
and that this difference was statistically significant. The same calculation would ordinarily be made in a
disparate impact case, although the employer would argue that there was no disparate impact as long as the
relevant rate for the protected group was at least 80 percent of the rate of the comparison group. Thus, if an
employer hired 20 percent of white applicants and 17 percent of black applicants, the employer would
invoke the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission’s 80 percent rule to argue there was no disparate
impact. See Meier et al. (1984).
80
Providing welfare benefits through the antidiscrimination apparatus tends to target the benefits to the
elite members of the protected classes rather than the neediest members of such classes. This has some
obvious undesirable distributional consequences but may have offsetting external benefits if the visible
advancement of the elite members both undermines stereotypic attitudes about members of the protected
classes and serves a useful mentoring or role-modeling effect. For example, readily visible black economic
advancement may generate positive externalities.

36

This brief discussion underscores that disparity is not a sufficient condition for the
existence of discrimination. While discrimination can and has contributed to racial and
ethnic inequity in earnings, the mere presence of such a disparity does not establish the
presence of discrimination. For example, differences between racial or ethnic groups in
basic levels of education or even earlier differences in pre-natal exposures to drugs and
alcohol can lead to disparities in ultimate outcomes even in the absence of any invidious
discrimination.81 Conversely, the absence of discrimination in one stage does not
eliminate the possibility that discrimination was present and caused harm at some earlier
stage. Thus, disparities observed in the labor market may not reflect discrimination in
that domain, but could be generated by discrimination that occurred in a prior sphere
(health, housing and education, for example). A growing literature has tried to ascertain
what portion of the large disparities in economic welfare between men and women,
whites and non-whites, and among other classes of protected individuals stems from
discrimination and what is the product of differences in human capital, personal
preferences, and ambitions.82
Some articles focusing on earnings disparities between gay and heterosexual
workers illustrate these issues. We know that many individuals and employers
discriminate against gays (the U.S. military for one), although one consequence of the
widespread bias is that many gays do not advertise their sexual orientation to employers.
How does this bias influence the labor market outcomes of gay workers? Using simple
earnings regressions, one study found that “lesbian women earn more than comparable
single and married women, while gay men earn less than their married male counterparts
and also perhaps somewhat less than comparable single heterosexual men.”83 Assuming
that such findings are correct, how are they to be interpreted? In general, it appears that
married men earn more than both straight unmarried men and gay men (the latter two
earning about the same).84 Does this show that being gay doesn’t matter at all and the
only important stimulant to earnings for a man is being married (to a woman)? Perhaps
married men are simply more attached to the labor force, so that they work a greater
portion of the year and more hours while working. One might suspect that married men
work harder or more reliably because they need to support a family. Alternatively, the
married men may not work harder but may simply bargain harder or more effectively
given the ability to reference family needs as a justification for higher earnings. Since
lesbians earn more than married women, the various earnings disparities are clearly not
explained by a simple story of discrimination against gays -- again one suspects that
marriage (at least when accompanied by child rearing) facilitates a sexual division of
labor that probably leads to higher earnings for men and lower earnings for women as
husbands focus more on work and wives concentrate on family matters.85
81

Carneiro, Heckman, and Masterov (2005).
See Blank et al. (2004).
83
Black et al. (2003).
84
Allegretto and Arthur (2001) uses 1990 Census data and finds that gay men in unmarried partnered
relationships earned 15.6 percent less than similarly qualified married heterosexual men and 2.4 percent
less than similarly qualified unmarried, partnered heterosexual men.
85
Posner (1989) argues that because women and men are economically linked (through marriage or
relationships), the shortfall in earnings of women is less problematic than, say, the shortfall in earnings
experienced by blacks, who do not have the same strong economic interdependency with whites. While
Posner’s point may lessen the sting of lower earnings for women it does not eliminate the impact on
82

37

Thus, it may be unsurprising that lesbians earn more than married women, but
why they earn more than unmarried women is potentially more puzzling (one assumes
discrimination is not the explanation). Perhaps, the anticipation of the marriage effect by
single women who plan to marry (and therefore feel less of a need to invest in their
careers) explains why they earn less than gay women. It is also worth speculating
whether being gay influences preferences in ways that might impact earnings. For
example, one could examine the collegiate educational choices of gay and straight
individuals to see if lesbians choose majors more often selected by straight men than
straight women (e.g., more business and economics and less art and sociology), and,
conversely, whether gay men choose undergraduate majors more like straight women
than straight men. The bottom line is that an analysis will need many steps of elaboration
before a finding of disparity can be taken as proof of discrimination.
VI.

MEASURING THE EXTENT OF DISCRIMINATION

Psychologists have argued that the aforementioned implicit attitudes test reveals
that most Americans harbor unconscious bias against blacks. Experimental studies in
which individuals were put in situations in which they needed help reveal that both
whites and blacks frequently are more likely to give aid to their own race than to the
opposite race.86 Researchers have tested for the presence of discrimination in an
enormous array of settings, and typically conclude that some discrimination against
blacks (and perhaps against Hispanics) is present. For example, discrimination has been
uncovered in car buying, access to kidney transplants, and tipping in taxicabs.87 In
general, as we saw earlier, raw (or unadjusted) disparities across racial groups are often
considerable. Nonetheless, because of the difficulties in trying to control for legitimate
nondiscriminatory factors in regression analyses, most crude documentations of racial (or
other) disparities probably overstate the presence of discrimination.
A.
Regression Studies
Regression analysis is frequently used to ascertain whether earnings disparities
can be fully explained by various explanatory variables. These efforts to control for
some of the non-discriminatory reasons for such disparities (such as lower levels of
human capital attainment) tend to shrink the disparities considerably. This leaves the
researcher with the nagging concern that any remaining disparities after adjustment may
not reflect discrimination, but only the imprecision of the controls. For example, many
studies use earnings regressions of the following form to test for discrimination:

ln(earnings ) = α + βX + δ (black = 1 or sex = 1)
where X is a vector of explanatory variables including observable traits such as age and
years of education. If the observable controls can capture all the factors that both
women if bargaining within the family is influenced by each partner’s individual contribution to family
wealth or if, in the (common) event of marital dissolution, divorce law inadequately protects women’s
contributions to family well-being.
86
Crosby, Bromley, and Saxe (1980).
87
Ayres and Siegelman (1995), Ayres (2001) and Ayres, Vars, and Zakariya (2005).

38

influence earnings and are correlated with race or sex, then δ provides a consistent
estimate of the percentage shortfall in earnings resulting from discrimination. But the
observable variables are crudely measured in a way that overestimates the likely human
capital of women and minorities so that the estimate of δ is likely more negative than is
in fact the case. For example, age may not be a good proxy for work experience for those
(such as women) who may have spent many years out of the labor market. Indeed, the
enormous increase in the incarceration of blacks means that age may considerably
overstate years of human capital accumulation for blacks vis-à-vis whites. Similarly,
years of education may not be an ideal proxy for human capital in estimating racial
disparities if whites are attending substantially higher quality schools. In both cases, the
coefficient δ on the race or gender dummy may be statistically significant, but its value
might drop to insignificance (or conceivably even reverse sign) if better controls for years
of job experience and for quality of education could be found. Indeed, statistical tests for
discrimination confront researchers with the vexing and opposing problems of omitted
variable bias (where the inability to capture all of the factors that affect productivity can
exaggerate the unexplained residuals in earnings functions) versus multicollinearity
(where many of the included variables that proxy for productivity are highly correlated
with race or sex). Many factors that could lead to greater productivity and that are
correlated with race or gender may be left out of standard earnings equations. As a result,
most regression studies only succeed in generating an unexplained residual in the
earnings equations rather than identifying with precision the shortfall in wages caused by
discrimination.88
The raw comparisons of the relative earnings of black and white full-time workers
are considerable (roughly 22 percent in 2001), as are the raw disparities for the other
groups listed in Table 1. Not surprisingly, a portion of these disparities can be explained
as regression studies control for various human capital differences. If everything can be
explained by legitimate human capital factors, the case that discrimination is still harming
blacks and other groups is weakened. For example, Altonji and Blank (1999) estimate
racial, ethnic, and gender disparities (using 1995 CPS data) while controlling for
education, potential experience, region, occupation, and industry. Their finding is that
blacks suffer a 9 percentage point shortfall; Hispanics, 10 percentage points; and women,
22 percent. The big questions about these regression results for blacks and Hispanics are
whether years of education can capture the difference in schooling quality for the
different populations, and whether some better measure of human capital attainment is
needed. For women, the big questions are whether potential experience can be an
adequate control since time off for childrearing can dampen years of actual experience
considerably and whether differing female job preferences undermine the validity of the
male-female regression results.
B.
The Debate over the Current Degree of Discrimination
The competing positions in the vigorous debate concerning the significance of
race and sex discrimination in the contemporary labor market were well-captured in an
88

For example, these earnings equations rarely control for choices that workers make that may not
maximize their own earnings, such as the decisions of many wives to focus more on the family than their
husbands do. In some instances, this pattern may reflect intra-family discrimination against women, rather
than labor market discrimination.

39

excellent symposium in the Journal of Economic Perspectives (JEP). In that exchange,
William Darity and Patrick Mason aligned with Kenneth Arrow in arguing that
discrimination is still widespread and significantly diminishes the economic opportunities
of women and minorities, while James Heckman disagreed with this assessment. Many
non-economists are highly resistant to Heckman’s position because they heard this claim
made by earlier University of Chicago economists at a time when it clearly was not true.
The view was that the market would eliminate discriminators so discrimination can’t be a
substantial problem. This was analogous to arguing based on principles of aerodynamics
that bumble bees can’t fly, and the economics profession was probably justly given a
black eye for elevating selected theory over unassailable empirical evidence. It must be
remembered, though, that Heckman did not accept the Chicago orthodoxy when the
empirical evidence refuted it, and he has written some of the major papers establishing
the burdens of discrimination on blacks during the Jim Crow period and beyond, as
discussed in Section III (A) above and Section VIII (A) below. Therefore, simply
because discrimination was once a major impediment to economic advances by blacks
and women does not necessarily mean that it remains so in the very different legal and
economic environment that exists today. (Conversely, even if the current impact of
existing labor market discrimination is small, one cannot simply assume that this would
be the case if antidiscrimination laws were eliminated.) Heckman no longer believes that
market discrimination substantially contributes to the black-white wage gap (as it once
clearly did), and therefore he doubts that at present racial discrimination in the labor
market is a first-order problem in the United States. Rather, Heckman looks to other
factors (i.e., those that promote skill formation) to explain the black-white earnings gap –
a theme that he builds on in Carneiro, Heckman, and Masterov (2005). The following
discussion will summarize the competing evidence amassed in the JEP symposium.
Darity and Mason (1998) cite articles that estimate earnings functions using
Census data that show unexplained disparities for women and minorities, which they
interpret as a measure of discrimination. For the reasons discussed above, Heckman is
skeptical that regression analysis of Census data is able to discern the extent of labor
market discrimination against black workers.89 Heckman also notes the disparity
between the list of human capital characteristics used to measure a difference in earnings
that are available in standard data sets, such as those provided by the Census, and the
more complete list of characteristics available to employers when they make their
employment decisions. Of course, even if current labor market discrimination is not a
major impediment to blacks, discrimination in public education or housing could still be a
factor, as could a set of choices by blacks that would not have been made in a nondiscriminatory environment.
In arguing for the relative unimportance of labor market discrimination in
effecting black economic outcomes today, Heckman (1998) instead relies on an important
set of articles that correct for the problem of omitted productivity variables by adding to
the earnings functions the Armed Forces Qualifying Test (AFQT) to measure an
important dimension of worker quality. These articles have found that the previously
unexplained earnings disparities are eliminated by the inclusion of this human capital
measure. Heckman contends that the studies purporting to show the existence of racial
89

Heckman (1998).

40

discrimination are flawed by their failure to adequately control for underlying racial
differences in human capital attainment.
Darity and Mason remain unconvinced by these articles, arguing that “the results
obtained by O’Neill (1990), Maxwell (1994), Ferguson (1995), and Neal and Johnson
(1996) after using the AFQT as an explanatory variable are, upon closer examination, not
robust to alternative specifications and are quite difficult to interpret.”90 Specifically,
Darity and Mason contend that there is a conceptual flaw in Neal and Johnson’s earnings
equation in that it controls for age and the AFQT but does not control for education.
Both Darity and Mason as well as Lang and Manove (2004) have found that when the
control for education is added to the earnings equation a black-white wage gap
reemerges. The contrasting findings, then, are not in dispute but there is debate over their
proper interpretation. If the AFQT measures aptitude and years of schooling measures
additional productivity attributes such as acquired skill or knowledge, (as well as
motivation or perseverance), then both the AFQT and years of schooling should be
included in the regression. In this case, the racial gap in earnings is significant. But,
Heckman supports Neal and Johnson in the view that the AFQT score captures the
contribution to productivity of intelligence and education and that therefore it is
inappropriate to also include years of education in these earnings functions. The Neal
and Johnson specification that Heckman endorses eliminates the racial gap in earnings.
Ross (2003) addresses the issue as follows: “Johnson and Neal control for the age of the
individual [at the time of the AFQT test], but they did not control for the education of the
individual when he or she took the AFQT. While [arguably] education should not be
included in the wage specification, it is certainly important to remove the influence of
educational differences on AFQT performance if one is to obtain a measure of pre-market
ability. When this correction is made the influence of prejudice on earnings is 11
percentage points.”
Similarly, Darity and Mason argue that measures of psychological well-being
should be included in wage equations. They claim that their inclusion again causes the
black-white wage gap to resurface. They also find that the results of the above-cited
“AFQT studies” are not robust since using the math and verbal subcomponents of the
AFQT leads to conflicting implications for discriminatory differentials. Given these
flaws, Darity and Mason do not trust the results of studies based on the AFQT data. Even
though the results may suggest that there has been a decrease in the black-white wage
gap, the authors assert that blacks still suffer from discrimination in the employment
market.
In addition to their claim that the aggregated regression data document the
existence of race and sex discrimination, Darity and Mason argue that the evidence from
selected discrimination lawsuits and audit pair studies further buttress this conclusion.
They highlight the 1996 Texaco case as the most notorious in recent years in which top
corporate officials were caught on tape making highly demeaning remarks about blacks,
which then translated into discriminatory employment practices. Similar evidence was
uncovered about the racist language and behavior of Ray Danner, who was the CEO of
the restaurant chain Shoney’s.91
90
91

Darity and Mason (1998).
See Steve Watkins, “Racism du jour at Shoney’s,” excerpted in Donohue (2003).

41

Darity and Mason summarize the findings of five separate audit-pair studies
assessing race and sex discrimination, noting:
• The Urban Institute audits from the early 1990s found that both black and
Hispanic males were three times as likely to be turned down from a job as
white males.
• Bendick, Jackson, and Reinoso (1994) found that whites were 10 percent
more likely to receive job interviews than blacks, half of the white
interviewees received job offers versus 11 percent of the black
interviewees, and blacks who did receive jobs were offered 15 cents per
hour less than whites.
• The Fair Employment Council found that both Hispanic and black women
were three times as likely to encounter discrimination when compared to
Hispanic or black males, respectively.
• To address the methodological complaints of Heckman and Siegelman
(1993) that audit pairing fails to adequately hold constant all relevant
traits, Neumark, Bank, and Van Nort (1995) designed a study to eliminate
personality and appearance variables by relying on manipulated resumes
sent to selected employers (restaurants). The results show that a man
always had a higher probability of receiving a job offer, and Darity and
Mason interpret this to mean that within a particular occupation, gender
discrimination is still prevalent.
• Goldin and Rouse (1997) found that hiding the identity of orchestra
applicants (behind a screen) raised the probability that a female musician
was selected by 50 percent.
Heckman emphasizes that the evidence from the audit studies must be evaluated
in light of the distinction between market discrimination and individual discrimination.
He stresses that the “impact of market discrimination is not determined by the most
discriminatory participants in the market nor by the average level of discrimination
among firms, but rather by the level of discrimination at the firms where ethnic minorities
or women actually end up buying, working, and borrowing.” That is, market
discrimination occurs at the margin. While the audit studies can establish that a certain
percentage of employers are discriminatory, this does not imply that there will be any
effective market discrimination in an active labor market. If lots of employers refuse to
hire Jews, but there are others who don’t share this view, Jews may suffer no shortfall in
earnings. Therefore, since Heckman concludes from the AFQT studies that blacks are
receiving wages consistent with their productivity, he is skeptical of the importance of the
audit study findings that some percentage of employers harbors discriminatory attitudes
towards blacks.
In addition, Heckman argues that the audit pair studies may not correctly achieve
even the more limited goal of identifying individual examples of discriminatory conduct.
Heckman notes the following weaknesses in the audit studies:
• Audit pair studies have primarily been conducted for hiring in entry-level jobs
in certain low skill occupations using overqualified college students during
summer vacations.
• Audit pair studies do not sample subsequent promotion decisions.
42

•

Since only jobs found through newspapers clippings are audited, other
avenues of securing work are underrepresented.
Heckman is also uncomfortable with some of the methodological assumptions that
underlie the audit pair methodology. It is quite unlikely that all characteristics affecting
productivity can be perfectly matched between two job candidates. If, because of the
effort required to match the candidates, the researcher assumes that they have equal
strength on all characteristics, she can mistakenly assume discrimination where there is
none. For example, if the black auditors are better at Skill X but the white auditors are
better at Skill Y, an audit researcher who equalizes blacks and whites only on Skill X will
find discriminatory practices in firms (that are in fact looking for Skill Y workers) even
when there is no discrimination.
In the end, Heckman believes that more strenuous enforcement of civil rights laws
will henceforth be a costly and ineffective way to narrow the black-white wage gap.
Rather, efforts should focus on enriching family and preschool environments so that
skills are strengthened before job candidates enter the market. The need for early
intervention is highlighted by the recent findings of Fryer and Levitt (2005: 5): “By the
end of third grade, even after controlling for observables, the black-white test score gap is
evident in every skill tested in reading and math…. The largest racial gaps in third grade
are in the skills most crucial to future academic and labor market success: multiplication
and division in math, and inference, extrapolation, and evaluation in reading. Any initial
optimism is drowned out by the growing gap.”
C.
Some New Audit Pair Studies
A recent study by Devah Pager concludes that the degree of discrimination in
employment is so great that blacks without criminal records are treated as badly as whites
with criminal records.92 The Pager study has been widely cited as establishing the
existence of a high level of discrimination, but there are some reasons for caution in
interpreting this work. This study employs an experimental audit approach, varying only
criminal record, to chronicle the success of candidates’ interviews in Milwaukee. Using
matched pairs of individuals, the author is able to control for other characteristics and
isolate the effect of the criminal record alone. Pager finds that a criminal record has a
substantial effect on employment opportunities, particularly for black applicants.
Pager’s audit experiment involved four male participants, two blacks and two
whites, applying for entry-level job openings. The auditors formed two teams such that
the members of each team were of the same race.93 The teams applied to 15 jobs per
week and the final data included 150 applications by the white pair and 200 by the black
pair.94 The auditors applied to the jobs and advanced as far as they could during the first

92

Pager (2003).
The auditors were chosen based on similarity of characteristics, and all background information was
made similar for the job applications. The only difference in the application was that one of the testers in
each team was assigned a criminal record, a felony drug conviction, and 18 months of prison. The member
of each team with the criminal record was rotated on a weekly basis to control for any unobserved
differences. Both members of a team would apply for the same job, one day apart with the order
determined randomly.
94
The job openings were all within 25 miles of downtown Milwaukee and were selected from the classified
section of a Milwaukee newspaper and a state-sponsored internet job service. The project occurred
93

43

visit. The application was considered a success only if the auditors were called back for a
second interview or hired.
The results showed that 34 percent of whites with no criminal record were called
back while only 17 percent of those with a criminal record were; 14 percent of blacks
without a criminal record were called back while only 5 percent with a criminal record
were. Notably, the black auditor without a criminal record received a smaller percentage
of callbacks than the white auditor with a criminal record, suggesting the presence of
substantial discrimination against blacks in general. Note that the extent of the disparity
that Pager found was quite a bit higher than that found in other audit pair studies in the
employment realm. One issue to consider is that same-race pairs would visit the same
employers but the cross-race pairs visit different employers. This is an efficient protocol
for testing the impact of a criminal record on labor market success but a less efficient
method for testing for race discrimination. Nonetheless, Pager notes that black and white
testers were carefully matched to each other as if they were participating on the same
team, so that these estimates should be unbiased even if less efficient. Moreover, while
there may be some heterogeneity among the employer samples tested by each pair, even
after random assignment, Pager’s approach yields an offsetting advantage: the black pair
and the white pair were able to use identical sets of resumes, which would not have been
possible had they been visiting the same employers.95 Another concern, albeit one about
which Pager is well-aware, is the possibility of experimenter effects in in-person audit
studies. When the variables of interest, i.e. race and criminal record, are known to the
auditors, there is potential for bias if the person conducting the study signals even subtly
what the study hopes to accomplish.96
A closely related technique is used in Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004) to
measure the extent of race-based labor market discrimination. Employing a so-called
correspondence test methodology, they submitted about 5,000 fictitious resumes in
response to nearly 1,300 employment advertisements posted in The Boston Globe and
The Chicago Tribune. Their experiment was designed to estimate the racial gap in
response rates, measured by phone calls or emails requesting an interview. The authors
deliberately chose a correspondence test in order to circumvent some of the weaknesses
associated with audit studies, such as the confounding effects of human interaction in a
face-to-face interview and the difficulty of “matching” two different individuals.
Randomly assigning traditionally black or white names to resumes, on the other hand,
ensures 1) race remains the only component that varies for a given resume and 2)
heterogeneous responses to behavior or appearance do not affect outcomes (as often
occurs with human auditors).
The Bertrand and Mullainathan paper also differs from specific features of
Pager’s audit study. First, they analyze hiring practices for two large cities in different
regions of the country. In addition, they submitted four applications to each employer,

between June and December 2001 and focused on a range of entry-level jobs, such as restaurant workers
and production workers.
95
The resumes of test partners were similar but not identical.
96
This is the “experimenter” effect that Heckman and Siegelman (1993) discuss in the context of the Urban
Institute audit studies and that social psychologists have long recognized and stressed.

44

one for each race/quality cell.97 Bertrand and Mullainathan submitted applications for
three occupational categories -- sales, clerical services, and administrative support -while Pager’s study includes entry-level sales and clerical positions, restaurant and
warehouse jobs, customer service positions, and cashiers. Finally, and perhaps most
important, differences in race can only be inferred by the employer in the Bertrand and
Mullainathan study. Since no personal contact with the potential employer ever takes
place, Bertrand and Mullainathan randomly assign names that are typically or exclusively
associated with blacks or whites.98 As the authors note, the correspondence test—like
most audit studies—captures only the initial stage of the hiring process and excludes
other important sources of employment news such as social networks. One drawback to
this approach is that it can only address jobs in which mailed resumes is an appropriate
application method, which may miss lower level jobs where discrimination at the point of
hire may be most acute.
Bertrand and Mullainathan find significant differences in callback rates for whites
and blacks: “applicants with White names need to send about 10 resumes to get one
callback whereas applicants with African-American names need to send about 15
resumes.”99 Put differently, the advantage of having a distinctly white name translates
into roughly eight additional years of experience in the eyes of a potential employer.
Whites also appear to benefit much more than blacks from possessing the skills and
attributes of a high-quality applicant and from living in a wealthier or whiter
neighborhood.100
Although these results represent compelling evidence of labor market
discrimination, it is important to bear in mind the study’s underlying assumptions,
particularly the likelihood that distinctive names map as expected to racial identity in the
minds of potential employers. The results of Fryer and Levitt (2004) also indicate that
distinctive names do not disadvantage blacks for a variety of adult outcomes. They offer
some potential arguments for reconciling their findings with those of Bertrand and
Mullainathan (2004). First, if names are considered a noisy initial indicator of race, then
they should have no effect once a candidate arrives for the interview.101 Second, if
distinctively black names damaged labor market prospects, one might observe more name
changes than appear to occur. Finally, with only about 10 percent of jobs being secured
through formal resume-submission processes, the disadvantage of being screened out by

97

Quality, which can either be “high” or “low,” refers to a subjective classification of attributes across a
range of standard resume components. For example, a high-quality applicant might possess (among others)
an email address, computer skills, honors and volunteer or military experience.
98
Bertrand and Mullainathan express concern that employers might not recognize racial identities based on
distinctive names and that such labeling may not reflect the identity of the average African-American.
However, an informal survey of Chicago residents confirmed that people associate their list of distinctive
names with the expected race.
99
Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004).
100
The difference in callback rates between high and low quality whites is 2.3 percentage points, while for
blacks the difference is a meager one half of one percentage point.
101
Fryer and Levitt also hint at the possibility that discrimination at the resume submission stage against
individuals with distinctively black names will reduce the search costs of those applicants and perhaps
direct them more rapidly toward employers that prefer to hire blacks. Still, this saving in search costs may
come at a price if it eliminates the opportunity for high-quality black applicants to present themselves in a
manner that will dampen the employer’s discriminatory response.

45

certain employers may not be high when other employers and other job search paths
remain open.
The combination of the audit studies and the better regression studies seems to tell
us that (1) there are enough discriminators around that blacks do have to search harder to
find employment, (2) the resulting unexplained earnings shortfall is not terribly high, and
(3) the unexplained earnings shortfall will overstate discrimination if other legitimate
factors are omitted, but will understate the cost of discrimination to blacks because they
bear the added search costs and any attendant psychological burden that it imposes.
Eliminating discrimination could bridge that earnings gap and remove the added search
costs, but this would still leave a substantial unadjusted disparity in black and white
earnings. Heckman is trying to emphasize that current black earnings shortfalls should be
thought of as emanating more importantly from lower levels of human and cultural
capital, and that efforts to address those deficits will yield greater rewards than further
heightened antidiscrimination measures in the labor market. Heckman fears that efforts
to aid groups that have been languishing in socio-economic attainment will be more
impeded rather than advanced by a predominant focus on discrimination.
VII.

ANTIDISCRIMINATION LAW IN PRACTICE

Rather than a focus on ability enhancement, which Heckman would prefer, the
theoretical goal of antidiscrimination law is the attainment of the equilibrium that would
exist in the counterfactual world in which every individual retained his or her same
abilities but the employer (or purchaser) was somehow prevented from observing any of
the prohibited traits (such as race or sex). This equilibrium is given by point A in Figure
1.102 In effect, this implies that the legislation is premised on the view that discriminatory
preferences should not be registered in the social calculus and that any benefits that occur
from taste-based or even statistical discrimination should be foregone. Since the
antidiscrimination regime is implemented largely through private litigation, it is
encumbered by all of the costs of any litigation-based scheme in which motives are
highly relevant to determining liability. Thus, post hoc decision-makers must determine
whether protected workers have been fired because of their protected
race/gender/age/disability or for some other legitimate reason such as their shortcomings
relative to other available workers. Obviously, this type of litigation is costly and prone
to error.
The effort to discern the motive of employers may be particularly difficult
because (as considerable psychological evidence suggests) much discrimination is
unconscious. This implies that an employer might believe that he or she has not
discriminated even when discrimination has occurred. The difficulty this poses for a trier
of fact is clear: if the employer doesn’t know that he or she has acted in a discriminatory
way, how easily can the jury discern this fact? Certainly demeanor evidence at trial
would be misleading if an employer who sincerely believes there has been no
102

This conclusion depends on the assumption that the law is pursuing the color-blind view of
discrimination. To the extent that the law is seeking to pursue another goal -- such as, providing
preferences for a disadvantaged group -- then the demands of the law might be to generate a more favorable
level of wages and employment than would exist in a wholly nondiscriminatory environment. See
Donohue (1994).

46

discrimination did in fact discriminate. The inability to readily and accurately identify
intentional discrimination provides a rationale for the disparate impact doctrine and
reliance on statistical proof of discrimination. Statistical models are informative about
the probability that an observed disparity would occur if workers were selected in a
random process. Statistically significant disparities therefore suggest that the likelihood
that the observed employment patterns emerged from a random process is low. Such a
finding, however, does not always provide useful evidence that the non-random process
was discriminatory: underlying differences in productivity may be correlated with race
yet not accounted for in the statistical model. Therefore, reliance on statistical models to
prove intentional discrimination will likely generate too high a level of Type I error
(where the innocent employer is wrongfully found to have discriminated). Assuming
reverse discrimination lawsuits are possible, the standard level of statistical significance
(5 percent) would indict 5 percent of all employers, even with purely random
employment selection. Not using statistical evidence, though, increases the risk of Type
II error (where the unlawfully discriminating employer avoids sanction). Presumably,
markets will provide some discipline on employers who engage in unconscious
discrimination, so in evaluating the costs and benefits of antidiscrimination law the
imperfect market sanction needs to be compared with the imperfect legal remedy.
Antidiscrimination law may also undermine the efficient use of statistical
discrimination, thereby lowering overall wealth to the extent that statistical
discrimination has real cost advantages to employers seeking to minimize the cost of
selecting their workforce.103 Moreover, the prohibition on statistical discrimination can
potentially turn antidiscrimination law into a mechanism for generating preferential
treatment of protected workers. As we have seen, the law clearly prevents an employer
from acting on the knowledge that most women will leave the labor market when they
have children. If women and men were otherwise identical, then burdens of childbearing
would imply that, on average, the marginal product of men would be higher than that of
women. Requiring that employers ignore this fact tends to increase the demand for
female workers beyond what it would be if the outcome could be reached in which all
animus against women was absent. This highlights a difference between an economic
and a legal definition of discrimination, since economists would say that an employer
who pays a class of workers $x less because on average the members of that class impose
$x greater costs on the employer is not discriminating. Indeed, the economist would
likely say that in this scenario, if the employer did not pay less to this class of workers,
then the employer would be discriminating in favor of this group. Thus, the legal
definition would mandate economic discrimination by requiring that male and female
workers must receive equal compensation and employment despite this productivity
differential. Similar issues arise for racial and ethnic minorities (their relative poverty has
led to less desirable school options and hence lower human capital attainment), the

103

A fascinating recent paper revealed that the introduction of a personality test into the hiring process for a
large retail firm did not reduce the employment of blacks even though black workers did score lower on the
test. The authors conclude that “these results imply that employers were… statistically discriminating prior
to the introduction of employment testing -- that is, their hiring practices already accounted for expected
productivity differences between minority and non-minority applicants.” See Autor and Scarborough
(2004).

47

elderly (on average they are slowing down), and the disabled (at the very least they
require reasonable accommodation).
The previous discussion suggests an inherent tension in employment
discrimination law. If, in the economist’s terms, employers are appropriately paying
members of a certain group less because on average the members of that group are either
less productive or more costly to employ, then the legal requirement not to discriminate
will be in tension with the economic incentives faced by employers. In essence, a
tradeoff emerges between the equal hiring requirement and the equal wage requirement.
If, as is generally believed, the latter is more binding, then the law may actually dampen
employment while raising wages of those who secure employment (the “minimum wage”
scenario). There is empirical support for the view that antidiscrimination laws may help
those who keep jobs while reducing the total number of jobs. In general, the minimum
wage effect predicts higher wages and lower employment for protected workers, while
the equal hiring component suggests that protected workers will experience some demand
stimulus. The bottom line is that both factors predict higher wages for protected workers
but the employment effects are ambiguous depending on whether the demand stimulus
offsets the incentive to cut back on more costly workers.
VIII. THE IMPACT OF ANTIDISCRIMINATION LAW ON BLACK ECONOMIC
WELFARE
A.
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and Black Employment
As previously noted, the major law prohibiting employment discrimination on the
basis of race, sex, religion, and national origin was Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of
1964. Congress later broadened the coverage of this statute when it enacted the Equal
Employment Opportunity Act (EEOA) of 1972, and then further expanded federal
antidiscrimination law (primarily in providing greater damage remedies for successful
sex discrimination plaintiffs and workers discharged because of their race) in passing the
Civil Rights Act of 1991. The 1964 Act has received the most scholarly attention for it
was clearly the most momentous piece of antidiscrimination law ever enacted. Initially,
James Smith and Finis Welch attempted to carry the mantle of Milton Friedman by
arguing that the Civil Rights Act of 1964 had not advanced black economic welfare.104
The thrust of the argument was simply that blacks had low skill levels and little education
and as they secured more human capital their wages rose appropriately. Smith and
Welch argued that the economic gains of blacks were no different during the period from
1940 through 1960 than they were in the following two decades. They took this as
evidence against the view that Title VII generated any benefits for black workers.
More nuanced examinations of this issue have now confirmed that Title VII did
indeed generate economic gains for blacks, although these gains were largely
concentrated in the first ten years after adoption and in the South. As Donohue and
Heckman (1991) note:

“the evidence of sustained economic advance for blacks over the period 19651975 is not inconsistent with the fact that the racial wage gap declined by similar
amounts in the two decades following 1940 as in the two decades following 1960.
104

Smith and Welch (1989).

48

The long-term picture from at least 1920-1990 has been one of black relative
stagnation with the exception of two periods – that around World War II and that
following the passage of the 1964 Civil Rights Act.”
It is now widely accepted that in helping to break down the extreme discriminatory
patterns of the Jim Crow South, Title VII did considerably increase the demand for black
labor, leading to both greater levels of employment and higher wages in the decade after
its adoption.105
B.
The Equal Employment Opportunity Act (EEOA) of 1972
As the literature examining the effects of Title VII illustrates, attempts to estimate
the impact of a federal law that has universal application at a single date in time are
difficult, since any perceived changes may at least arguably be the product not of law but
of broader shifts in the economy or society that either led to the legal change or just
happened to coincide with it. Differential geographic impact turned out to strongly
buttress the conclusion that Title VII mattered. The area of the country that had no
antidiscrimination law in 1964 and that fought desperately against the passage of the
1964 Civil Rights Act was the South, and it was this region that experienced the most
profound narrowing of the black-white wage gap after the federal law took effect. A
recent, interesting effort addresses these issues in attempting to determine whether the
EEOA, which broadened the coverage of Title VII in 1972, provided additional
independent stimulus beyond that provided by the initial Civil Rights Act of 1964. Ken
Chay used the fact that the EEOA had a predictably different impact across industries and
between the South and the non-South as a way to estimate the economic consequences
for blacks of this strengthening in the federal antidiscrimination law.106 Prior to 1972,
Title VII’s prohibition against employment discrimination only applied to firms with 25
or more employees. The Equal Employment Opportunity Act (EEOA) of 1972 lowered
this threshold to include employers with 15 to 24 employees. Moreover, many states
already had fair employment practice (FEP) laws that covered these employers, so if the
legal prohibition in these states was as effective as the federal prohibition, then the EEOA
would be redundant in those states. Of the nine states that did not have FEP laws before
1972, eight were in the South.
Chay analyzes CPS data for the years 1968-1980 in order to assess the relative
trends in black and white earnings at the two-digit industry level. Using the fraction in
each industry-region employed by establishments with fewer than 25 employees (note:
this is not limited to 15-24 employee establishments), Chay is able to divide the
industries into three groups for both the South and the non-South: industries with high,
medium, and low fractions of workers in establishments with fewer than 25 employees.
Chay’s “treatment group” consists of the high fraction group (H-Group) industries in the
South, since these were assumed to be the most affected by the EEOA. The low fraction
(L-Group) industries are essentially considered unaffected by the EEOA and serve as the
control group.

105

Freeman et al. (1973), Donohue and Heckman (1991), Conroy (1994), and Orfield and Ashkinaze
(1991).
106
Chay (1998).

49

Chay estimates the share of black employment by industry, region (South or one
of five non-South regions), and year while controlling for region-specific economic
measures, black-white relative demographic characteristics, and a time trend.107 The
variables of interest are the post-policy effects for each region-industry group, which
were defined to equal zero before March 1973 and are captured by a trend term
thereafter. Chay calculates two estimates: 1) a difference-in-differences estimator
comparing the post-policy changes for the South H-Group to the changes for the South LGroup; and 2) a “triple differences” estimator that compares the difference-in-differences
estimate (H-Group vs. L-Group) for the South relative to the one for the non-South. Both
sets of estimates indicated that the relative employment of blacks grew more after March
1973 in industries and regions with a greater proportion of small firms.108 Chay
concludes from this that the EEOA strongly increased relative black employment shares
and earnings: “black employment shares grew 0.5 – 1.1 log points more per year and the
black-white earnings gap narrowed, on average, 0.11 – 0.18 log points more at newly
covered than at previously covered employers after the federal mandate.” The evidence
on the increasing relative wages of blacks is important to help exclude the possibility of
white disemployment or simple black re-shuffling of employment. As a result, Chay
concludes that the EEOA increased the demand for black workers among small
employers not previously covered by FEP laws.
The Chay paper is persuasive, and in fact may understate the boost to black
employment from the 1972 law for two reasons. First, Chay’s control group contains
some employers who had 15 to 24 employees, and were not covered by a state
antidiscrimination law. Thus, Chay’s control group would contain some employers who
shared whatever impact the EEOA had on black employment. Second, by the mid-1970s,
the Supreme Court had interpreted Section 1981 of the Civil Rights Act of 1866 as
providing another federal remedy for intentional discrimination without any explicit
exemption for small firms. Both of these factors would lead Chay’s estimates to
understate the true impact of the law.
C.
The Civil Rights Act of 1991
1.
Did the CRA Alter Terminations of Black and Female Workers?
In the summer of 1989, the Supreme Court cut back on a previous holding that
enabled blacks to sue under §1981 for compensatory and punitive damages when
discharged because of their race. While discriminatory discharges continued to be
unlawful under Title VII, the 1989 decision meant that, such discharged blacks were
limited to remedies of reinstatement and back pay until the Civil Rights Act of 1991
restored the pre-1989 law on this issue. This Act also gave workers dismissed (or
otherwise discriminated against) because of their sex the right, for the first time, to seek
107

While conducting this analysis on states rather than regions would have provided more variation and
greater precision of the estimates by enabling Chay to directly control for the establishments that were
already covered by pre-existing FEP laws, the small sample size of the CPS made statewide analysis
impossible.
108
Instead of separating the industries into the three groups (H-, M-, L-Group), Chay might have
experimented with interacting the post-1972 trend term with the fraction of establishments in that industry
that had less than 25 employees. This technique would have allowed Chay to test whether black
employment share and the fraction “treated” are directly related instead of dividing the industries into
somewhat arbitrary groups.

50

compensatory and punitive damages for such dismissals (although the damages that such
sex discrimination cases could generate were subject to caps depending on the size of the
discriminating firm’s workforce). Paul Oyer and Scott Schaefer have tried to explore
different effects generated by the Civil Rights Act of 1991 (henceforth “CRA”) by
examining whether the elevated penalties for discriminatory discharge might have altered
employer behavior in predictable ways. If it is costly to fire minority and female
employees because of legal restrictions such as federal and state antidiscrimination laws,
then firms will have an incentive to find ways to get rid of ex post low-productivity
protected workers that circumvent the legal prohibitions. Oyer and Schaefer (2000)
suggest that one possible mechanism is to try to push such workers out the door in the
course of a larger layoff, and if this strategy lowers the cost of discharge one might
expect to see more firms relying on this approach as federal and state antidiscrimination
laws become more stringent. To test this proposition, Oyer and Schaefer posit that the
CRA would have increased employer concern about discharging minority and female
workers and might prompt the hypothesized effort to use layoffs to avoid litigation.
The major findings of the paper are that:
a) black male full-time workers aged 21-39 were more likely to be fired than
comparable non-Hispanic white men during the period from 1987 to 1991 (before
the CRA of 1991 went into effect), but that this differential disappears over the
period 1992-1994 (after the legislation). The paper notes, “These estimates are
strongly consistent with our model’s prediction that the firing rates of protected
workers should go down when the potential costs of wrongful discharge litigation
go up.”
b) Among the black workers who were involuntarily separated from their jobs, the
proportion fired went down by more than a third after the CRA of 1991 went into
effect. The suggestion is that firms were shifting away from firing blacks to
terminating them during layoffs: “While the overall rate of displacement for
protected workers was unaffected by the law, the share of involuntary
displacements coming in the form of firings fell significantly.”
Layoffs provide a great opportunity to unload dead wood of any kind (with an added
advantage of getting rid of protected workers who might sue if discharged for cause).
But loading up the layoff with too high a percentage of blacks might draw the attention of
plaintiffs’ lawyers too readily. Oyer and Schaefer note a finding that would seem to
buttress their theory of the causal impact of the CRA of 1991: they find no effect on
relative firing of blacks in California but do in the rest of the country.109 This is
supportive because California had a very generous state antidiscrimination law
throughout the 1987-1994 period, so one would not have expected the effective legal
regime in California to be significantly impacted by the CRA of 1991. That is, if because
of the application of state law, California employers were already subject to the full
penalties for terminating blacks throughout the study period, then no shift in minority
termination behavior should have been observed after 1991. The fact that such a shift is
not seen in California but is seen outside California lends credence to the claim that the
1991 change in federal antidiscrimination law has influenced termination patterns.
109

Oyer and Schaefer (2000: 356).

51

It should also be noted that Oyer and Schaefer’s before and after comparisons of
the impact of the CRA are not entirely pristine because of certain judicial decisions in the
pre-CRA period that were alluded to above. Federal antidiscrimination law afforded a
somewhat restricted set of remedies to victims of race discrimination (damages limited to
back pay and no right to jury trial) between 1965 (the effective date of Title VII of the
Civil Rights Act of 1964) and 1976, when the Supreme Court ruled that a suit alleging
intentional racial discrimination could be brought under a law passed at the end of the
Civil War (Section 1981) without these restrictions. Thus in 1976, blacks could get to a
federal court jury if they alleged intentional racial discrimination and sought not only
back pay, but compensatory and punitive damages without limit. The Supreme Court
then cut back on the sweep of the 1976 ruling in the June 1989 case of Patterson v.
McLean Credit Union, which “held that claims of racial harassment on the job are not
actionable under sec. 1981 and indicated that many promotions do not amount to the
making of a new contract. Further, its decision clearly suggested that discharge for racial
reasons is also outside the statute’s purview.”110 The Civil Rights Act of 1991 then
restored the pre-Patterson interpretation of Section 1981.
If the Patterson case had been decided before the pre-CRA data period used by
Oyer and Schaefer, then their conceptual approach of defining a before/after comparison
of the legal regime relevant to blacks would provide a clean test of their hypothesized
effects. Instead, for the period from 1987 to mid-1989, the predominant view of the
Section 1981 law concerning discriminatory discharge on grounds of race was exactly the
same as the legal regime after 1991.111 Perhaps then, a more precise test of the OyerSchaefer hypothesis would only compare mid-1989 to 1991 as the “before” period to
post-1991 as the “after” period. The bottom line is that the before and after comparisons
are likely muddied because of the way in which the law concerning race discrimination in
employment was weakened by the Supreme Court in 1989 and then restored by Congress
in late 1991.
2.
Did the CRA Affect Black and Female Employment Levels?
In another paper, Oyer and Schaefer compare CPS data for 196 three-digit SIC
code industries for two four-year periods prior to the passage of the CRA of 1991 (198386 and 1988-91) and for the period from 1993-96 to determine if the CRA affected the
employment of blacks and women.112 The basic conclusion is that in the years leading up
to the CRA of 1991, industries with relatively few women and blacks had been increasing
their share of such workers (if one compares data from 1983-86 with that from 1988-91)
but that this trend fades if one looks at data from 1993-1996. It is not all that surprising
that the CRA did not enhance black employment since the only real changes it
effectuated for blacks was the restoration of the law that had existed in June of 1989 with
respect to discriminatory discharge and the standards for employer justification of
practices with disparate racial impacts. The disparate impact standard (used to attack
110

Zimmer et al. (1994).
Oyer and Schaefer recognize that their pre-CRA of 1991 period essentially divides into a pre-Patterson
(pre-June 1989) period and a post-Patterson period. During the pre-Patterson period, the majority of
federal courts permitted section 1981 wrongful discharge claims, which were then extinguished when
Patterson was decided before being restored by the CRA of 1991. If by 1987 employers fully anticipated
the Supreme Court’s decision in Patterson, then the Oyer-Schaefer pre-post comparison would be pristine.
112
Oyer and Schaefer (2002b).
111

52

neutral acts that have an adverse impact on protected workers) was stringent until mid1989, then virtually eviscerated by the Ward’s Cove decision, and eventually restored by
the CRA of 1991. Once again, though, the major difference in the law concerning racial
discrimination was between mid-1989 – 1991 versus the end of 1991 on (when the CRA
went into effect), so the Oyer-Schaefer comparison is somewhat muddied.
Moreover, to the extent that the boom of the 1990s was disproportionately driven
by white and Asian males harnessing the opportunities of the internet, Oyer and
Schaefer’s finding that relative black employment growth slowed in the post-1991 period
may be more the product of overall economic trends than the consequence of law. Note
that, in any event, Oyer and Schaefer show, in their Table 2, that the percentage of blacks
in overall employment was 7.8 percent for 1988-1991 as well as for the period 1993 1996, so that there was no “reversal” in black employment, even if there was a slowing of
gains observed across the time periods in the 1980s. For women, the small percentage
decline from 39.8 to 38.9 again may be more a product of internet-driven growth in male
employment than a law-driven reversal in the hiring of protected workers.113 Thus, while
I am skeptical that the CRA hurt black and female employment, I agree with one of the
main themes of the Oyer and Schaefer papers that there is little support for the view that
the strengthening of federal antidiscrimination law in 1991 stimulated black or female
employment, as occurred with the federal laws passed in 1964 and 1972.
3.
Did the CRA Change the Frequency of Discharge Complaints?
Oyer and Schaefer (2002b) present some interesting data on the frequency of
EEOC complaints (in cases other than failure to hire) across two-digit SIC industries by
race and gender: “in industries where women and blacks have relatively low
representation, they file a relatively large number of complaints” per capita. Might this
pattern imply that the CRA acted as a drag on employment of protected workers because
it led to too many wrongful discharge type suits? One must consider two other
possibilities. First, the possibly adverse impact on female hiring could be caused by the
sharp increase in sex harassment (rather than wrongful termination) cases after the CRA
was adopted. Second, changes in hiring patterns can also be the product of broad
economic changes rather than legal developments. Specifically, as Donohue and
Siegelman (1991) found, industries with lots of discharge complaints likely have large
numbers of involuntary terminations.114 Therefore, one might expect that a declining
113

One would have expected the CRA of 1991 to have had far more impact on gender discrimination cases
than on race cases (since before and after the CRA of 1991 blacks could sue for failure to hire under
Section 1981 and get compensatory and punitive damages with a right to a jury trial, while women could
only do this afterwards). Thus, the pattern of no decline in black employment coupled with a modest
decline in female employment is at least consistent with my reading of the extent of the legal change for
race and sex discrimination generated by the CRA.
114
In general, tight labor markets will reduce employer-initiated terminations and will also reduce the
likelihood of filing employment discrimination complaints since, under such circumstances, the market
remedy of seeking another job is often preferable to the legal remedies afforded by federal law. Donohue
and Siegelman (1991, 1993). History affords an interesting illustration of the claim that employers will
discriminate less when labor markets are tight. During the American Revolution, George Washington
countermanded the edict that blacks should not be allowed to serve in the Continental Army. Washington
acted not out of a sense of fairness, but out of a sense of urgency, caused by his need for more men to help
fight the British. American blacks and whites would not fight side by side again until President Truman
integrated the military nearly two centuries later. Ellis (2004).

53

industry would experience lots of layoffs, which then lead to increased wrongful
discharge claims filed by women and blacks (particularly, under last hired, first fired
approaches). In other words, the apparently flagging employment of women and
minorities that Oyer and Schaefer note may be the product of declining industries rather
than the result of an increased likelihood of discharge litigation induced by the more
stringent law.
Oyer and Schaefer (2002a) also explored whether the strengthening of wrongful
discharge law brought about by the CRA altered the volume of discrimination suits and
had broader impacts on black and female employment. They looked at actual EEOC
filings from 1988 to 1995 and limited their analysis to sex cases brought by white women
and race cases brought by black males (focusing only on those aged 20-40 to avoid the
complications of age-based cases). Roughly 19,000 such wrongful discharge charges
were filed each year over their eight-year period. Importantly, they make two very
interesting points concerning these cases brought by young white women: 1) if one looks
at cases brought in a single year, the number of complaints brought per employee falls
with age; so 20-year-old women are most likely to file such complaints and the number
declines monotonically through age 40 (the last age in their data set); and 2) even though
the age profile is the same in the years 1990 and 1993, there are substantially more cases
brought in 1993 (after the adoption of the CRA). Neither of these facts (the downward
sloping age-litigation profile and the jump in filings) is found for wrongful discharge
cases brought by blacks. Black litigation rates (in terms of EEOC filings) actually rise
from age 20 – 30 and then are flat or trend slightly down thereafter, and there is no
obvious difference in filing rates between the two years. One can only conjecture about
the reason why young women file wrongful discharge complaints at higher rates than
somewhat older women. Might this reflect a harassment effect with the youngest women
primarily targeted (a common pattern for harassment cases to reach the courts is that a
harassed female quits and uses the harassment as the basis for a claim of constructive
discharge)? Ordinarily, one would expect that older workers would be more likely to sue
for wrongful discharge since the burdens of dismissal increase with tenure and increased
acquisition of firm-specific human capital (which is exactly what we see for black males
at least through age 30).115
Oyer and Schaefer note:
The complaint rate is much higher for black men than for white women. Each
year, the EEOC received a gender-based wrongful termination claim from
approximately one out of every 2500 to 3500 employed white women, but the
proportion is one out of 400 to 600 for black men.116
The lack of growth in black male wrongful discharge EEOC filings after the CRA is not
surprising since the only element relevant to such cases that changed in 1991 was the
increased ability to file Section 1981 discharge cases, which litigants were not required to
file with the EEOC (since they could proceed straight to federal court).

115

All sex discrimination filings alleging disparate treatment would be expected to increase after the CRA
owing to its authorization of compensatory and punitive damages.
116
Oyer and Schaefer (2002a)

54

IX.

DISCRIMINATION ON THE BASIS OF SEX

During the 1980s and 1990s, the male-female wage gap decreased substantially.
Darity and Mason (1998), who are generally more sanguine about the impact of federal
antidiscrimination law on female employment than Oyer and Schaefer, argue that three
distinct factors contributed to this important change:
• First, two opposing trends were in motion. Men at or below the 78th
percentile of the wage distribution experienced absolute decreases in their
real wage rate. Meanwhile, women at all points on the wage distribution
experienced wage increases.
• Second, the disparity in the level of human capital for men and women
was shrinking.
• Third, the level of sex discrimination was decreasing.
Clearly, the fact that women bear children and tend to assume a larger role in childrearing than men has an important impact on female labor market decisions and
outcomes. Waldfogel (1998) finds that childless women aged 24 - 45 receive 81.3
percent of a man’s pay whereas women of the same age with children receive only 73.4
percent. Waldfogel concludes that this pattern is caused by premarket factors that
influence employment, as well as discrimination and institutional barriers in the
workplace. But, of course, knowing whether and how to respond to this disparity
requires an understanding of the relative importance of these factors.
Darity and Mason also contend that the index of occupational dissimilarity for
both 1970 and 1990 demonstrates strong evidence of occupational crowding by gender.
Although this index has decreased from 68 percent117 to 53 percent over this twenty-year
period, women are still highly concentrated in lower-paying jobs. Blau and Kahn (1996)
looked at the economic performance of women in nine OECD countries and drew the
following interesting conclusions: 1) in terms of human capital and occupational
distribution, U.S. women compare favorably with women from the other countries; 2) the
U.S. has had a longer commitment to employment equality; but 3) the U.S. gender gap in
wages is larger than in any other country. Darity and Mason interpret this evidence as
implying that the gender wage gap is governed by the overall degree of inequality in the
national economy. Since the U.S. has a high level of income inequality, the wage gap
will be high despite the existence of strong antidiscrimination measures. In the case of
the United States, a decentralized system for setting wages, a low minimum wage
mandate, and weak trade unions account for the greater inequality in wages in the U.S.
Thus, policy measures other than enhanced antidiscrimination enforcement might have a
greater impact on the earnings differential between male and female workers. Of course,
as John Rawls argued, we don’t want to enforce greater equality at the expense of those
at the low end of the income distribution.118
Darity and Mason’s discussion is largely focused on the over-representation of
women at the low end of the earnings spectrum in the labor market. What more can be
117

A value of 68 percent implies that 68 percent of women (or men) would have to change occupations to
have equal gender representation in all occupations.
118
Rawls (1971).

55

said about the under-representation of women at the high end of the market? The CRA of
1991 created the Glass Ceiling Commission whose mission was to identify “invisible,
artificial barriers that prevent qualified individuals from advancing within their
organization and reaching full potential.”119 The Commission hoped to explain
phenomena such as the 90 percent male share of top managers at Fortune 500 companies.
A recent survey of 120 CEOs, who were predominately male, and 705 female executives,
who at the time held positions at the level of vice president and above at major
corporations, illustrates the expressed beliefs of CEOs and high-ranking female
executives about why so few women make it to the very top of the business pecking
order.120 The authors highlight the following survey results:
•

•
•

•
•
•

Female executives responded that the following barriers exist: exclusion from
informal networks, stereotyping, lack of mentoring, shortage of role models,
commitment to personal or family affairs, lack of accountability in their position,
and limited opportunities for visibility in the workplace.
CEOs responded that the primary barriers for women workers were ineffective
leadership and lack of appropriate skill sets for senior management positions.
79 percent of the female executives and 90 percent of the CEOs responded that
the primary obstacle to gaining a top-level position is women’s lack of line
experience. According to the survey, women do not find themselves on the
trajectory for senior management positions because they are not aware that such
positions are available to them or they are discouraged from pursuing these roles
by colleagues and superiors who do not feel that women can perform well in
them. As a result, these women simply are not on the radar screen when
succession decisions are made because they do not have the profit-and-loss
experience that CEOs most value.
Two-thirds of the female executives and more than 50 percent of the CEOs
responded that a key barrier for women is the failure of senior leadership to
assume accountability.
Less than 1/3 of the total respondents considered a lack of desire by women to
reach senior level positions to be a barrier to women’s advancement.
Of those executive women not already at the very top, 55 percent responded that
they aspire to attain the most senior leadership positions.

The article closes with the suggestion that current CEOs must alter business
strategies and human resources agendas to ensure that their female workers can gain the
appropriate skill sets for senior level positions. These results helpfully describe what
some highly talented individuals state is the problem, but, of course, in light of the public
relations sensitivity on the part of the CEOs and the potentially self-serving responses of
the female executives, one must be cautious before accepting these statements as having
established the truth of the matters asserted.
119

See “About the Commission” at
http://www.ilr.cornell.edu/library/downloads/keyWorkplaceDocuments/GlassCeilingAbout%20the%20Co
mmission.pdf
120
Wellington et al. (2003).

56

Many of the survey comments suggested that women experienced disparate
treatment, which would violate federal antidiscrimination law, but even this is not certain.
Female executives, for example, apparently feel that they have been excluded from
informal networks and were not mentored. Even if the feeling corresponds with reality,
though, we still cannot conclude that disparate treatment of women had occurred unless
we know that such mentoring occurred more frequently for men with no greater
qualifications. Conceivably, the same percentage of men felt (and were in fact) excluded
as well. Note that one of the cited “barriers” to female advancement to top managerial
positions is “commitment to personal or family affairs,” which would not violate current
law because it is not a barrier created by employers. Arguments can be made that
governmental action may be appropriate to address this situation but 1) this would be
more a matter of affirmative action for women, rather than antidiscrimination law or
policy, and 2) one may not want to promote policies that undermine women’s
“commitment to personal or family affairs.”
It is unclear whether other aspects of this survey support a Beckerian notion of
employer animus against having women in top jobs, or a view of statistical discrimination
based on inaccurate -- or even accurate, if one believes Hakim’s work discussed below -views of female ability and desire for top jobs. Somewhat over half the women reported
that they aspired to the highest level jobs. What was the comparable percentage for men
(and can we trust the accuracy of self-reported aspirations)? In any event, one would
expect that the market would penalize employer animus against women or inaccurate
statistical assessments. Again, one might ask why businesses would not have the
appropriate incentives to encourage this human capital development given the value of
cultivating top corporate managerial talent.121 The survey might be thought to give
support for an externality-based argument for affirmative action: if women saw more top
corporate female role models, then they would pursue these jobs more assiduously,
thereby expanding their human capital and the productivity of business. If so, a firm
might find that hiring a woman for a top job creates a positive externality by stimulating
the productivity of other women that will not necessarily accrue to the original hiring
firm.
A.
Differences in Male and Female Behavior and Preferences
Other recent academic studies have suggested that the plight of women in the
labor market is strongly influenced by their own conduct and attitudes existing
independent of the labor market. Babcock and Laschever (2003) argue that part of the
failure of women to earn as much and advance as far as men stems from the fact that
modern Western culture strongly discourages women from asking and negotiating for
what they want in their careers. Specifically, women directly out of an MBA program
were found on average to earn $4,000 less than their male counterparts in their first jobs
because men were more adept at negotiating their starting salaries. This finding appears
to suggest that the requirements (or at least the goals) of the Equal Pay Act (designed to
121

Norway has just launched an experiment in affirmative action for female business executives by
mandating, as of January 2006, that all publicly traded corporations must have 40 percent female
representation on their corporate boards. It will be interesting to see whether this will dampen profits of the
corporations, as the Becker model would suggest, and as Norway’s business community has strongly
predicted.

57

insure that women receive the same pay as men for identical jobs) are not being met. The
finding also suggests that, assuming equal productivities, employers would have an added
incentive to hire women because they are willing to work for less. If there is no added
incentive, then women are not underpaid from the employer’s perspective, either because
they impose greater costs on employers (either from Beckerian discrimination or perhaps
because of the expected penalty on the employer imposed by female workers who will
leave the labor market for child-bearing/child-rearing), or because their modest
bargaining strategy for a higher salary correlates with lower success on the job.
Note that an employer could not defend against a wage discrimination lawsuit on
the ground that women are more likely to leave the workforce for child-rearing, but might
be able to prevail on the second claim if the employer made individualized
determinations that particular women did not possess the attributes associated with
greater productivity. As a practical matter, however, an employer would be risking
substantial civil liability by attempting to justify male-female disparities in earnings or
hiring on this basis, even if they were economically justified. Note, too, that if culture or
biology inhibits females from negotiating aggressively, women on average will have less
success in positions where this trait is rewarded. There is also some evidence that women
can be trapped in a Catch-22 situation: those women who do negotiate aggressively may
be characterized as “pushy or bitchy or difficult to work with,” and thus rejected on this
basis.122 In the absence of employment discrimination law, the market would respond to
such non-productivity-based discrimination with greater gender segregation across firms
without necessarily impairing the earnings or employment of women if Beckerian, rather
than search, models of discrimination are correct. Segregation of women who are highly
productive but viewed as “pushy” by fellow male workers could conceivably allow the
firm to profit from hiring female workers without incurring the cost of having male
workers feel discomfort at working with a pushy female executive. Query whether the
existence of employment discrimination law reduces the ability of firms to engage in
such efficient segregation, thereby impairing the prospects of female workers (and
lowering male utility).123
Catherine Hakim, a sociologist at the London School of Economics, uses
“preference theory” to argue that, contrary to the implicit premise of antidiscrimination

122

In Price Waterhouse v. Hopkins, 490 U.S. 228 (1989), a talented female accountant was denied a
promotion in part because her conduct was deemed aggressive and abrasive under circumstances that raised
a question whether these traits would have been acceptable for male accountants. The Court ruled that
given the critical remarks about the woman’s dress and makeup, the burden should be on the employer to
prove that sex had played no part in the decision to reject her for partnership. This burden-shifting doctrine
was legislatively endorsed in the CRA of 1991.
123
The legal prohibition on such segregation is likely quite effective because complete segregation would
be an easily spotted violation of Title VII and thus would presumably be rare. Title VII would also create
incentives to expand the opportunities for women, but this incentive may be less potent because the
attainment of the legally mandated nondiscriminatory equilibrium is harder to secure through private
litigation. The result is that the law bars the segregation that could conceivably give women higher pay and
better opportunities (albeit in gender segregated firms), and forces them into integrated workforces with the
attendant friction between men and women, but not so effectively that the legal protections of Title VII
compensate fully for the loss of the protections of the unregulated market. The more competitive the labor
market, the greater confidence one would have in the market remedies, and the less one would need the
remedies supplied by law.

58

law, women do not have the same work aspirations as men.124 Hakim reports that men
are three times as likely as women to view themselves as ‘work-centered.’125 She
contends that while women in general want opportunities, they do not want a life
dominated by work. According to Hakim, antidiscrimination policy has been premised
on the inaccurate belief that both men and women desire full-time employment and that
spouses will take equal shares of home responsibility. Instead, many women look for
spouses who can provide them with the opportunity to remove themselves from the
workforce as much as possible so that they can concentrate on home life. According to
Hakim, women simply have different preferences than men and most would rather spend
time with their families than in the office. In fact, only one-third of those women in dualcareer families even regard their jobs as central to their identity. (Query what the
corresponding percentage would be for men.) Hakim’s preference theory states that
“women’s lifestyle preferences tend to determine the pattern of their lives, and that with
the benefit of equal opportunities, women continue to make choices that are different
from those made by men.”
Some contend that Hakim is expressing an antiquated view of female preferences,
which themselves have been shaped by the discriminatory practices of the labor market.
But new social science research conducted by scholars at the University of Chicago
business school has been offered to support the view that male workers seem to have a
greater competitive drive, on average, than female workers.126 In a set of controlled
experiments involving rewards for solving a maze puzzle, the authors determine that
competition between women and men tends to degrade the performance of women. The
experiment, conducted in Israel, consisted of 324 engineering students over a span of 54
sessions. The authors targeted engineering students because they wanted women who
were used to competing with men. The experiment consisted of five different treatments:
•
•
•
•
•

Treatment 1: Piece Rate. Each participant was anonymously paid two shekels
for each maze solved.
Treatment 2: Mixed Competitive Pay. A group of three males and three females
was told that the (anonymous) winner of the contest would be paid twelve
shekels for each maze solved.
Treatment 3: Mixed Random Pay. A group of three males and three females was
told that at random, an anonymous participant would get paid twelve shekels for
each maze solved.
Treatment 4: Single Sex Competitive Pay. A group of six males or six females
with the same setup as Treatment 2.
Treatment 5: Single Sex Piece Rate. A group of six males or six females with
same setup as Treatment 1.

124

Hakim et al. (2000), Hakim (2003) and Kirby (2003).
Through a series of questions relating to work and home/life preferences, Hakim classifies women in
the United Kingdom as work-centered, home-centered, or adaptive. Work-centered women account for 1520 percent of the population, home-centered account for 15-20 percent, and adaptive women (those whose
lives encompass both work and family responsibilities) account for 60-70 percent.
126
Gneezy et al. (2003).
125

59

The authors found that in either mixed or single sex piece rate tournaments (i.e.,
each participant receives two shekels for each puzzle solved), no significant gender
difference exists. However, in the mixed tournament scheme in which only one player
would win, male participants outperformed females. The increase in this gender gap is
driven by the competitive performance of males under competitive pay schemes (though
the performance of men does not differ between Treatments 2 and 4). When tournaments
only consist of a single sex, the authors note an increase in the mean performance of
women and a decrease in the gender gap in mean performance. Thus, women do in fact
react to tournament incentives and compete in single sex groups. But, when women
compete in a mixed group, they may have negative expectations about their relative
ability that impair their performance.
In a second study focused on physical tasks, the same authors found that
competition enhances the performance of boys but not of girls.127 140 fourth graders -75 boys and 65 girls -- were tested running on a track both alone and in pairs. When
children ran alone, there was no difference in performance between the boys and the
girls. However, in competition, boys but not girls improved their performance.128 The
authors chose younger subjects in this experiment (compared to an average age of 23 in
the maze study) to determine if competitiveness is due to socialization or other
characteristics that develop at a younger age or is instead shaped by the discriminatory
workplace and is therefore something that could provide a basis for a claim of unlawful
employment discrimination. No monetary reward was used in this second experiment in
order to determine whether males only compete for an extrinsic reward. These results
confirmed the authors’ hypothesis that competition has a stronger effect on boys than on
girls and that the gender composition of the group of competing subjects is important.
One can imagine that such evidence in an unregulated market could provide yet another
incentive towards greater sex segregation in the workforce. The research also suggests
that certain ways of structuring the environment might be more effective for male, rather
than female, workers and that, accordingly, an employer who allowed practices to remain
in place that had this effect might be the subject of a disparate impact analysis. In such a
case, the employer could be found to have violated Title VII unless the employer could
establish that the practice was sufficiently justified by business necessity.
In his remarks at National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) Conference on
Diversifying the Science and Engineering Workforce, Lawrence Summers, the President
of Harvard, enraged some when he suggested that the relatively small number of women
to reach the very top levels in the various disciplines of science might have less to do
with discrimination and more to do with drive or innate ability at the extreme tails of the
distribution. After cataloguing potential explanations for disparate female performance,
Summers concluded that “in the special case of science and engineering, there are issues
of intrinsic aptitude, and particularly of the variability of aptitude, and that those
considerations are reinforced by what are in fact lesser factors involving socialization and
continuing discrimination.” The point is a general one – if women and men have equal
mean aptitude but men have higher variance, then there will be more men at each tail of
the distribution. Employment as, say, a physicist at Harvard means that someone is at the
127

Gneezy and Rustichini (2004).
When girls ran with girls, their performance was worse than when they ran alone. In contrasts, boys’
time improved by a large margin when they ran with another.

128

60

far right tail of the distribution. It has long been observed that men in general seem to
have higher-variance life outcomes (men have more Nobel prizes but also more suicides,
deaths due to homicide, and spells of incarceration), so the higher-variance hypothesis is
worthy of consideration.
John Tierney of the New York Times used Scrabble rankings as an indication that
men were willing to put in prodigious effort to reach the top of a ranking scheme at a
higher rate than women, even when the number of overall Scrabble players in the country
included more women than men. Tierney, picking up on the work of Fatsis (2001), noted
that to join the Scrabble elite, intelligence and fluency with words is not enough: “you
have to spend hours a day learning words like “khat,” doing computerized drills and
memorizing long lists of letter combinations, called alphagrams, that can form highscoring seven-letter words.” But he then cites the work of anthropologist Helen Fisher to
establish the fact that men will be much more likely to engage in such behavior because
of an evolutionary predilection. Thus, “women don't get as big a reproductive payoff by
reaching the top. They're just as competitive with themselves - they want to do a good
job just as much as men do - but men want to be more competitive with others.”
The National Scrabble Association is the official organization for nearly 10,000
competitive Scrabble players, which supervises over 180 tournaments in the United
States and Canada, including the National Scrabble Tournament held every other year.
Before each official tournament, a new rating is calculated for each participant. This
score, which currently ranges from 400 to 2100, is intended to serve as a relative
benchmark with higher ratings indicating higher skill levels. As of June 2005, only 6 of
the top 100 ranked Scrabble players are female, with the highest ranked at 45 (the others
are ranked at 46, 48, 72, 89 and 100). A player’s ranking simply represents their position
in the national list of player ratings. The #1 player (David Gibson) has a rating of 2065
and #100 (Gail Wolford) has a rating of 1810. As Table 2 indicates, overall gender
representation at the last two National Tournaments has been fairly even. But,
interestingly, the premier Division 1 is dominated by male players (113 men versus 17
women in 2002; 145 men versus 25 women in 2004), while the middle divisions are more
evenly matched, and women tend to outnumber men in the lower divisions. Once again,
we see significant gender disparities at the most elite level of competition, even in an area
involving a skill where women would not appear to be disadvantaged (and might even
have an advantage). While it is unclear whether this results from some greater
competitive drive or some other human capital trait, it is hard to see how discrimination
could play a significant role in success in the National Scrabble Tournament.
B.
Sex Harassment
After the CRA of 1991 provided the first monetary remedy for this cause of action
at the federal level, the total number of federal sex harassment cases rose sharply until
1995 and has since remained roughly stable. A number of studies have tried to estimate
the prevalence of sex harassment. A 1995 survey of active duty women in the U.S.
Armed Forces found that perceived sex harassment was rampant. The researchers
distributed 49,003 questionnaires and collected 28,296 responses, of which 22,372 were
from women.129 The survey revealed that 70.9 percent of active duty women had faced
some sort of sexual harassment over the previous year. Even adjusting for the response
129

Antecol and Cobb-Clark (2002).

61

rate with the most conservative assumption that none of the women who did not respond
had perceived sexual harassment, this is still a strikingly large perceived level of
harassment, which has been corroborated by a second set of studies conducted by the
U.S. Merit Systems Protections Board in 1980, 1987, and 1994. In 1994, 13,200 surveys
went out to federal employees, with 8,000 returned; the results suggested that 44 percent
of female employees and 19 percent of male employees had faced sexual harassment over
the previous year. In 1980, the figures were 42 percent of women and 15 percent of men,
while in 1987 the figures were 42 percent of women and 14 percent of men.130 One
might be tempted to interpret this time-series evidence as indicative of the ineffectuality
of the federal ban on sex harassment, which developed in the 1980s and was bolstered by
the enhanced capacity to secure damages in the CRA of 1991. This conclusion is
unwarranted, though, in that it fails to appreciate the likely defects of this time-series
data. Increased sensitivity to the issue of harassment has occurred over time, so one
would assume that complaints of sex harassment rose even as the incidence of sex
harassment declined.
Grafting the prohibition on sex harassment onto the antidiscrimination regime has
the benefit of sanctioning clearly undesirable conduct but, of course, comes at a price.
First, as this paper has stressed, litigation-based enforcement schemes are costly and
subject to Type I and Type II errors. The social loss from high Type II errors (failing to
punish actual harassers) is mitigated to the extent that the costly litigation does put at
least some burden on wrongdoers. Nonetheless, Type II errors in sex harassment cases
likely impose a considerable psychic if not monetary burden on victims -- the monetary
burdens of the unsuccessful suits fall on the plaintiff’s attorneys who typically get paid
only when they win. Of course, without the legal prohibition, all wrongdoers go free.
High Type I errors impose all of the same litigation costs but wrongfully sanction
innocent conduct, which can have an inhibiting effect on unobjectionable workplace
conduct (as workers try to avoid anything that might be misconstrued as harassment,
presumably reducing both some unpleasant, albeit non-harassing conduct but perhaps
also reducing some pleasant and desired conduct). Moreover, if hiring a woman has
some chance of imposing an erroneous large monetary penalty plus the stigma of sex
harassment liability, that prospect will serve as another burden associated with hiring
American workers in general and women in particular.
Second, there is the doctrinal issue of whether the sex harassment claim should be
an independent tort or linked to antidiscrimination law where it does not always fit
comfortably. Thus, we see an increasing number of sex harassment claims brought by
men, many of which are same-sex harassment cases where the reason for the harassment
may stem more from sexual orientation than from gender. Moreover, the sex
discrimination framework fits uncomfortably when a boss harasses both male and female
employees, which is not unknown since some harassers harass anyone over whom they
can exert power.

130

X.

DISCRIMINATION IN CREDIT AND CONSUMER MARKETS

A.

Housing and Credit Markets

USMSPB (1995).

62

As noted previously, Congress enacted a number of statutes in the late 1960s and
early 1970s extending the reach of antidiscrimination law beyond employment, public
accommodations, and schooling. The Fair Housing Act (FHA), passed in 1968, prohibits
housing providers and lending institutions from discriminating against consumers based
on race, religion, sex, national origin, familial status or disability. The Equal Credit
Opportunity Act (ECOA) of 1974 made it illegal, inter alia, for the extension of credit to
be influenced by the racial composition of a neighborhood, and the Home Mortgage
Disclosure Act (HMDA) of 1975—later amended in 1989—mandates that lenders report
information on their lending activity and the disposition of individual applications. The
HMDA has generated voluminous data that has been mined by researchers seeking – and,
according to Kenneth Arrow, finding -- evidence of discrimination in lending practices.
HMDA data has been subjected to regression analysis designed to detect disparate
treatment by showing that being a member of a protected class significantly reduces the
probability of obtaining fair terms of trade after controlling for legitimate measures of
creditworthiness, such as income, credit history, and existing debt.131 At the same time,
audit studies have attempted to reveal discriminatory business practices in housing and
lending as they occur.
Yinger (1998) and Heckman (1998) stress that both standard regression and audit
studies have strengths and weaknesses. Either omitting necessary explanatory variables
or including “illegitimate” controls can influence the ultimate findings of regression
studies concerning the presence or absence of discrimination. However, as mentioned
above, audit studies can also be marred by errors in design and management. For
example, the decision to inform the auditors about the study’s objectives or about the
presence of his or her partner may influence their behavior and survey responses in ways
that are likely to support a finding of discrimination if one assumes that test auditors
would likely sympathize with the goals of the antidiscrimination organizations that
usually initiate audit tests. Moreover, audit studies are typically narrower in focus than
regression analysis; they highlight discrimination in isolated stages of economic
transactions rather than reveal the experience of the average member of a protected class
who may learn to find more reliable trading partners in active, competitive consumer
markets.132 Also, with the partial exception of the housing context where repeated
studies have been undertaken, audit studies are not generally available in time series,
which limits their usefulness in analyzing changes over time. As a result, inference and
interpretation based on either type of study requires explicit consideration of their
competing advantages and disadvantages.
Schafer and Ladd (1981) used data on mortgage applications in California during
1977-1978 and in New York from 1976-1978 to estimate the differential probabilities of
loan denial by race, sex and marital status. Controlling for an array of variables,
including loan-to-value ratio, income of secondary earners and neighborhood effects,
Schafer and Ladd estimated that black applicants were anywhere from 1.58 to 7.82 times
as likely to be denied loans as white applicants. Interestingly, they found that the
disparate treatment of women subsided over time, whereas for minorities the trend
131

As Yinger (1998) underscores, the economic status of credit applicants and consumers may itself be the
legacy of previous discrimination.
132
Yinger (1998). Ross (2003) also notes that audit studies cannot reveal disparate impact discrimination,
presumably because all of the neutral factors that distinguish the sets of testers have been held equal.

63

seemed to persist. After the 1989 expansion of the HMDA, the Federal Reserve Bank of
Boston analyzed newly available data containing all the components of a lender’s
information set at the time of the loan decision.133 The resulting study -- published as
Munnell et al. (1996) -- found that even the rich set of controls could not fully explain the
differential treatment experienced by blacks and whites. The paper concluded that blacks
experienced a denial rate that was almost twice as high as that for similarly situated
whites.
A number of criticisms have been leveled against the Boston Fed finding of
discrimination in the market for mortgages. Some (incorrectly, according to Ross and
Yinger, 1999) argued that coding errors could account for the results, while others, such
as Stengel and Glennon (1994), attacked the Boston Fed’s model specification. The
debate has continued with Kenneth Arrow concluding that statistical discrimination was
clearly present and Bostic (1996) and others continuing to argue against findings of
discrimination. Specifically, Becker (1995) stated: “Some of the evidence found by the
Boston Fed contradicts their claim of discrimination against minorities. For example,
average default rates found in this study were about the same on loans in census tracts
with a large percentage of blacks and Hispanics as in predominantly white tracts. Yet if
the banks had been discriminating against minority applicants, default rates on loans to
minorities should have been lower than on loans to whites, since banks discriminate in
part by accepting minority applicants only with exceptionally good credit histories and
employment records. They would reject marginally qualified minority applicants while
accepting marginal white applicants.”
Berkovec et al. (1996) and others have tried to follow Becker’s suggestion by
further examining the rate of loan default by race in order to detect or disprove
discrimination in lending behavior. As Becker noted, taste-based discrimination would
lead institutions to set higher credit thresholds for minorities, thereby decreasing their
probability of default relative to white borrowers. Results that point to higher minority
default rates have therefore been interpreted as evidence against discrimination. As Ladd
(1998) cautions, however, the use of default data is subject to important methodological
limitations. She argues that, unlike the loan application data, which includes the full set
of factors used by the lender when deciding to approve or deny, default data necessarily
omits unobserved factors that contribute to the probability of default. Such unobserved
heterogeneity, which can influence the probability of default in both directions, has made
it difficult to generate an unassailable conclusion about the existence or nonexistence of
discrimination from default data.
Using data from the 1989 Housing Discrimination Study, Yinger (1995) probes
the severity of discrimination by examining the rate at which members of racial groups
learn about housing opportunities through market interaction. He finds, consistent with
discrimination, that “black home buyers learn about 23.7 percent fewer houses than do
their white teammates, [and] black renters learn about 24.5 percent fewer
apartments…”134 These results imply that in addition to the psychic costs of
discrimination blacks suffer, they are also burdened by higher search costs and the
consequent potentially inferior housing.
133

This dataset contained crucial information on the credit history, employment stability and public record
of defaults of applicants, all of which were missing from Schafer and Ladd (1981) and previous studies.
134
Yinger (1998).

64

A recent study by Han (2002) that Ross (2003) references may reconcile the
apparently contending positions in the issue of mortgage lending discrimination.
Reanalyzing the Boston Fed data, Han shows that there are distinctly different patterns
between applicants who have a credit history and those who do not. In the former case,
lenders seem to treat applicants equally across races since they have valid information on
which to make their decisions. In the case where the applicants have no credit history,
however, strong racial differences are found. Han concludes that since blacks in the first
category had significantly worse credit histories than did whites, lenders make similar
assumptions about applicants without credit histories and therefore assume blacks are
worse credit risks and treat them accordingly. This is precisely what Arrow concluded –
that there is statistical discrimination against blacks. At the same time, if the statistical
judgments are correct on average then the lending firms are not making greater profits on
the loans that they do make to black applicants – which is Becker’s point. In essence,
Becker is emphasizing his belief that there is no taste-based discrimination against black
mortgage applicants, while Arrow is emphasizing that there is still statistical
discrimination against such applicants (although Han would suggest, only at the point
where richer credit information is not yet available to the lenders). Of course, Arrow
would be correct in noting that such statistical discrimination against black applicants
would be unlawful. Becker would likely reply that such conduct shouldn’t be banned
since on average blacks are being treated fairly (and that credit is being allocated and
priced more efficiently with such statistical discrimination than it would be without it).
Ross and Yinger (2002:310) argue that lenders who appear to be following a
legitimate lending model based on neutral lending criteria that do not include applicant
race can still disadvantage black applicants considerably. This can occur if these lending
schemes:
“exploit the correlation between many credit characteristics and minority
status to create underwriting weights that serve to help identify minority
applicants, not just to measure the impact of credit characteristics on loan
performance. We show that the only way to rule out disparate-impact
discrimination is to make sure that every element of a scoring scheme
improves the ability of the scheme to predict the performance of the
applicants within a group (among whites, for example). More research is
needed to determine whether the elements of existing scoring schemes
meet this test, but we use existing default data to show that disparateimpact discrimination generated by these schemes could severely limit
minority households’ access to credit under some circumstances.”

B.
Auto Sales
Ayres (1991, 1995) and Ayres and Siegelman (1995) have also used the audit
approach to document the presence of discriminatory pricing in automobile sales.
Carefully controlling for observable differences between audit pairs and instructing
auditors on precise bargaining tactics, Ayres and Siegelman collected data from 306
cases at Chicago car dealers. They found that black, male customers paid approximately
$1,000 more for cars than white men and black females paid $405 more than white

65

males. Additional results from these car sales audit studies suggest that discriminatory
practice does not depend on the race of firm employees and that car dealers statistically
discriminate by assuming that black men and all women have higher reservation prices
than white males.135
Goldberg (1996) uses regression analysis of Consumer Expenditure Survey data
from 1983 to 1987 to argue against the claim of discrimination in auto sales prices by
arguing that car dealers did not significantly reduce the price of cars below list value for
white males relative to minorities or women. Goldberg’s sample of nearly 1,300
households included less than 5 percent minority males or females, which is probably a
smaller amount of data than one would ideally like to have in resolving such an important
question. Moreover, Goldberg’s paper is not necessarily in direct conflict with the
findings of Ayres and Siegelman because of their different geographic focus (national
versus Chicago) and units of observation (households versus individuals). Finally, as
Siegelman (1998) notes,
“Even though Goldberg (1996, 624) characterized her results as ‘quite different
from the ones reported by . . . Ayres and Siegelman,’ … Goldberg's estimates of
the discriminatory premiums paid by white females and ‘minority’ females are
virtually identical to ours. The only difference … is that Goldberg found black
males paying a much smaller premium than we did, and none of her results are
statistically significant, whereas ours were, at least for the black testers. Because
there are at least six dimensions on which our audit data allowed for more precise
measurement and better controls than the survey Goldberg used, her failure to
obtain statistically significant results is not surprising and should not be taken as
evidence against the existence of discrimination in new car sales.”
XI. CRIMINAL JUSTICE AND RACIAL PROFILING

As crime fell starting in the early to mid-1990s, the ACLU launched a highly
successful campaign designed to reduce racial profiling in all aspects of American
policing -- from drug enforcement by state troopers and customs and immigration
officials to the implementation of the death penalty to local policing efforts to disrupt
gang activity and simply to enforce motor vehicle laws and criminal law more generally.
Racial profiling became a contentious political issue, and a number of prominent cases of
apparent police targeting -- frequently of African-American men -- led to numerous
consent decrees and massive increases in the number of departments that collect and
retain data designed to ascertain whether their policing strategies were infected by
discrimination. Again, some argued that any disparity in arrest rates across groups
should be taken as evidence of discrimination but this, too, is simply another example of
the gap between proof of discrimination and evidence of disparities that was discussed
earlier.
One pattern that exists in certain towns in the United States that has contributed to
this racial profiling litigation is that a largely white suburban area with single family
homes is changed in ethnic or racial composition when a low income housing project is
built in the town. Suddenly, arrests rise sharply and on a per capita basis, arrests are far
135

Yinger (1998).

66

more numerous in the high-density area than in the single family part of town. Because
of the racially diverse compositions of the two areas, however, evidence of strong
statistically significant disparities in arrests rates by race are quickly marshaled as
evidence of intentional discrimination.
Ideally, tests for discrimination would develop a behavioral benchmark that
corrects for the underlying rate of participation in illegal conduct, which for many crimes
is all but impossible. But what if it is shown that blacks commit X percent of a particular
crime but make up substantially more than X percent of the arrests for that crime? This
pattern could be consistent with intentional race discrimination, but it also could be the
product of a neutral practice having a disparate impact. Consider the case where a war
breaks out between two gangs vying to gain control over the crack trade in an inner city
environment. If the city responds to the mayhem by flooding the area with police, the
ability of the police to observe criminal activity in the inner city area will be elevated and
may well lead to higher arrests across the board for the residents of the targeted inner city
area, who may happen to be members of a racial or ethnic minority. The effect may be
that the arrest rate data that are now being routinely collected may seem to show bias on
the part of police because of the disproportionate arrest rates of minorities. Ironically, to
the extent that the added police activity dampens crime in the flooded area, the benefits of
the policing may be disproportionately targeted on law-abiding minority members of the
community -- even though the political rhetoric may all focus on the discriminatory
conduct of the police.136 Still, where sentences for identical behavior can vary
dramatically based on prior convictions, there is a concern about the consequences of
severe disparate racial impacts in arrests.
One can imagine a model in which officers have an opportunity to seek
contraband or detect criminals by engaging in certain policing actions, such as stops and
frisks. If for whatever reason the success rate in these police encounters is higher when
blacks are targeted, the police may have an incentive to target blacks more intensively.
Efficient policing would then focus on blacks until the success rate from an enforcement
action against the marginal black citizen equaled that against the marginal non-black
citizen. Indeed, if, say, blacks are more likely than non-blacks to commit crime, it might
be rational for the police to focus all their enforcement activity on blacks, since a corner
solution may actually define the efficient policing strategy in a particular case.
This is precisely the theoretical approach taken by Knowles et al (2001) in their
study of motor vehicle searches along a Maryland highway. Their model of the search
process includes a continuum of law enforcement officers and drivers, and the latter are
identified by race r ∈ {B, W } . All other observable characteristics of motorists are
bundled into the variable c. Police officers are free to search vehicles driven by any (c, r)
profile and do so with probability γ(c, r) but incur a cost of tr. The event G denotes a
search in which drugs are found, and thus the expected payoff to the officer is P (G c, r ) .
Similarly, drivers receive v(c, r) if they carry drugs and are not searched or –j(c, r) if
contraband is found.137 Therefore, their expected payoff is:

136

The claim is frequently made, though, that the police under-enforce the law in black residential areas,
and over-enforce against blacks when they are in white areas.
137
If the driver is not transporting drugs, then his payoff is zero regardless of the officer’s actions.

67

γ (c, r )[− j (c, r )] + [1 − γ (c, r )]v(c, r )

(25)

Knowles et al define the event when tB ≠ tW as racial prejudice since the costs of
search differ by race. On the other hand, if γ(B) ≠ γ(W) then there is evidence of
statistical discrimination. The equilibrium constructed entails randomization by motorists
and police. Setting equation (25) equal to zero, the equilibrium search rate is given by:

γ * (c, r ) =

v (c , r )
v ( c, r ) + j ( c , r )

(26)

Officers are willing to randomize whenever P * (G c, r ) = t r for all c and r. In the absence
of a taste for discrimination, the equilibrium probability of guilt is the same for both
races. However, since equation (26) does not depend on that probability, black motorists
will be stopped and searched more often if

γ * (c, B ) =

v (c, B )
v ( c, W )
>
= γ * (c , W )
v ( c , B ) + j ( c, B ) v ( c, W ) + j ( c , W )

(27)

Note that this inequality is satisfied when the value of transporting drugs is higher or
when the cost of being found guilty is lower for blacks.
Even though data on c and γ* are not readily accessible by the econometrician, the
authors test for prejudice by calculating the probability of guilt by race conditional on
being searched. If those probabilities are the same for whites and blacks at the margin,
then there is no evidence to support a racial bias claim. Such a test could be implemented
by testing the null hypothesis
Pr (G = 1 c, r ) = Pr (G = 1)

for all c, r

(28)

In order to avoid specification problems with logit and probit models, Knowles et al opt
for a nonparametric test based on the Pearson χ2 statistic.
Their data set includes over 1,500 motor vehicle searches along Interstate 95 in
Maryland between 1995 and 1999. Of those searches, 63 percent of the motorists were
African-American, 29 percent were white and 6 percent were Hispanic. A first glance at
the data also revealed that the percentage of African-American drivers searched had
decreased in the late 1990s, while whites were searched more often in the same time
period.
Tests for equality of guilt rates across race (as well as sex, time of day and car
type) are carried out according to different thresholds for measuring guilt. Knowles et al
emphasize the criteria in which any form and amount of illegal substances found
constitute guilt (Definition 1) or when seizures of less than two grams of marijuana are
excluded (Definition 2). When guilt is measured according to Definition 1, the
hypothesis of equal conditional guilt rates is not rejected for whites and blacks but is for
Hispanics and the other two race categories. Similarly, under Definition 2 there is no
evidence of bias against African-American drivers. Interestingly, when the definition of

68

guilt includes drugs in large quantities, Knowles et al find potential signs of bias against
white drivers.
These results are interpreted as evidence of maximizing behavior on the part of
law enforcement rather than racial prejudice. As suggested by their model, differences in
search rates may arise even without discriminatory preferences. Indeed, they argue that
“searching some groups more often than others may be necessary to sustain equality in
the proportions guilty across groups.”
In a recent extension of the Maryland search analysis, the model of Persico and
Todd (2004) allows for heterogeneous payoffs for officers and drivers and then tests for
bias using data from Wichita. This version permits drivers a third option of delegating
criminal activity to a member of another (r, c) group and within each group there is a
joint probability distribution over v, j and d, the cost of hiring a delegate. The racial bias
of police officers p now enters through an extra benefit, B(p), if a successful search
involves an individual of the minority race.
If the police are unbiased and both race groups are searched in equilibrium, then
Persico and Todd note that their respective crime rates must be equal, or κr = κR, where r
and R represent the minority and majority race, respectively. However, if B(p) > 0, i.e.
officers are prejudiced, then it must be the case that the crime rate of the group subject to
bias is lower, or κr < κR. Although characterization of equilibrium in this model is more
complex than in Knowles et al (2001), its implications for empirical analysis are just as
straightforward. In fact, the simple analysis above of crime rates carries over into the
fully specified model of interaction between police and drivers: the hit rate, or the success
rate of searches, will be equal across races at the margin if police are unbiased, and the
hit rate of the preferred race will be higher when police are biased.
Persico and Todd apply this test to over 2,000 vehicle searches between January
and September 2001 conducted by the Wichita police department. As in the Maryland
data, the percentage of blacks searched by law enforcement (32 percent) is higher than
their share in the population of drivers (11 percent) while the opposite holds for whites
(63 versus 65 percent). Their primary finding once again indicates that police officers are
not biased in their search behavior: the hit rates for whites and blacks were 22.03 percent
and 22.69 percent. Indeed, they observe equal hit rates across all three race groups.
Finally Persico and Todd summarize the results of 16 other city and state-level racial
profiling studies, which hint at an empirical regularity of no police bias against black
drivers. In contrast, Gross and Barnes (2002) conclude from their analysis of the
Maryland data that the Maryland State Police do use race to decide who to stop and who
to search. This disparate treatment stems from the police effort to increase the minute
percentage of stops that lead to drug seizures, they conclude. Gross and Barnes view the
discriminatory treatment to be pointless since it has no discernible impact on the drug
trade.
In general, using race to target policing activity in the absence of a specific racial
description of a perpetrator will violate constitutional doctrine of equal protection under
the law, but the disparate impact standard will only govern certain types of policing
activities – e.g., where Congress has instituted a broader definition of discrimination for
those departments that receive federal funding. One consequence of the racial profiling
movement is that far more data about the racial composition of stops and arrests is now
collected by the police, which presumably has some opportunity cost since officers must

69

devote time to filling out reports. In addition, the data is costly to evaluate and does
create an opportunity for knowingly or unwittingly presenting results that appear to
demonstrate racial bias when none in fact exists. The data may be most valuable in
reining in the misconduct of particularly biased officers, but even then the fear remains
that these bad apples can avoid detection simply by not filling out the forms when they
stop but do not arrest blacks. Procedures are then implemented to address that problem,
but one can see that rooting out discriminatory conduct is not a trivial task, whether it is
in the workplace, the police force, or other arena of social life.
The massive increase in incarceration of young black men clearly signals a social
problem, although it may have less to do with discrimination in policing, than with the
harsh war on drugs. Even if this war is conducted in a race neutral manner, it will
enmesh into the criminal justice system a disproportionate number of young males with
low socio-economic status and fewer options in the legitimate labor force. Of course, an
anti-drug policy directed at the demand side (rather than the current supply-side
approach) would have far less racial impact since blacks make up a much smaller share
of drug users than of drug sellers.138 The latest figures show that 12 percent of black men
aged 20-34 are incarcerated while the comparable figure for white men is 1.6 percent.139
No change in policing will radically alter these numbers, although a change in drug
policy clearly would. It is worth asking whether our society has done enough to try to
alter this situation, or whether it is willing to accept such high levels of black
incarceration because of indifference emanating from discriminatory attitudes.
XII.

CONCLUSION

We know that discrimination has been an enormous blight on the history of this
country. The scholarly consensus is also clear that the enactment of the Civil Rights Act
of 1964 was a major step towards addressing this problem, and, in particular, aided the
employment and earnings of blacks relative to whites for the decade from 1965 to 1975.
This tells us that law was needed to stimulate demand for black labor if society was to be
true to the ideal that every person should be judged by their talents and not by the color of
their skin. The market alone had not given this protection, despite the claims to this
effect by some very prominent economists, such as Milton Friedman. Even the
libertarian Richard Epstein now concedes that the Civil Rights Act was required to break
the logjam of Jim Crow. Indeed, to the extent that this federal legislation reduced the
discriminatory attitudes of southern (and even non-southern) racists, the efficiency gains
from reducing these Beckerian costs would be enormous. Just as de Tocqueville writing
in 1833 understood that slavery was not only cruel to the slave but deeply harmful to the
masters, federal antidiscrimination law revealed a century and one-half later that lifting
the oppression of intense discrimination from blacks helped the citizens of the South,
both black and white, immensely.140

138

Loury (2002).
“Prison Rates among Blacks Reach a Peak, Report Finds” (2003).
140
De Tocqueville found the comparison of the contiguous slave state of Kentucky and the free state of
Ohio to be dispositive on this issue. The first was marred by poverty and idleness, the second hummed
with industry, comfort, and contentment. See Donohue (2003) quoting de Tocqueville.
139

70

There is much less consensus, though, about where things stand today. As in so
many areas of the law -- for example, medical malpractice, which kills more than the
total victims of homicide and car accidents each year; and antitrust, where the costs of
egregious acts in restraint of trade can be enormous -- it is easy to point out examples of
objectionable conduct, but it is also easy to see that a system of private litigation creates
many problems of costly lawsuits and high rates of error. The audit studies described in
Section VI and X remind us that employers and housing agents acting in a discriminatory
manner are still common, but by no means dominant. The Urban Institute study of
Chicago employers found that black and white testers were treated identically 85.8
percent of the time, while whites were favored in 9.6 percent of the tests and blacks were
favored in 4.5 percent of the tests.141 When one compares those figures to the percentage
of Chicago employers who held negative views about the work ethic of black, white, and
Hispanic employees (37.7 percent ranked blacks last) one realizes that the combination of
competition in the market and the existence of employment discrimination law leads to
much lower effective discrimination than one might fear.142 Ideally, one would like to
know the relative importance of law in this equation. Clearly, the economy is more
competitive today than ever before, which implies that concerns about employer
discrimination should be less pressing than might have been true even 20 years ago.
Heckman may well be correct that efforts to further ratchet up enforcement efforts
of the current litigation-based system of antidiscrimination law would elevate costs far
beyond likely benefits. In his view, the best policy would be to direct resources more
heavily into education and human capital development rather than further
antidiscrimination activity or affirmative action, although Loury (2002) argues that the
full array of approaches will be needed to produce greater racial equality. It may be
worth exploring whether it would be sensible to diminish the reliance on private litigation
and place greater emphasis on programs such as the federal contract compliance program,
under which government contractors are pressed to be sure to avoid “underutilization of
women and minorities.” Such efforts have the potential not only to redress overt
imbalances in hiring procedures but also to mitigate negative, subconscious attitudes
about race and sex of which people in positions of authority may not be aware. As
suggested by the empirical findings of sociologists and psychologists, latent, negative
attitudes toward racial minorities have persisted despite decades of antidiscrimination
legislation.143 It is therefore likely that the problem of racial discrimination will continue
to be widespread and difficult to combat.

141

Donohue (2003).
Donohue (2003).
143
The experimental study of implicit attitudes in Cunningham et al. (2001) provides some interesting
evidence of this phenomenon. Test subjects were shown faces of black and white individuals on a
computer screen followed by words that were clearly positive or negative in connotation. In one trial,
subjects pressed the same key to identify white faces and “good” words and another for black faces and
“bad” words. In a second trial the key for black faces was the same as for good words while bad words
were identified with the same key as white faces. Their results revealed a statistically significant slower
response time in the second trial suggesting stronger associations between the pairings in the first test.
However, participants scored below the midpoint of the Modern Racism Scale (suggesting lower than
average levels of racism) based on a questionnaire on explicit attitudes toward race, which indicated a
disconnect between implicit and explicit feelings.
142

71

The first phase of federal antidiscrimination law was designed to achieve color
blind treatment of all workers. In its second phase, however, antidiscrimination law was
harnessed as a means of improving the economic status of those who would remain
disadvantaged in the marketplace by color-blind treatment: blacks, women, Hispanics,
the elderly, and the disabled.144 This was done in a way that was, arguably, less socially
divisive than explicit welfare legislation that could more efficiently target benefits to
these groups. Supporters of this implicit affirmative action will assert that it was social
welfare-enhancing even if no longer efficient and even if somewhat disingenuously
couched in the language of remedying discrimination (rather than promoting fairness or
distributive justice). Over time, however, the opponents of such policies have become
increasingly unhappy with the perceived excesses of such aggrandized antidiscrimination
law, and we have begun to witness this trend in recent legislative initiatives designed to
cut back on affirmative action in education and other governmental functions.145
Another goal of antidiscrimination law is to prevent the type of racial and ethnic
conflagrations that persistently lead to such unhappy consequences around the world.
Wise antidiscrimination law and policies may serve to dampen down such antagonisms
and prevent the rigid forms of segregation that can allow biased attitudes to percolate into
an unhealthy brew. Richard Posner has speculated that the violence initiated by French
Muslims in November 2005 resulted from insufficient reliance on American–style
antidiscrimination and affirmative action efforts.146 On the other hand, social science
evidence suggests that when affirmative action programs are pushed too aggressively,
they can generate angry backlashes. Finding the correct balance, then, becomes an
important element of antidiscrimination law and policy. These tensions are always
bubbling beneath the surface as evidenced by the fact that Timothy McVeigh, who
bombed the Oklahoma City federal building, was involved with the Aryan Republican
Army and supported its white supremacist agenda.
The economic analysis of law, especially with respect to antidiscrimination
measures, has endured much criticism for its “reduced form” approach to complex social
and legal issues. In his denunciation of the neo-classical paradigm, Ramirez (2004)
144

See Donohue (1994).
As Card and Krueger (2004) noted: “Between 1996 and 1998, California and Texas eliminated the use
of affirmative action in college and university admissions. At the states' elite public universities admission
rates of black and Hispanic students fell by 30-50 percent and minority representation in the entering
freshman classes declined.”
146
Posner (2005) states: “Another factor in the recent French riots may be the French refusal to engage in
affirmative action. The French are reluctant even to collect statistics on the number of people in France of
various ethnicities, their incomes, and their unemployment rates. No effort is made to encourage
discrimination in favor of restive minorities (as distinct from women, who are beneficiaries of affirmative
action in France) and as a result there are very few African-origin French in prominent positions in
commerce, the media, or the government. Affirmative action in the United States took off at approximately
the same time as the 1967 and 1968 race riots, and is interpretable (so far as affirmative action for blacks is
concerned) as a device for reducing black unemployment, creating opportunities for the ablest blacks to
rise, promoting at least the appearance of racial equality, and in all these ways reducing the economic and
emotional precipitants of race riots. Of particular importance, affirmative action was used to greatly
increase the fraction of police that are black, while the "community policing" movement improved relations
between the police and the residents of black communities. French police, traditionally brutal, have by all
accounts very bad relations with the inhabitants of the Muslim slums. The French riots are a reminder that
affirmative action, although offensive to meritocratic principles, may have redeeming social value in
particular historical circumstances.”
145

72

argues that the field of law and economics promotes a “truncated microeconomic analysis
of race that is founded on what can only be termed pseudo-economics,”147 citing the
arguments of Arrow (1998) as justification for his position. Arrow does indeed believe
that non-market-based accounts of discrimination such as social networks deserve more
attention, but this is not to say that economics has little to offer those studying
antidiscrimination law. In fact, Ramirez’s skepticism of the field echoes precisely the
issues that motivated economists like Arrow to formulate alternatives to the Beckerian
theory of discrimination, such as the models presented in Section III. There is even
evidence of the multi-disciplinary approach to discrimination that Ramirez contends are
woefully missing.148 Moreover, Ramirez opines that law and economics primarily
consists of theoretical analysis. As this chapter has shown, though, empirical studies
investigating the effect of legal interventions on racial prejudice and the actual behavior
of economic agents have provided valuable insight into the causes and consequences of
discrimination.
Indeed, economic analysis has helped to identify some of the unintended
consequences of antidiscrimination law, such as the fact that, as employment
discrimination litigation changed from being largely about failure to hire to being
primarily about wrongful discharge, the law developed from a tool that opened up new
areas for minority employment to one that created some incentives against hiring
minorities. The potential drag on minority employment resulted from the increased cost
associated with hiring someone who might need to be fired at a later date.149 Another
example concerns the ability of employers to circumvent the demands of law: if a firm
resides in an area with a 40 percent minority population, it may be able to drastically
reduce its reliance on black labor by moving to another locale, with a black workforce of
only, say, 2 percent. By doing so, both the prejudiced employer and the employer fearful
of discrimination suits might be able to avoid the psychic or legal burden of hiring blacks
altogether. In either event, the goal of increasing opportunities for blacks would be
thwarted. Similarly, an impressive recent study has raised concerns about whether the
“reasonable accommodation” requirements of disability law are harming the employment
opportunities of disabled workers.150 More empirical work is needed before we can state
with assurance the full extent of the costs and benefits of antidiscrimination law in
employment, housing, lending, medical care, and criminal justice policy.

147

Ramirez (2004).
For example, Lang (1986) proposes a theory of discrimination based on the transaction costs that
accompany the emergence of distinct language or speech communities in the labor market. Lang clearly
states his claim that this idea “is a distinct improvement over the existing theoretical literature on
discrimination, which either relies on tastes…or on statistical discrimination having implications generally
contrary to factual evidence.”
149
Donohue and Siegelman (1991).
150
Jolls and Prescott (2004).
148

73

References

“About the Commission” available at:
http://www.ilr.cornell.edu/library/downloads/keyWorkplaceDocuments/GlassCeilingAbo
ut%20the%20Commission.pdf
Aigner, D.J. and G.G. Cain (1977), “Statistical Theories of Discrimination in Labor
Markets”, Industrial and Labor Relations Review 30(2):175-187.
Allegretto, S.A. and M.M. Arthur (2001), “An Empirical Analysis of
Homosexual/Heterosexual Male Earnings Differentials: Unmarried and Unequal?”,
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 54(3):631-646.
Altonji, J.G. and R.M. Blank (1999), “Race and Gender in the Labor Market”, in: O.
Ashenfelter and R. Layard, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 3 (North-Holland,
Amsterdam) 3143-3259.
Antecol, H. and D. Cobb-Clark (2002), “The Sexual Harassment of Female Active-Duty
Personnel: Effects on Job Satisfaction and Intentions to Remain in the Military”, mimeo:
Claremont McKenna College.
Arrow, K.J. (1972), “Some Mathematical Models of Race in the Labor Market”, in: A.H.
Pascal, ed., Racial Discrimination in Economic Life (Lexington Books, Lexington,
Mass.) 187-204.
Arrow, K.J. (1973), “The Theory of Discrimination”, in: O.C. Ashenfelter and K.F.
Hallock, eds., Labor Economics, Vol. 4 (Edward Elgar, Aldershot) 3-33.
Arrow, K.J. (1998), “What Has Economics to Say about Racial Discrimination?” Journal
of Economic Perspectives 12(2):91-100.
Ashenfelter, O., and J.J. Heckman (1976), "Measuring the Effect of an
Antidiscrimination Program, in: O. Ashenfelter and J. Blum, ed., Estimating the Labor
Market Effects of Social Programs (Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ) 46-89.
Autor, D. and D. Scarborough (2004), “Will Job Testing Harm Minority Workers?”
NBER Working Paper No. 10763.
Averett, S. and S. Korenman (1996), “The Economic Reality of the Beauty Myth”,
Journal of Human Resources 31(2):304-330.
Ayres, I. (1991), “Fair Driving: Gender and Race Discrimination in Retail Car
Negotiations”, Harvard Law Review 104:817-872.
Ayres, I. (1995), “Further Evidence of Discrimination in New Car Negotiations and
Estimates of its Causes”, Michigan Law Review 94(1):109-147.

74

Ayres, I. and P. Siegelman (1995), “Race and Gender Discrimination in Bargaining for a
New Car”, American Economic Review 85(3):304-321.
Ayres, I. (2001), Pervasive Prejudice? Unconventional Evidence of Race and Gender
Discrimination (The University of Chicago Press, Chicago).
Ayres, I., F. Vars and N. Zakariya (2005), “To Insure Prejudice: Racial Disparities in
Taxicab Tipping”, 114 Yale Law Journal 1613.
Babcock, L. and S. Laschever (2003), Women Don’t Ask: Negotiation and the Gender
Divide (Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J.).
Bayer, P., S. Ross and G. Topa (2005), “Place of Work and Place of Residence: Informal
Hiring Networks and Labor Market Outcomes”, NBER Working Paper No. 11019.
Becker, G. (1957), The Economics of Discrimination (University of Chicago Press,
Chicago).
Becker, G. (1968), “Discrimination, economic”, in: D.L. Sills, ed., International
Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences, Vol. 4 (Macmillan, New York) 208-210.
Bendick, Jr. M., C.W. Jackson and V.A. Reinoso (1994), “Measuring Employment
Discrimination through Controlled Experiments”, Review of Black Political Economy,
23(1):25-48.
Berkovic, J.A., G.B. Canner, S.A. Gabriel and T.H. Hannan (1996), “Mortgage
Discrimination and FHA Loan Performance”, Cityscape: A Journal of Policy
Development and Research 2(1):9-24.
Berlin, I. (1969), “Two Concepts of Liberty”, in: Four Essays on Liberty (Oxford
University Press, London) 118-172.
Bertrand, M. and S. Mullainathan (2004), “Are Emily and Greg More Employable than
Lakisha and Jamal? A Field Experiment on Labor Market Discrimination”, American
Economic Review 94(4):991-1011.
Bhagwati, J. (2004) In Defense of Globalization (Oxford University Press, Auckland).
Black, D.A. (1995), “Discrimination in an Equilibrium Search Model”, Journal of Labor
Economics 13(2):309-334.
Black, D.A., H.R. Makar, S.G. Sanders and L.J. Taylor (2003), “The Earnings Effects of
Sexual Orientation”, Industrial and Labor Relations Review 56(3):449-469.

75

Black, S.E. and E. Brainerd (2002), “Importing Equality? The Impact of Globalization on
Gender Discrimination”, NBER Working Paper No. 9110.
Blank, R., M. Dabady and C. Citro, eds. (2004), Measuring Racial Discrimination
(National Academies Press, Washington, D.C.).
Blau, F.D. and L.M. Kahn (1996), “Wage Structure and Gender Differentials: An
International Comparison”, Economica 63(250):S29-S62.
Borjas, G.J. and Bronars, S.G. (1989), “Consumer Discrimination and SelfEmployment”, Journal of Political Economy 97(3):581-605.
Bostic, R. (1996), “The Role of Race in Mortgage Lending: Revisiting the Boston Fed
Study”, Division of Research and Statistics, Federal Reserve Board of Governors,
Washington, D.C., Working Paper.
Buruma, I. and A. Margalit (2002), “Occidentalism”, The New York Review of Books,
January 17, 4-7.
Cain, G.G. (1986), “The Economic Analysis of Labor Market Discrimination: A Survey”,
in: O. Ashenfelter and R. Layard, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 1 (NorthHolland, Amsterdam) 693-785.
Card, D. and A.B. Krueger (2004), “Would the Elimination of Affirmative Action Affect
Highly Qualified Minority Applicants? Evidence from California and Texas”, NBER
Working Paper No. 10366.
Carneiro, P., J.J. Heckman, and D.V. Masterov (2005), “Labor Market Discrimination
and Racial Differences in Premarket Factors”, Journal of Law and Economics 48(1):1-40.
Chay, K. (1998), “The Impact of Federal Civil Rights Policy on Black Economic
Progress: Evidence from the Equal Employment Opportunity Act of 1972”, Industrial and
Labor Relations Review 51(4):608-632.
Chiswick, B.R. (1973), “Racial Discrimination in the Labor Market: A Test of
Alternative Hypotheses”, Journal of Political Economy 81(6):1330-1352.
Conroy, M. (1994), Faded Dreams: The Politics and Economics of Race in America
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge).
Couch, Kenneth, and Mary Daly (2002), “Black-white wage inequality in the 1990s: A
Decade of Progress,” Economic Inquiry 40: 31-41.
Crosby, F., S. Bromley, and L. Saxe (1980), “Recent Unobtrusive Studies of Black and
White Discrimination and Prejudice: A Literature Review.” Psychological Bulletin 87:
546-563.

76

Cunningham, W.A., K.J. Preacher and M.R. Banaji (2001), “Implicit Attitude Measures:
Consistency, Stability, and Convergent Validity”, Psychological Science 12(2):163-170.
Darity, W.A. and P.L. Mason (1998), “Evidence on Discrimination in Employment:
Codes of Color, Codes of Gender”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 12(2):63-90.
Donohue, J.J. (1986), “Is Title VII Efficient?”, University of Pennsylvania Law Review
134:1411-1431.
Donohue, J.J. (1987), “Further Thoughts on Employment Discrimination Legislation: A
Reply to Judge Posner”, University of Pennsylvania Law Review 136:523-551.
Donohue, J.J. (1989), ″Prohibiting Sex Discrimination in the Workplace: An Economic
Perspective,″ University of Chicago Law Review 56:1337-1368.
Donohue, J.J. (1994), “Employment Discrimination Law in Perspective: Three concepts
of Equality,” Michigan Law Review, 92:2583-2612.
Donohue, J.J. (2002), “The Search for Truth: In Appreciation of James J. Heckman”,
Law and Social Inquiry 27(1):23-34.
Donohue, J.J. (2003), Foundations of Employment Discrimination Law (Foundation
Press, New York).
Donohue, J.J. and J.J. Heckman (1991), “Continuous Versus Episodic Change: The
Impact of Civil Rights Policy on the Economic Status of Blacks”, Journal of Economic
Literature 29(4):1603-1643.
Donohue, J.J. and P. Siegelman (1991), “The Changing Nature of Employment
Discrimination Litigation”, Stanford Law Review 43:983-1033.
Donohue, J.J. and P. Siegelman (1993), ″Law and Macroeconomics: Employment
Discrimination Over the Business Cycle,″ 66 University of S. Calif. L. Rev. 709.
Duleep, H. and N. Zalokar (1991) “The Measurement of Labor Market Discrimination
When Minorities Respond to Discrimination”, in: R. Cornwall and P. Wunnava, eds.,
New Approaches to Economic and Social Analyses of Discrimination (Praeger Press,
New York) 181-198.
Dworkin, R. (1993), “Women and Pornography”, The New York Review of Books,
October 21, 36-42.
Economic Report of the President (2003), United States Government Printing Office,
Washington, D.C.

77

Ellis, J.J., His Excellency: George Washington, (Alfred A. Knopf: New York, N.Y.).
Epstein, R. (1992), Forbidden Grounds: The Case against Employment Discrimination
Laws (Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass.).
Fatsis, S. (2001) Word Freak: Heartbreak, Triumph, Genius, and Obsession in the World
of Competitive Scrabble Players (Houghton Mifflin Co.: Boston).
Ferguson, R.F. (1995), “Shifting Challenges: Fifty Years of Economic Change toward
Black-White Earnings Equality”, in: O. Clayton, ed., An American Dilemma Revisited:
Race Relations in a Changing World (Russell Sage Foundation, New York) 76-111.
“Financial Firms Hasten Their Move to Outsourcing”, The New York Times, August 18,
2004, C1.
Freeman, R.B., R.A. Gordon, D. Bell and R.E. Hall (1973), “Changes in the Labor
Market for Black Americans, 1948-72”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
1973(1):67-131.
Friedman, M. (1962), Capitalism and Freedom (University of Chicago Press, Chicago).
Fryer, R.G. and S.D. Levitt (2004), “The Causes and Consequences of Distinctively
Black Names”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(3):767-805.
Fryer, R.G. and S.D. Levitt (2005), “The Black-White Test Score Gap Through Third
Grade,” NBER Working Paper No. 11049.
Gneezy, U., M. Niederle and A. Rustichini (2003), “Performance in Competitive
Environments: Gender Differences”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(3):1049-1074.
Gneezy, U. and A. Rustichini (2004), “Gender and Competition at a Young Age”,
American Economic Review 94(2):377-381.
Goldberg, P.K. (1996), “Dealer Price Discrimination in New Car Purchases: Evidence
from the Consumer Expenditure Survey”, Journal of Political Economy 104(3):622-654.
Goldin, C. and C. Rouse (2000), “Orchestrating Impartiality: The Impact of ‘Blind’
Auditions on Female Musicians”, American Economic Review 90(4):715-741.
Greenwald, A. G., Banaji, M. R., Rudman, L. A., Farnham, S. D., Nosek, B. A., &
Mellott, D. S. (2002). “A unified theory of implicit attitudes, stereotypes, self-esteem,
and self-concept,” Psychological Review, 109, 3-25.
Gross, S.R. and K. Barnes (2002), “Road Work: Racial Profiling and Drug Interdiction
on the Highway”, Michigan Law Review 101(3):653-754.

78

Hakim, C. (2000), Work-Lifestyle Choices in the 21st Century: Preference Theory
(Oxford University Press, Oxford).
Hakim, C. (2003), Models of the Family in Modern Societies: Ideals and Realities
(Ashgate, Aldershot, England).
Hamermesh, D.S. (2005), “Changing Looks and Changing “Discrimination:” The Beauty
of Economists,” NBER Working Paper No. 11712.
Hamermesh, D.S. and J.E. Biddle (1994), “Beauty and the Labor Market”, American
Economic Review 84(5):1174-1194.
Hamermesh, D.S. and A.M. Parker (2003), “Beauty in the Classroom: Professors’
Pulchritude and Putative Pedagogical Productivity”, NBER Working Paper No. 9853.
Han, S. (2002), “Learning and Statistical Discrimination in Lending,” unpublished
manuscript.
Heckman, J.J. and B.S. Payner (1989), “Determining the Impact of Federal
Antidiscrimination Policy on the Economic Status of Blacks”, American Economic
Review 79(1):138-177.
Heckman, J.J. and P. Siegelman (1993), “The Urban Institute Audit Studies: Their
Methods: Response to Comments by John Yinger”, in: M. Fix and R. Struyck, Clear and
Convincing Evidence: Measurement of Discrimination in America (The Urban Institute
Press, Washington) 271-275.
Heckman, J.J. and K. Wolpin (1976), "Does the Contract Compliance Program Work?
An Analysis of Chicago Data", Industrial and Labor Relations Review 29:544-564.
Heckman, J.J. (1998), “Detecting Discrimination”, Journal of Economic Perspectives
12(2):101-116.
Holzer, H.J. and K.R. Ihlanfeldt (1998), “Customer Discrimination and Employment
Outcomes for Minority Workers”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(3):835-867.
Jolls, C. and J.J. Prescott (2004), “Disaggregating Employment Protection: The Case of
Disability Discrimination”, NBER Working Paper No. 10740.
Kirby, J. (2003), Choosing To Be Different: Women, Work and the Family (Center for
Policy Studies, London).
Knowles, J., N. Persico and P. Todd (2001), “Racial Bias in Motor Vehicle Searches:
Theory and Evidence”, Journal of Political Economy 109(1):203-229.

79

Ladd, H.F. (1998), “Evidence on Discrimination in Mortgage Lending”, Journal of
Economic Perspectives 12(2):41-62.
Lang, K. (1986), “A Language Theory of Discrimination”, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 101(2):363-382.
Lang, K. and M. Manove (2004), “Education and Labor-Market Discrimination”, mimeo:
Boston University.
Leonard, J. (1984a), "The Impact of Affirmative Action on Employment", Journal of
Labor Economics 2:439-463
Leonard, J. (1984b), "Employment and Occupational Advance Under Affirmative
Action", The Review of Economics and Statistics 66(3):377-385.
List, J.A. (2004), “The Nature and Extent of Discrimination in the Marketplace: Evidence
from the Field”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(1):49-89.
Loury, G.C. (2002), The Anatomy of Racial Inequality (Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, Mass.).
Lundberg, S. and R. Startz (1998), “On the Persistence of Racial Inequality”, Journal of
Labor Economics 16(2):292-323.
Maxwell, N.L. (1994), “The Effect on Black-White Wage Differences of Differences in
the Quantity and Quality of Education”, Industrial and Labor Relations Review
47(2):249-264.
McAdams, R.H. (1995), “Cooperation and Conflict: The Economics of Group Status
Production and Race Discrimination”, Harvard Law Review 108:1003-1084.
Meier, P., J. Sacks, J. and S.L. Zabell (1984), “What Happened in Hazelwood: Statistics,
Employment Discrimination, and the 80% Rule”, American Bar Foundation Research
Journal 9(1):139-186.
“Military Loses Able Recruits with Gay Rule; Ousted Linguists' Skills Badly Needed”,
Chicago Tribune, January 23, 2003, 8.
Munnell, A.H., G.M.B. Tootell, L.E. Browne and J. McEneaney (1996), “Mortgage
Lending in Boston: Interpreting HMDA Data”, American Economic Review 86(1):25-53.
Mulligan, C.B. and Y. Rubinstein (2005), “Selection, Investment, and Women’s Relative
Wages Since 1975”, NBER Working Paper 11159.
Nardinelli, C. and C. Simon (1990), “Customer Racial Discrimination in the Market for
Memorabilia: The Case of Baseball”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 105(3):575-595.

80

Neal, D.A. and W.R. Johnson (1996), “The Role of Premarket Factors in Black-White
Wage Differences”, Journal of Political Economy 104(5):869-895.
Neumark, D., R.J. Bank and K.D. Van Nort (1995), “Sex Discrimination in Restaurant
Hiring: An Audit Study”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(3):915-941.
Oettinger, G.S. (1996), “Statistical Discrimination and the Early Career Evolution of the
Black-White Wage Gap”, Journal of Labor Economics 14(1):52-78.
O’Neill, J. (1990), “The Role of Human Capital in Earnings Differences Between Black
and White Men”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 4(4):25-45.
Orfield, G. and C. Ashkinaze (1991), The Closing Door: Conservative Policy and Black
Opportunity (University of Chicago Press, Chicago).
Oster, Emily, (2005), “Hepatitis B and the Case of the Missing Women,” CID Graduate
Student and Postdoctoral Fellow Working Paper (#7) available at:
http://www.cid.harvard.edu/cidwp/graduate.html
Oyer, P. and S. Schaefer (2000), “Layoffs and Litigation”, Rand Journal of Economics
31(2):345-358.
Oyer, P. and S. Schaefer (2002a), “Litigation Costs and Returns to Experience”,
American Economic Review 92(3):683-705.
Oyer, P. and S. Schaefer (2002b) “Sorting, Quotas, and the Civil Rights Act of 1991:
Who Hires When It’s Hard to Fire?” Journal of Law and Economics 45(1):41-68.
Pager, D. (2003), “The Mark of a Criminal Record”, American Journal of Sociology
108(5):937-975.
Persico, N. and P. Todd (2004), “Using Hit Rate Tests to Test for Racial Bias in Law
Enforcement: Vehicle Searches in Wichita”, NBER Working Paper No. 10947.
Phelps, E.S. (1972), “The Statistical Theory of Racism and Sexism”, American Economic
Review 62(4):659-661.
Posner, R.A. (1987), “The Efficiency and Efficacy of Title VII”, University of
Pennsylvania Law Review 136:513-521.
Posner, R.A. (1989), “An Economic Analysis of Sex Discrimination Laws”, University of
Chicago Law Review 56:1311-1335.

81

Posner, R.A. (2005), “The French Riots,” The Becker-Posner Blog on November 13,
2005, http://www.becker-posner-blog.com/archives/2005/11/.
Power, S. (2002), “Genocide and America”, The New York Review of Books, March 14,
15-18.
“Prison Rates among Blacks Reach a Peak, Report Finds”, The New York Times, April
7, 2003, A11.
Ramirez, S.A. (2004), “What We Teach When We Teach About Race: The Problem of
Law and Pseudo-Economics”, Journal of Legal Education 54(3):365-379.
Rawls, J. (1971), A Theory of Justice (Belknap Press, Cambridge, Mass.).
Ross, S.L. (2003), “What is Known About Testing for Discrimination: Lessons Learned
by Comparing Across Different Markets,” University of Connecticut, Department of
Economics Working Paper.
Ross, S.L. and Yinger, J. (1999), “Does Discrimination in Mortgage Lending Exist? The
Boston Fed Study and Its Critics,” in Turner, M.A. and Skidmore, F., eds., Mortgage
Lending Discrimination: A Review of Existing Evidence (The Urban Institute:
Washington, D.C.).
Ross, S.L. and Yinger, J. (2002), The Color of Credit: Mortgage Discrimination,
Research Methodology, and Fair-Lending Enforcement (MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.).
Schafer, R. and H.F. Ladd (1981), Discrimination in Mortgage Lending (MIT Press,
Cambridge, Mass.).
Schauer, F.F. (2003), Profiles, Probabilities, and Stereotypes (Belknap Press, Cambridge,
Mass.).
Sen, A. (1970), “The Impossibility of a Paretian Liberal,” The Journal of Political
Economy, 78(1): 152-157.
Sen, A. (1990), “More than 100 Million Women are Missing”, The New York Review of
Books, December 20, 61-66.
Siegelman, P. (1998), “Racial Discrimination in "Everyday" Commercial Transactions:
What Do We Know, What Do We Need to Know, and How Can We Find Out?” in M.E.
Fix and M.A. Turner, eds., A National Report Card on Discrimination in America: The
Role of Testing (The Urban Institute, Washington, D.C.).
Smith, J.P. and Welch, F.R. (1989), “Black Economic Progress after Myrdal”, Journal of
Economic Literature 27(2):519-564.

82

Steele, C. and J. Aronson (1995), “Stereotype Threat and the Intellectual Test
Performance of African Americans”, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
69(5):797-811.
Stengel, M. and D. Glennon (1994), “An Evaluation of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Boston’s Study of Racial Discrimination in Mortgage Lending”, Office of the
Comptroller of the Currency, Economic & Policy Analysis Working Paper 94-2.
“The Urge to Win”, The New York Times, May 31, 2005, A17.
USMSPB (1995), “Sexual Harassment in the Federal Workplace: Trends, Progress and
Continuing Challenges, A Report to the President and the Congress of the United States”,
U.S. Merit Systems Protection Board, Washington, D.C.
Waldfogel, J. (1998), “Understanding the ‘Family Gap’ in Pay for Women with
Children”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 12(1):137-156.
Wellington, S., Kropf, M.B. and P.R. Gerkovich (2003), “What’s Holding Women
Back?”, Harvard Business Review 81:18-19.
Yinger, J. (1995), Closed Doors, Opportunities Lost: The Continuing Costs of Housing
Discrimination (Russell Sage Foundation, New York).
Yinger, J. (1998), “Evidence on Discrimination in Consumer Markets”, Journal of
Economic Perspectives 12(2):23-40.
Zimmer, M.J., C.A. Sullivan, R. Richards, D.A. Calloway (1994), Cases and Materials on
Employment Discrimination (Little, Brown and Company, Boston).

83

Figure 1
The Effect of Discrimination on the Wages and Quantity of Black Labor under the
Becker Employer-Animus Model

S
A

W1
Wage in Dollars
W2

B

D1
C

D2
Q2

Q1

Quantity of Black Labor

84

TABLE 1: MEDIAN INCOME AND NUMBER OF FULL-TIME, YEAR ROUND WORKERS FOR
SELECTED GROUPS, 1962-2001

White
Black
Asian
Hispanic
White, non-Hispanic

White
Black
Asian
Hispanic
White, non-Hispanic

1962
29,774
17,768
-

1962
17,793
10,858
-

59.7 percent
-

61.0 percent
-

1975
38,374
(34.0)
28,553
(2.8)
27,804
(1.5)
-

Males
1988
40,635
(42.7)
74.4 percent 29,786
(4.1)
40,369
(1.2)
26,154
(3.6)
42,364
(39.3)

1975
22,436
(15.1)
21,436
(2.0)
19,073
(0.6)
-

Females
1988
27,064
(26.3)
95.5 percent 24,252
(4.0)
28,536
(0.9)
21,856
(2.0)
27,521
(24.4)

73.3 percent
99.3 percent
61.7 percent
-

89.6 percent
105.4 percent

79.4 percent
-

2001
40,790
(50.0)
31,921
(5.5)
42,695
(2.7)
25,271
(7.6)
43,194
(42.8)

2001
30,849
(33.4)
27,297
(5.9)
31,284
(2.0)
21,973
(4.4)
31,794
(29.3)

78.3 percent
104.7 percent
58.5 percent
-

88.5 percent
101.4 percent
69.1 percent
-

Notes:
(a) Data source is the U.S. Census Bureau.
(b) Full-time workers are defined as persons on full-time schedules include persons working 35 hours
or more, persons who worked 1-34 hours for non-economic reasons (e.g., illness) and usually work
full-time, and persons ``with a job but not at work'' who usually work full-time.
(c) Median income numbers are in 2001 dollars based on the CPI-U-RS price index of inflation.
(d) The figures in parentheses represent the number in millions of full-time, year round workers making up each group.
(e) For blacks and Asians, the percentage is the median income compared to the white median income.
(f) For Hispanics, the percentage is the median income compared to the white, non-Hispanic median income.

85

TABLE 2: COUNTS OF MEN AND WOMEN IN THE 2002 AND 2004 NATIONAL SCRABBLE
TOURNAMENTS
Men

Women

Division 1
Division 2
Division 3
Division 4
Division 5
Division 6
Division 7

145
78
80
61
30
26
19

25
56
88
89
59
49
21

Total

439

387

Division 1
Division 2
Division 3
Division 4
Division 5
Division 6

113
73
54
42
40
25

17
29
76
82
70
61

Total

347

335

2004

2002

Sources: http://www.scrabble-assoc.com/tourneys/2004/nsc/registered.html and http://www.scrabbleassoc.com/tourneys/2002/nsc/roster.html

86

