                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        MODELING EXCHANGE-RATE PASSTHROUGH
                             AFTER LARGE DEVALUATIONS

                                            Ariel Burstein
                                          Martin Eichenbaum
                                            Sergio Rebelo

                                         Working Paper 11638
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11638


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2005




We thank Miles Kimball and an anonymous referee for their suggestions, and Pierpaolo Benigno, Mario
Crucini, Andrew Levin, Carlos Vegh, Jessica Wachter, Ivan Werning, and Michael Woodford for their
comments. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the National Science Foundation and the
Searle Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Ariel Burstein, Martin Eichenbaum and Sergio Rebelo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Modeling Exchange-Rate Passthrough After Large Devaluations
Ariel Burstein, Martin Eichenbaum and Sergio Rebelo
NBER Working Paper No. 11638
September 2005
JEL No. F31

                                            ABSTRACT




Large devaluations are generally associated with large declines in real exchange rates. We develop
a model which embodies two complementary forces that account for the large declines in the real
exchange rate that occur in the aftermath of large devaluations. The first force is sticky nontradable-
goods prices. The second force is the impact of real shocks that often accompany large devaluations.
We argue that sticky nontradable goods prices generally play an important role in explaining post-
devaluation movements in real exchange rates. However, real shocks can sometimes be primary
drivers of real exchange-rate movements.


Ariel Burstein                                         Sergio Rebelo
Bunche Hall 8365                                       Kellogg Graduate School of Management
Department of Economics                                Northwestern University
UCLA                                                   Leverone Hall
Box 951477                                             Evanston, IL 60208-2001
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477                             and NBER
arielb@econ.ucla.edu                                   s-rebelo@northwestern.edu

Martin S. Eichenbaum
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2003 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
eich@northwestern.edu
1. Introduction

Large devaluations are generally associated with large declines in the real exchange
rate (RER). In an earlier paper (Burstein, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2005)) we
argue that the primary force causing these declines is a slow adjustment in the
price of nontradable goods and services, not slow adjustment in the price of goods
that are imported or exported. Our evidence suggests that the key puzzle about
the post-devaluation behavior of inflation is, why do the prices of nontradable
goods and services respond by so little in the aftermath of large devaluations? We
develop a model that accounts for the negligible response of nontradable-goods
prices in the aftermath of large devaluations.
   Our model highlights two complementary forces that produce this result. The
first force is sticky nontradable-goods prices. Instead of assuming that nontradable-
goods prices are sticky, we develop conditions under which this phenomenon can
emerge as an equilibrium outcome. The second force is the impact of real shocks
associated with large devaluations that lead to a decline in the price of nontrad-
able goods relative to traded goods. We study the importance of these two forces
using three examples motivated by the devaluations in Korea (1997), Uruguay
(2002), and the U.K. (1992).
   In the Korean case, we find that to explain the large post-devaluation decline
in the real exchange rate, we must allow for sticky nontradable-goods prices.
Moreover, we argue that sticky nontradable-goods prices are sustainable as an
equilibrium phenomenon. In the UK case, we find that the post-devaluation
behavior of the real exchange rate can be explained solely as a result of sticky
nontradable-goods prices. However, the Uruguayan case shows that it can be
very misleading to assume that prices are sticky. In this case nontradable-goods
prices cannot be sustained as an equilibrium phenomenon and real shocks alone


                                         1
account for the post-devaluation real exchange-rate depreciation.
      To model sticky nontradable-goods prices, we build on the many studies that
analyze price stickiness in closed economies. The closed-economy literature iden-
tifies a class of models in which the gains from adjusting prices in response to
changes in monetary policy are very small. These gains can be so modest that
when there are small costs of changing prices, price stickiness is an equilibrium
phenomenon. We incorporate into our model the key feature emphasized by Ball
and Romer (1990), a relatively flat marginal cost curve. In addition, we adopt
Kimball’s (1995) assumption that the elasticity of demand for the output of a mo-
nopolistic producer is increasing in its price relative to the prices of its competitors
goods.
      There are two key diﬀerences between our analysis of sticky prices and the
analogue closed-economy literature. First, we consider large changes in monetary
policy instead of small changes. Second, we focus on open economies and identify
key features of the model economy that play an important role in making sticky
nontradable-goods prices sustainable as an equilibrium phenomenon.
      To model the direct impact of real shocks on inflation and the real exchange
rate, we build on the literature that models the mechanisms through which large
devaluations lead to contractions in economic activity.1 A common feature of
these models is that devaluations are associated with negative wealth eﬀects. We
capture these eﬀects by considering two alternative real shocks, a decline in export
demand and a reduction in net foreign assets. The first shock is drawn from the
experience of countries like Uruguay, whose devaluations were precipitated by large
declines in export demand associated with recessions in countries with whom they
trade. The second shock captures in a direct, albeit in a brute force manner, the
  1
    See, for example, Aghion, Bachetta, and Banerjee (2001); Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Re-
belo (2001); Caballero and Krishnamurty (2001); Christiano, Gust, and Roldos (2004); and
Neumeyer and Perri (2005).


                                            2
decline in real wealth that is a hallmark of contractionary devaluations. Arguably,
we can think of the fall in real wealth as a proxy for the balance-sheet eﬀects
emphasized by some authors.
   We suppose that the model economy is initially in a fixed exchange-rate regime
and that there is then a change in monetary policy that leads to a large, permanent
devaluation. To simplify, we assume that if there is a real shock, it occurs at the
same time as the devaluation. To assess whether or not sticky nontradable-goods
prices are an equilibrium, we calculate the post-devaluation equilibrium assum-
ing that nontradable-goods prices are constant. We then compute the benefits
to a nontradable-goods producer of deviating from a symmetric equilibrium by
changing his price. In our model, the nontradable-goods sector is monopolistically
competitive. Firms in this sector set local currency prices as a mark-up on nomi-
nal marginal cost, which is proportional to the nominal wage rate. So the benefit
of deviating from a symmetric sticky price equilibrium depends critically on the
response of the mark-up and nominal wages to a devaluation. Since we measure
the benefits of deviating relative to an equilibrium in which prices are constant
forever, we are adopting a conservative strategy for rationalizing sticky prices.
   Our model open economy incorporates four assumptions that mute this re-
sponse. First, the share of tradable goods in the consumer price index (CPI) is
small. Second, there are domestic distribution costs associated with the sale of
traded goods. Third, there is a low elasticity of the demand for exports. Fourth,
there is a moderate elasticity of substitution between tradable and nontradable
goods.
   Section 2 describes our model. Section 3 presents our basic results. Section 4
discusses the role played by diﬀerent features of our model in accounting for sticky
nontradable-goods prices. Section 5 uses our model to discuss the possibility of
an overvalued currency. Section 6 concludes.


                                         3
2. The Model

Here we present our model of a small open economy.


The Representative Household The household values streams of consump-
tion services (Ct ), hours worked (Nt ), and real balances. Consumption services
are produced by combining tradable (CtT ) and nontradable (CtN ) goods according
to the CES technology
                    h 1     ρ−1          1
                                                   i ρ
                                                ρ−1 ρ−1
                        T                   N ρ
               Ct = ν (Ct )
                      ρ      ρ  + (1 − ν) (Ct )
                                         ρ              , ν ≥ 0.             (2.1)

The parameter ρ governs the elasticity of substitution between CtT and CtN . The
price of consumption services, Pt , is given by
                          h ¡ ¢                          i ρ−1
                                                            1
                                 1−ρ
                      Pt = ν PtT     + (1 − ν) (PtN )1−ρ       .             (2.2)

The variables PtT and PtN denote the local currency prices of tradables and non-
tradable goods, respectively.
    Lifetime utility (U ) is given by:
                        X
                        ∞
                   U=         β t [u(Ct , Nt ) + f (Mt /Pt )], 0 < β < 1.    (2.3)
                        t=0

The variable Mt represents beginning-of-period nominal money balances, and f (·)
is a strictly concave function. As in Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Huﬀman (1988),
we assume that u(·) takes the form
                                             µ             ¶1−σ
                                      1              Nt1+θ
                       u(Ct , Nt ) =          Ct − B            ,            (2.4)
                                     1−σ             1+θ
where B > 0. Given this specification of u(·), there are no wealth eﬀects on labor
supply, so the uncompensated labor-supply elasticity, 1/θ, is equal to the Frisch
elasticity.

                                             4
   The household can borrow and lend in international capital markets at a con-
stant dollar interest rate, r. For simplicity, we assume that inflation in the U.S.
is equal to zero. To abstract from trends in the current account, we also assume
that β = 1/(1 + r). The household’s flow budget constraint is given by

                    PtT CtT + PtN CtN + St at+1 + Mt+1 − Mt + Tt =             (2.5)
                    Wt Nt + Πt + (1 + r)St at .

The variable at denotes the dollar value of household’s net foreign assets. The
variables Wt and Tt represent the nominal wage rate and nominal government
transfers to the household, respectively. Total nominal profits in the economy are
given by Πt . The variable St denotes the exchange rate expressed in units of local
currency per dollar. We impose the no-Ponzi game condition

                                          at+1
                                  lim            = 0.                          (2.6)
                                 t→∞    (1 + r)t

The Import Sector We assume that the tradable consumption good is im-
ported. The dollar price of this good, P̄t∗ , is set in international markets and is
invariant to the level of domestic consumption. We assume that purchasing power
parity (PPP) holds for prices “at the dock”, i.e., the price of imports exclusive of
distribution costs is
                                    P̄tT = St P̄t∗ .

For convenience, we normalize P̄t∗ to one. The variable P̄tT denotes the domestic
producer price of imports. In an earlier paper (Burstein, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo
(2005)) argue that relative PPP is a reasonable approximation for the behavior of
import prices at the dock after large devaluations.
   As in Burstein, Neves, and Rebelo (2003) and Erceg and Levin (1996), we
assume that selling a unit of a tradable consumption good requires φ units of the

                                           5
final nontradable good. Perfect competition in the distribution sector implies that
the retail price of imported goods is equal to

                                   PtT = St + φPtN .                              (2.7)

The domestic distribution margin, which we define as the fraction of the final
price accounted for by distribution costs, is equal to φPtN /PtT .


The Export Sector Exports are produced by a continuum of monopolistically
competitive producers indexed by i. The size of this sector has measure one. Firm
i uses labor (NitX ) to produce Xit units of exportable good i using the technology

                                    Xit = AX NitX .

For simplicity, we assume that the representative household does not consume the
export good. Demand for this good in the world market is given by

                                    Xit = ξ(Pit∗ )−γ .                            (2.8)

The variable Pit∗ denotes the dollar retail price of export good i. The price elasticity
of demand for the export good is given by γ > 1.
   As in Corsetti and Dedola (2004), we assume that to sell a unit of the exported
good to foreign consumers, foreign retailers must add φ∗ units of foreign distrib-
ution services. We normalize the dollar price of these services to one and assume
that the distribution industry is competitive. It follows that Pit∗ is given by

                                  Pit∗ = P̄itX /St + φ∗ .                         (2.9)

The variable P̄itX denotes the producer price of the exported good. Under these
assumptions, distribution costs aﬀect the elasticity of demand for exports with
respect to producer prices (d log(Xit )/d log(P̄itX )). The higher the distribution
margin, the lower is the eﬀective elasticity of demand.

                                            6
   Producer i maximizes profits, given by

                              ΠX        X        X
                               it = (P̄it − Wt /A )Xit .


The first-order conditions for this problem imply that all exporters charge the
same price
                                         γ(Wt /St )/AX + φ∗
                           P̄tX /St =                       .                 (2.10)
                                               γ−1
Total profits in the export sector are given by
                                        Z 1
                                    X
                                  Πt =      ΠXit di.
                                                   0


The Final Nontradable Good The final nontradable good (YtN ) is produced
by competitive firms using a continuum of diﬀerentiated inputs, yitN , that are
produced by the intermediate nontradable-goods sector. As in Kimball (1995), we
assume that the production technology for YtN is given by the implicit function
                                     Z      1
                                1=              G(yitN /YtN )di.              (2.11)
                                        0
The function G(·) satisfies: G(1) = 1 and G0 (1) = 1. The standard Dixit-Stiglitz
specification corresponds to the following specification for G(·),

                           G(yitN /YtN ) = (yitN /YtN )(μ−1)/μ .              (2.12)

The representative firm maximizes profits,
                                                       Z   1
                            ΠN
                             t   =   PtN YtN       −           pit yitN di,   (2.13)
                                                       0

subject to the production technology (2.11). The first-order condition for this
problem is
                             pit = λG0 (yitN /YtN )(1/YtN ).


                                                  7
Here, λ is the Lagrange multiplier associated with equation (2.11).
   Since the sector is competitive, equilibrium profits are zero and the price of
the final nontradable good is
                                          R1
                                                pit yitN di
                                  PtN =    0
                                                            .
                                                YtN
In a symmetric equilibrium where all intermediate good firms charge the same
price, pit = pt , the price of the final nontradable good is


                                       PtN = pt .                             (2.14)


The Intermediate Nontradable Good The nontradable intermediate good
i is produced by monopolist i according to the technology

                                    yitN = AN NitN .

Monopolist i chooses a price pit to maximize profits given by:

                              ΠN        N        N    N
                               t = pit yit − Wt yit /A ,


and commits to satisfy demand at this price. The first-order condition for the
monopolist’s problem implies that
                                     ∙           ¸
                                        ε(zit )    Wt
                                pit =                 .
                                      ε(zit ) − 1 AN
Here, zit = yitN /YtN denotes the market share of the ith producer and ε(zit ) is the
elasticity of demand for intermediate nontradable good i
                                                 G0 (zit )
                                 ε(zit ) = −                  .
                                               zit G00 (zit )



                                           8
We adopt the following functional form for ε(zit ):2
             ⎧
             ⎨                      εL ,                       if zit ≥ 1 + z̄,
                                      H
  ε (zit ) =                        ε   ,                      if zit ≤ 1 − z̄,
             ⎩ 1 £                  H                  L
                                                         ¤
               2z̄
                   (1 + z̄ − zit ) ε + (zit − 1 + z̄) ε , if 1 − z̄ ≤ zit ≤ 1 + z̄.
                                                                                 (2.15)
This specification implies that in a symmetric equilibrium (zit = 1), the elasticity
common to all the monopolists is

                                                 εH + εL
                                       ε (1) =           .
                                                    2
The optimal mark-up is
                                                ε (1)
                                        μ=             .
                                             ε (1) − 1
Once z̄ is specified, the parameters εL and εH jointly determine the average mark-
up and the local slope of the mark-up around the point zit = 1. Given a value for
εH , we choose εL so that μ is equal to the calibrated steady-state mark-up. With
these assumptions, the symmetric equilibrium is the same as the one in which
G(·) takes the Dixit-Stiglitz form, (2.12), so

                                                      Wt
                                       pit = pt = μ      .                        (2.16)
                                                      AN
      In practice, we set z̄ to a very small number (0.0001) so that ε (zit ) is close to
a step function. Therefore, a firm that deviates from a symmetric equilibrium by
raising its price faces a discrete increase in the elasticity of demand for its product.
In the standard Dixit-Stiglitz case ε(zit ) = μ and pit is a constant mark-up over
marginal cost. Relative to the Dixit-Stiglitz case, firms in our model have less of
an incentive to raise prices.
  2
      We thank Miles Kimball for suggesting this functional form.




                                                 9
Government The government chooses a money supply sequence, {Mts }∞
                                                                 t=1 , and

rebates any seignorage revenue to the household via lump-sum transfers:

                                          s
                                         Mt+1 − Mts = Tt .                                        (2.17)


Equilibrium and Definition of the RER A perfect-foresight, competitive
equilibrium for this economy is a set of paths for quantities {Xit , NitX , yitN , YtN ,
NitN ,Ct ,CtN , CtT , Nt , at+1 ,Mt+1 } and prices {Pit∗ , P̄itX , Wt , St , pit , PtN , P̄tT , PtT } such
that households maximize their utility and firms maximize profits; the govern-
ment’s budget constraint holds; and the goods, labor, money, and foreign ex-
change markets clear. We restrict our attention to symmetric equilibria in which
all nontradable-goods producers choose the same price and quantity.
    We define the RER as:
                                         Pt
                                               .
                                           RER =                      (2.18)
                                        St Pt∗
Here, Pt∗ denotes the foreign CPI. In our empirical measures of the RER, we
compute both St and Pt∗ as trade-weighted averages of exchange rates and foreign
CPIs. With the exception of Uruguay, movements in Pt∗ are quite small relative to
the size of the devaluation. So, to simplify, we normalize Pt∗ to one in the model.

3. Basic Results

Here we study the quantitative properties of our model. We consider three numer-
ical examples motivated by diﬀerent devaluation episodes: Korea (1997), Uruguay
(2002), and the UK (1992). Korea and Uruguay experienced large devaluations
that were followed by contractions in aggregate economic activity.
    In Korea, inflation remained stable after the devaluation. In contrast, in
Uruguay, inflation rose substantially after the devaluation. The UK devaluation
was relatively small and was followed by a mild expansion and stable inflation.

                                                   10
   In the Korean example, we generate a recession by assuming that net foreign
assets, a0 , decline at the time of the devaluation. We calibrate the change in a0
so that our benchmark model generates a fall in real consumption consistent with
that observed in Korea in the first year after the devaluation. We assume that the
decline in a0 coincides with a 37 percent unanticipated, permanent devaluation.
This devaluation coincides with the change in the trade-weighted exchange rate
for the won in the first year after the devaluation. For expositional purposes we
also consider the impact of a devaluation in the Korean example when there is no
coincident decline in real wealth.
   The Uruguayan devaluation coincided with a large decline in the demand for
their exports, which stemmed from the 2001 Argentina currency crisis. Drawing
on this observation, we assume in our Uruguayan example that the devaluation
coincides with a fall in ξ, the level parameter in the export demand equation (2.8).
We choose the devaluation rate in our example, 42 percent, to coincide with the
cumulative devaluation in the trade-weighted peso exchange rate from January
2002 to June 2003. We note that the Uruguayan devaluation occurred in June
2002, but the trade-weighted nominal exchange rate changed substantially before
June 2002 due to the Argentina January 2002 devaluation. For this reason we
choose January 2002 as our reference point.
   For our UK example, we abstract from real shocks and consider a pure devalu-
ation of 11 percent. This devaluation coincides with the trade-weighted change in
the exchange rate for the pound sterling in the first year after the UK devaluation.
   In all of the examples, we assume that prior to time zero agents anticipate that
the exchange rate is fixed at St = S and that the economy is in a steady state with
constant prices and quantities. At time zero, there is an unanticipated change in
monetary policy that leads to a one-time permanent exchange-rate devaluation.
Depending on the example, there can be a real shock that coincides with the


                                        11
devaluation.
      We summarize the parameter values for our benchmark model in Table 1.
Our results are independent of the function f (.), which controls the utility of
real balances (see equation (2.3)). We set the elasticity of substitution between
tradables and nontradables (ρ) to 0.40. This value is consistent with estimates
in the literature.3 For each country, we set ν, the share parameter in the CES
consumption aggregator in equation (2.1), so that given φ, the pre-devaluation
share of import goods in consumption, exclusive of distribution costs, coincides
with the data reported in Burstein, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2005). We assume
that θ = 0.25. This value implies a labor supply elasticity of four which coincides
with the standard value of the Frisch labor supply elasticity used in the real-
business-cycle literature (see Christiano and Eichenbaum (1992) and King and
Rebelo (2000)). We choose B, the level parameter that controls the disutility of
labor, so that the price of nontradables in the pre-devaluation steady state is equal
to one.
      We set φ and φ∗ so that the pre-devaluation distribution margin is 50 percent in
both the domestic and foreign markets. This value is consistent with the evidence
in Burstein, Neves, and Rebelo (2003).
      We set the level parameter in the demand for exports, ξ, to one. The elasticity
of demand for exports, γ, controls how much the export sector expands in the
wake of the devaluation. For every country, we set γ so that the model replicates
the expansion in exports that occurs in the year after the devaluation (see Table
1).
      We require a relatively inelastic demand so that the model yields a plausible
post-devaluation expansion of the export sector. This low elasticity is a simple
  3
   See, for example, Stockman and Tesar (1995); Lorenzo, Aboal, and Osimani (2003); and
Gonzalez-Rozada and Neumeyer (2003).



                                           12
way to mimic the frictions that limit in practice the expansion of the export sector,
e.g. capacity constraints, financing constraints, or frictions to sectoral employment
reallocation.
   For every country, we set the level parameter in the production function of the
export sector, AX , and the initial level of net foreign assets (a0 ) so that the share
of exports in GDP in the model’s steady state is equal to its value in the year
prior to the devaluation.
   We choose the intermediate demand aggregator parameters, εL and εH , so that
the model has two properties. First, the steady-state mark-up is 20 percent. Sec-
ond, the parameters are consistent with the calibration used by Kimball (1995) to
generate sticky prices in a closed economy. This calibration has the property that
when the relative market share (zit ) decreases, the elasticity of demand increases
from six to nine. Given how little information is available to calibrate the Kim-
ball aggregator, we report the sensitivity of our results to alternative calibrations.
We consider a calibration such that it is optimal for the deviator to change his
price by 50 percent of the increase in marginal cost. This calibration is consistent
with the symmetric translog specification of Bergin and Feenstra (2000). These
two specifications of the demand aggregator encompass the calibration used by
Dotsey and King (2005), which lies in between the Kimball and Bergin-Feenstra
specifications. Finally, we also consider the standard Dixit-Stiglitz specification
of demand in which the elasticity of demand is constant.


The Korean Example The first two columns of Table 2 report the response
of the benchmark model to a single shock: a 37 percent devaluation. Columns
1 and 2 correspond to the case of flexible and sticky nontradable-goods prices,
respectively, when there is no real shock. Columns 3 and 4 report the impact of
two simultaneous shocks: a 37 percent devaluation and a negative wealth shock


                                          13
for the flexible and sticky price case, respectively.4 We start with the case in
which there is no real shock to build intuition that is useful for understanding the
empirically relevant case of when there is a negative real shock.

                                       No Real Shock

       Column 1 of Table 2 indicates that when prices are flexible, the devaluation has
no impact on quantities, whereas all prices, including the nominal wage, increase
by 37 percent.
       Column 2 of Table 2 shows that when nontradable-goods prices are sticky, the
devaluation induces a low rate of CPI inflation (8.7 percent). Even though PPP
holds for import prices at the dock, the presence of distribution costs implies that
the retail price of imported goods rises by only 20.4 percent.
       When nontradable-goods prices are sticky, the devaluation leads to a rise in
hours worked (9.9 percent). To understand the expansion in hours worked we
briefly discuss the response of output in the export and nontradable sectors.
       The devaluation induces a fall in the dollar wage rate (W/S), which reduces
the marginal cost of producing export goods. This reduction leads to a 8.4 percent
decline in the dollar price of exports (P̄ X /S) and a 10.4 percent rise in the volume
of exports (see Table 2). To understand the behavior of P̄ X /S and W/S, we note
that the optimal response of export goods producers to a decline in marginal cost
is to lower their dollar price and sell more units. Consistent with equation (2.10),
absent foreign distribution costs (φ∗ = 0), the percentage declines in P̄ X /S and
W/S would be the same. However, as emphasized by Corsetti and Dedola (2004),
when φ∗ > 0, a one percent decline in the dollar price of exports (P̄ X /S) induces
a less than one percent decline in the retail dollar price of exports. Consequently,
   4
   We also analyze the Korean example by assuming that the real shock is a decline in the
demand for exports. Our results are similar those obtained with the net foreign asset shock.
The only diﬀerence is that exports rise by less when there is a negative shock to export demand.

                                              14
the price reduction induces a smaller rise in the demand for the product. Put
diﬀerently, a positive value of φ∗ reduces the eﬀective elasticity of demand with
respect to P̄ X /S. Therefore, the optimal response of the monopolist is to lower
P̄ X /S by less than when φ∗ = 0.
   According to Table 2 consumption of tradable goods rises by 3.7 percent. To
understand this eﬀect note that in equilibrium the following condition must hold:


                          rat = ra0 = CtT − (P̄tX /St )Xt .                     (3.1)

To derive this equation we start with (2.5) and rewrite profits as sales revenue
minus labor costs. We then use equations (2.17), (2.6), the market clearing con-
dition for nontradable goods, and the intertemporal Euler equation for tradable
consumption. The assumptions that β = 1/(1 + r) and shocks are permanent
imply that at is constant (at = a0 ). It follows from (3.1) that imports (CtT ) must
rise to match export revenues.
   To explain the response of hours worked in the nontradable-goods sector we
note that the consumer’s first-order conditions for CtT and CtN imply that
                                          ∙ T ¸ρ
                                    CtN    Pt
                                        =        .                              (3.2)
                                    CtT    PtN
   We note that PtT /PtN rises, since PtN remains constant and PtT rises in response
to the devaluation (see equation (2.7)). Since both CtT and the right-hand side of
equation (3.2) rise, it follows that CtN must also rise. By assumption, nontradable-
goods firms must satisfy demand at fixed prices, so hours worked in the nontrad-
able sector rise. Since hours worked in both the export and nontradable-goods
sectors increase so do the overall hours worked.
   The wage rate that is relevant for labor supply decisions is the CPI-deflated real
wage, Wt /Pt . Given our assumptions about preferences Wt /Pt must rise, because


                                         15
hours worked (Nt ) increase. Since Nt rises by 9.9 percent and the elasticity of labor
supply is four, Wt /Pt must rise by roughly 9.9/4 percent.5 The dollar-denominated
wage falls by 26.4 percent, but this wage is not relevant for labor-supply decisions.
Most of the worker’s consumption basket is composed of nontradable goods whose
prices have not changed. As a result, CPI and dollar-deflated real wages respond
very diﬀerently to the devaluation.
       The real-wage rate is constant in the flexible-price case and rises when prices
are sticky. The increase in the nominal wage, Wt , is smaller in the sticky-price
case because CPI inflation is much lower than in the flexible-price case.
       Table 2 reports that the mark-up of nontradable-goods producers falls to 7.6
percent after the devaluation. A key question is, how great is the incentive of
an individual nontradable-goods firm to deviate from the symmetric sticky price
equilibrium? According to Table 2, the optimal mark-up for the deviator is 12.5
percent and the percentage increase in his profits is 9.9 percent. Consequently, the
loss from keeping prices constant for a long period of time would be very great.
We conclude that absent any real shocks, a large devaluation would lead firms to
change prices and the economy would go to the flexible-price equilibrium.

                                    Negative Real Shock

       Column 3 of Table 2 shows that when prices are flexible, a devaluation of 37
percent leads to a 23.1 percent rise in the CPI. A devaluation also induces a fall
in the dollar price of exports, an expansion of hours worked in the export sector,
and an even greater drop in hours worked in the nontradable-goods sector. In
addition, there is a decline in the dollar price of nontradable goods and in the
dollar and CPI-deflated real wages.
   5
    The nominal wage rate reported in Table 2 rises by somewhat less than 9.9/4 because we
compute the CPI reported in our tables as an arithmetic average of tradable and nontradable
prices. The rate of change in the arithmetically averaged CPI is similar to the rate of change the
theoretical price index that corresponds to the household’s utility function (see equation (2.2)).

                                               16
   These eﬀects happen because when there is a negative real shock, the devalu-
ation coincides with a decline in net foreign assets. According to equation (3.1) a
decline in at must be accompanied by either an improvement in the trade balance
(CtT − (P̄tX /St )Xt ). In principle, this reduction can be accomplished by increasing
exports or reducing imports. Exports can be increased either by raising aggregate
hours worked or by reallocating workers from the nontradable-goods sector to the
export sector.
   Given our preference specification, it is not optimal to respond to a decline in
a0 solely through a fall in CtT , so that Xt must rise. For exports to rise, the dollar
price of exports must fall. Equation (2.10) implies that the dollar wage must also
fall. Under flexible prices (but not under sticky prices) whenever the dollar wage
declines the CPI-deflated real wage also declines. To see this we note that the
CPI-deflated real wage is
                              h ¡ ¢1−ρ                   i 1
                                   T                N 1−ρ ρ−1
                 Wt /Pt = Wt / ν Pt    + (1 − ν) (Pt )        .                  (3.3)

Using equations (2.14), (2.16), and (2.7) this expression can be rewritten as
                     h ¡                  ¢                        i 1
                                        N 1−ρ                 N 1−ρ ρ−1
         Wt /Pt = 1/ ν St /Wt + φμ/A           + (1 − ν) (μ/A )         .     (3.4)

   Our preference specification implies that aggregate hours worked depend only
on the wage rate. Therefore aggregate hours worked fall. It follows that there
must be a substantial decline in nontradable consumption to allow for a rise in
the production of exports.
   Since nontradable-goods prices are a mark-up on wages, the drop in dollar
wages leads to a decline in the dollar price of nontradable goods. This decline
creates a wedge between the devaluation rate (37 percent) and the CPI inflation
rate (23 percent). However, even though the CPI inflation is lower than the change
in the exchange rate, it is much higher that the actual rate of inflation in Korea
(6.6 percent).

                                          17
    Column 4 of Table 2 shows that when nontradable-goods prices are sticky,
the CPI inflation in the model (8.7 percent) is much closer to the actual rate of
inflation (6.6 percent). Thus, the model does well in accounting for the post-
devaluation decline in the RER.
    Viewed as a whole, our results indicate that when nontradable-goods prices are
sticky, the model successfully accounts for low post-devaluation rates of inflation.
This result begs the question, is it reasonable to assume that nontradable-goods
prices are sticky? To answer this question, we calculate the incentive of an in-
dividual nontradable-goods monopolist to deviate from a symmetric sticky-price
equilibrium. The percentage change in profits of a deviator is equal to zero (see
column 4 of Table 2). If there are any costs of changing prices, nontradable-goods
producers will keep their prices constant, thus rationalizing the sticky-price equi-
librium.6 The gains to deviating from a sticky-price equilibrium are very small,
when there is a negative real shock but large otherwise. This diﬀerence reflects
the fact that nominal wages rise by much less when there is a negative real shock.


The Uruguay Example Table 3 reports the results of a 42 percent devaluation
that coincides with a fall in ξ, the level parameter in the demand for exports (2.8),
from one to 0.69. When nontradable-goods prices are flexible, the CPI inflation
in the model (26 percent) is close to the actual rate of inflation (29 percent). This
result suggests that sticky prices did not play a significant role in the Uruguayan
case. Even though the model does well in accounting for the post-devaluation
rate of inflation, it understates the post-devaluation decline in the RER (15.5
compared to 30.6). This shortcoming is due to the fact that the model abstracts
from changes in the international price of tradable goods, Pt∗ . In the year after
   6
     There is, of course, another equilibrium in which all nontradable goods producers change
their prices. The existence of two equilibria, one in which prices are sticky and one in which all
firms change prices, is a generic property of models that emphasize costs of changing prices.


                                               18
the Uruguayan devaluation there was a large rise in the CPI of Uruguay’s major
trading partners. This rise was associated primarily with a high rate of inflation
in Uruguay’s main trading partner, Argentina.
   The CPI inflation is lower that the rate of devaluation because, other things
equal, a negative shock to export demand induces a decline in export revenues.
Given agents’ preferences, it is not optimal to match this decline with only a fall
in CtT , therefore P̄tX /St must fall to mitigate the decline in Xt . It follows from
(2.10) that the dollar wage must fall, so that nominal wages must rise by less
than the rate of devaluation. Since nontradable-goods prices are a mark-up on
nominal wages they also rise by less than the rate of devaluation. This result in
turn implies that the rate of CPI inflation is lower than the rate of devaluation.
   The previous results suggest that the flexible-price version of the model can
account for post-devaluation inflation rates in Uruguay. This conclusion leads us
to ask whether or not the sticky price equilibrium was sustainable in Uruguay.
To answer this question, we compute the equilibrium of the model under the
assumption that nontradable-goods prices are sticky. We then assess the gains to
a nontradable firm from deviating from that equilibrium. According to column
2 of Table 3, the gains are equal to roughly one percent of a deviator’s profits.
These calculations indicate that a sticky-price equilibrium would not have been
sustainable in Uruguay.


The UK Example Column 1 of Table 4 reports the response of our model
economy to a permanent 11 percent devaluation when prices are flexible. In this
case, there is no impact on real quantities, and prices increase by the rate of
devaluation. This version of the model clearly cannot account for the low post-
devaluation rate of inflation and mild expansion observed in the UK.
   Column 2 of Table 4 reports results for the sticky-price case. The intuition


                                         19
behind these results is similar to that underlying the Korean case when there is
no real shock. The key result here is that the CPI inflation is only 2.4 percent,
which is roughly consistent with the CPI inflation in the data (1.7 percent). Also,
consistent with the data, the model generates a mild expansion after the devalua-
tion. We infer that the sticky nontradable-goods price model captures the salient
features of the UK devaluation episode. As above, the key question is whether
sticky prices are sustainable as an equilibrium phenomenon. Table 4 indicates
that the answer to this question is yes. The gain to a nontradable-goods producer
of deviating from a symmetric sticky price equilibrium is equal to zero under the
Kimball (1995) specification of the nontradable-goods demand aggregator..

4. Isolating the Key Margins

Here, we use the UK example to discuss the mechanisms that enable our model
to account for sticky nontradable-goods prices. We conduct this analysis by ab-
stracting from real shocks, because the intuition is easier to convey when the only
shock is a change in the exchange rate.
   As noted, the optimal price for a nontradable-goods producer who chooses to
deviate from a symmetric sticky nontradable-goods price equilibrium is given by

                                               Wt
                                   pit = μ        .
                                               AN
The only way in which diﬀerent specifications of the demand for nontradable goods
aﬀect pit is through their impact on the gross mark-up, μ. Other features of the
model influence pit because they aﬀect the response of nominal wages to shocks.
   To discuss the sensitivity of our results to our benchmark specification of
the nontradable-goods demand aggregator, we consider two alternatives. First,
we choose the parameters of the nontradable-goods demand aggregator (2.15)


                                          20
to be consistent with the specification proposed by Bergin and Feenstra (2000).
Second, we consider the standard Dixit-Stiglitz demand specification. In both
cases, we calibrate the demand aggregators so that the pre-devaluation values of
all quantities and prices are the same as in our benchmark specification. Thus,
diﬀerent specifications of the aggregator only aﬀect the benefit to a nontradable-
goods producer of deviating from a symmetric sticky-price equilibrium.
   Column 2 of Table 4 summarizes the benefit to a deviator for diﬀerent speci-
fications of the demand aggregator. As we have noted, the benefit is roughly zero
for the Kimball case. With the Bergin-Feenstra calibration, the benefit is roughly
0.5 percent of profits. The present value of this gain is still moderate relative to
the costs of changing prices estimated by Levy, Bergen, Dutta, and Venable (1997)
and Zbaracki, Ritson, Levy, Dutta, and Bergen (2004). With the Dixit-Stiglitz
specification, the benefit to a deviator rises to 1.7 percent of profits. We conclude
that our results are reasonably robust to modifications of the demand aggregator,
as long as we do not go to the extreme of the Dixit-Stiglitz specification.
   We also wish to explore the impact of other key parameters on the response of
the nominal wage to the devaluation and on firm’s incentives to deviate from the
sticky price equilibrium. For every change in a model parameter, we recalibrate the
value of a0 so that the pre-devaluation share of exports in GDP remains constant.
We use this procedure to facilitate comparisons across the diﬀerent specifications.
For a small devaluation, such as that of the UK, the benefits from deviating from
the sticky-price equilibrium for the Kimball specification are always close to zero.
Therefore we focus our sensitivity analysis on the Bergin-Feenstra specification.
   First, we consider the impact of foreign distribution costs. Column 2 of Table 5
reports results for the case in which the foreign distribution margin is zero instead
of 50 percent. In this case, there is a smaller rise in the local currency price of
exports (5.7 percent compared to 8.1 percent) and a larger fall in P̄ X /S (−5.6


                                         21
percent compared to −3.2 percent). As noted, a fall in φ∗ raises the eﬀective
demand elasticity faced by export-goods producers. This fall makes it optimal for
producers to lower P̄ X /S by more than they do when φ∗ is positive. Relative to
the benchmark case, the associated increase in demand leads to a larger expansion
in hours worked in the export sector and a greater rise in the nominal wage (5.7
percent compared to 3.1 percent). Consequently, the percentage increase in profits
from deviating from the symmetric sticky-goods price equilibrium rises from 0.5
percent to 3.7 percent. We infer that the presence of foreign distribution costs
helps rationalize the sticky-price equilibrium.
       Column 3 reports the impact of changing the parameter ν so that the share
of traded goods (inclusive of distribution) in the CPI bundle falls from 40 percent
to 25 percent. The devaluation now leads to a lower rate of CPI inflation (1.5
percent compared to 2.4 percent) and to smaller rise in nominal wages (2.6 percent
compared to 3.1 percent). The benefit to the deviator falls from 0.5 to 0.2 percent
of profits. We conclude that a small share of traded goods in the CPI bundle
plays a positive role in rationalizing sticky nontradable-goods prices.
       Column 4 reports the results we obtain by increasing the elasticity of substi-
tution between tradables and nontradables from 0.4 to one. This change implies
that the demand for nontradable goods is more responsive to a change in the
price of imported consumption goods relative to nontradable-goods. Relative to
the benchmark specification, the devaluation induces larger rises in the demand
for nontradable-goods, hours worked in the nontradable-goods sector, and nomi-
nal wages.7 The percentage change in profits for a deviator rises from 0.5 percent
to 0.9 percent of profits. We conclude that a low degree of substitution between
nontradable goods and imported goods helps rationalize sticky nontradable-goods
   7
    An oﬀsetting eﬀect results from the fact that the theoretical consumption deflator changes
by less since the two goods are more substitutable. Other things equal, this eﬀect leads to a
smaller increase in the nominal wage.


                                             22
prices.
      Column 5 reports the results we obtain by eliminating domestic distribution
costs. Setting φ equal to zero increases the eﬀective share of pure tradable goods
in consumption and the eﬀective elasticity of substitution between tradables and
nontradables. For the reasons discussed above, both these eﬀects imply that,
after the devaluation, nominal wages rise by more than they do in the benchmark
model. The incentive for nontradable goods firms to change their price is 3.9
percent compared to 0.5 percent of profits in the benchmark model. We conclude
that sticky nontradable goods prices are easier to rationalize in the presence of
domestic distribution costs.
      Column 6 reports results of increasing the elasticity of demand for exports,
γ, from 2.7 to 3.7. This change in γ increases the response of exports for two
reasons. First, for a given drop in P̄ X /S, there is a larger increase in exports.
Second, the equilibrium fall in P̄ X /S is actually larger. Raising γ has the same
eﬀect as lowering φ∗ on the elasticity of P̄ X /S with respect to W/S. For the
reasons discussed above, P̄ X /S becomes more responsive to the drop in W/S.
Therefore, the decline in P̄ X /S is greater than in the benchmark model, which
leads to a larger expansion in the export sector. There is also a larger increase
in the nominal wage. The benefit of changing the price of nontradable goods
increases from 0.5 to 1.2 percent of profits. A low elasticity of demand for exports
helps to rationalize sticky prices in our model.
      Column 7 summarizes the impact of lowering the share of exports in GDP from
23 percent to 10 percent. This value is closer to the pre-devaluation export shares
in Argentina (10.9 percent) and Brazil (10.6 percent). In our model, a smaller
export sector reduces the absolute value of the post-devaluation rise in hours
worked in the export sector.8 Consequently, there is a smaller rise in nominal
  8
      This is consistent with evidence in Gupta, Mishra and Sahay (2001) that suggests that the


                                               23
wages. The percentage change in profits for a deviator falls from 0.5 percent to
0.4 percent of profits. We conclude that a smaller share of exports in GDP helps
rationalize the sticky-price equilibrium.
    Column 8 reports the impact of lowering the labor supply elasticity from four
to one. Relative to the benchmark model, there is a greater rise in the nominal
wage and the CPI-deflated real wage. The greater impact on wages is a direct
consequence of the lower labor-supply elasticity. These gains from deviating from
the symmetric sticky nontradable-goods price equilibrium rise from 0.5 percent
to 2.7 percent of profits. A high elasticity of labor supply is clearly critical in
accounting for sticky prices.

5. An Overvaluation Experiment

A standard way of formalizing the notion that an exchange rate is overvalued is
to assume that traded goods prices are sticky in domestic currency. Here, we
discuss an alternative, complementary mechanism through which exchange rates
can become overvalued. We show that if nontradable-goods prices do not change
after a real shock, the exchange rate becomes overvalued. By this we mean that
the real exchange rate is higher than it would be under flexible prices.
    We consider an economy that is in the steady state of a fixed exchange rate
regime. For convenience, we normalize the foreign price level to one and define the
real exchange rate as RER = Pt /St . For expositional purposes we consider the
Korean example, where the economy suﬀers a decline in its net foreign assets, at .
Qualitatively similar results obtain if there is a negative shock to export demand,
as in our Uruguay example.
    Table 6 reports the response of the economy to a decline in net foreign assets,
the negative real shock considered in Table 2, under diﬀerent scenarios. The
expansionary eﬀect of a devaluation is stronger when the tradable sector is larger.


                                              24
numbers we report are rates of change relative to the pre-shock steady state.
   Column 1 reports results for the case of flexible prices with no devaluation.
Equation (3.1) implies that a decline in net foreign assets requires an improvement
in the trade balance. Given our assumptions about preferences, this improvement
occurs via both a decline in imports and an increase in exports. The decline in
imports is achieved through an increase in the retail price of imports relative to
nontradables, PtT /PtN = St /PtN + φ (see equation (3.2)). Since St is fixed, a rise
in PtT /PtN requires a drop in PtN , which in turn induces a decline in the Pt (see
equations (2.7) and (2.2)) and in the RER.
   What are the consequences for wages and hours worked? Since the price of
nontradables falls, the nominal wage, Wt , also falls (see equation (2.16)). The
response of aggregate hours depends on the behavior of the CPI-deflated real wage,
Wt /Pt . To see what happens to Wt /Pt we recall that to achieve an improvement
in the trade balance, the quantity of exports must rise. This rise requires a fall in
the dollar price of exports, P̄tX /St . The drop in P̄tX /St induces a decline in both
the dollar-denominated wage, Wt /St and Wt /Pt (see equations (2.10), (3.3), and
(3.4)). The drop in Wt /Pt leads to a decrease in aggregate hours worked.
   Column 2 reports the response of the economy to the negative real shock when
nontradable-goods prices are sticky and there is no devaluation. The rate of the
CPI inflation is zero and the RER remains constant. When we compare columns
one and two we see that the RER is 14.2 percent higher when nontradable-goods
prices are sticky. In this sense, sticky nontradable-goods prices lead to an over-
valued exchange rate after a negative real shock.
   In the sticky-price equilibrium, the nominal wage falls by less than it does
when nontradable-goods prices are flexible. This smaller wage decline implies
that the dollar price of exports falls by less than when prices are flexible (−1.7
percent compared to −5.9 percent). As a result, there is a smaller expansion in


                                         25
exports when nontradadable-goods prices are sticky (2.2 percent compared to 7.3
percent). Equation (3.1) implies that consumption of imported goods must fall
by more in the sticky-price equilibrium.
   To explain the response of hours worked in the nontradable-goods sector we
note that with a fixed exchange rate and sticky nontradable prices, the right-hand
side of (3.2) is fixed. Consequently, the percentage declines in CtN and CtT are
the same (23.6 percent). In contrast, under flexible prices, the negative real shock
leads to a decline in PtN /PtT and a rise in CtN /CtT . This rise, together with the fact
that CtT drops by less under flexible prices, implies that CtN also falls by less under
flexible prices. Since the hours worked in the export sector rise by more in the
flexible-price case, the previous argument establishes that the recession induced
by the real shock is mitigated by flexible prices.
   Given that nontradable-goods prices remain constant and the wage falls, the
mark-up of nontradable-goods producers rises (from 20 percent to 26.3 percent).
An individual producer could raise his profit by lowering his price relative to the
symmetric sticky-price equilibrium. As Table 6 shows, the resulting rise in profits
is zero if we assume a Kimball demand aggregator. This rise in profits is very
modest (0.7 percent of profits) for the Bergin-Feenstra aggregator.
   The previous results show that if nontradable-goods prices are sticky, then
the impact of a real shock to the economy leads to a smaller decline in the real
exchange rate and a larger contraction than would be the case under flexible
prices. In this sense, the negative real shock results in the exchange rate being
overvalued. Under these circumstances, a devaluation leads to an expansion in
economic activity and helps realign the real exchange rate.
   Our model is consistent with the conventional wisdom that prices do not in-
crease after a large devaluation, because they were too high before the devaluation.
If we suppose that the exchange is overvalued in the sense just described above,


                                           26
then a devaluation that preserves the sticky nontradable-goods price equilibrium
leads to a decline in the real exchange rate without a substantial amount of infla-
tion (see column 3 of Table 6).

6. Conclusion

We propose an open economy, general equilibrium model that can account for
the substantial drop in real exchange rates that occurs in the aftermath of large
devaluations. Our model embodies several elements that dampen wage pressures
in the wake of a devaluation. If the nominal wage remains relatively stable in
the aftermath of a large devaluation, this stability can eliminate the incentive for
nontradable-goods producers to change their prices. If nontradable-goods prices
remain stable, inflation is low, which is compatible with a stable nominal wage
rate.
   We conclude by noting an important shortcoming of our paper. To simplify
our analysis, we focus on rationalizing a post-devaluation equilibrium in which
nontradable-goods prices do not change at all. In reality, these prices do change,
albeit by far less than the exchange rate, the price of imports and exportables, or
the retail price of tradable goods. Modeling the detailed dynamics of nontradable-
goods prices is a task that we leave for future research.




                                        27
References

[1] Aghion, Philippe, Philippe Bachetta and Abhijit Banerjee, “Currency Crisis
   and Monetary Policy in an Economy with Credit Constraints,” European
   Economic Review, 45: 1121-1150, 2001.

[2] Ball, Laurence and David Romer, “Real Rigidities and the Non-Neutrality of
   Money,” Review of Economic Studies, 57: 183-203, 1990.

[3] Bergin, Paul and Robert Feenstra, “Staggered Price Setting, Translog Pref-
   erences, and Endogenous Persistence,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 45:
   657-680, 2000.

[4] Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum and Sergio Rebelo, “Hedging and Fi-
   nancial Fragility in Fixed Exchange Rate Regimes,” European Economic Re-
   view, 45: 1151-1193, 2001.

[5] Burstein, Ariel, Martin Eichenbaum and Sergio Rebelo, “Large Devaluations
   and the Real Exchange Rate,” Journal of Political Economy, 113: 4, 742-784,
   August 2005.

[6] Burstein, Ariel, Joao Neves, and Sergio Rebelo, “Distribution Costs and
   Real Exchange-Rate Dynamics During Exchange-Rate-Based Stabilizations,”
   Journal of Monetary Economics, 50: 1189—1214, 2003.

[7] Caballero, Ricardo and Arvind Krishnamurthy, “International and Domestic
   Collateral Constraints in a Model of Emerging Market Crises,” Journal of
   Monetary Economics 48: 513-548, 2001.

[8] Christiano, L. and M. Eichenbaum, “Current Real Business Cycle Theories
   and Aggregate Labor Market Fluctuations,” American Economic Review, 82:
   430-50, 1992.

                                     28
 [9] Christiano, Lawrence, Christopher Gust, and Jorge Roldos, “Monetary Policy
    in a Financial Crisis,” Journal of Economic Theory, 119: 64-103, 2004.

[10] Corsetti, Giancarlo and Luca Dedola, “Macroeconomics of International Price
    Discrimination,” forthcoming Journal of International Economics, 2004.

[11] Dotsey, Michael and Robert G. King, “Implications of State-dependent Pric-
    ing for Dynamic Macroeconomic Models,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
    52: 213-242, 2005.

[12] Erceg, Christopher and Andrew Levin, “Structures and the Dynamic Behav-
    ior of the Real Exchange Rate,” mimeo, Board of Governors of the Federal
    Reserve System, 1996.

[13] Gonzalez-Rozada, Martín and Pablo Andrés Neumeyer “The Elasticity of
    Substitution in Demand for Non-tradable Goods in Latin America Case
    Study: Argentina,” mimeo, Universidad T. Di Tella, 2003.

[14] Gordon, Robert, “The Aftermath of the 1992 ERM Breakup: Was There
    a Macroeconomic Free Lunch?” in Paul Krugman (ed.) Currency Crises,
    University of Chicago Press, 241-82, 2000.

[15] Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz and Gregory Huﬀman, “Investment, Ca-
    pacity Utilization, and the Real Business Cycle,” American Economic Review
    78: 402-417, 1988.

[16] Gupta, Poonam, Deepak Mishra and Ratna Sahay, “Output Response to
    Currency Crises,” mimeo, International Monetary Fund, 2001.

[17] Kimball, Miles S., “The Quantitative Analytics of the Basic Neomonetarist
    Model,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 27: 1241-1277, 1995.


                                      29
[18] King, Robert and Sergio Rebelo, “Resuscitating Real Business Cycles”, in
    John Taylor and Michael Woodford (eds.) Handbook of Macroeconomics,
    North-Holland, 927-1007, 2000.

[19] Levy, Daniel, Mark Bergen, Shantanu Dutta, and Robert Venable, “The
    Magnitude of Menu Costs: Direct Evidence from Large U.S. Supermarket
    Chains,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113: 791-825, 1997.

[20] Lorenzo, Fernando, Diego Aboal and Rosa Osimani “The Elasticity of Sub-
    stitution in Demand for Non-tradable Goods in Uruguay” mimeo, Inter-
    American Development Bank Research Project, 2003.

[21] Neumeyer, Pablo Andrés and Perri, Fabrizio “Business Cycles in Emerging
    Economies: The Role of Interest Rates,” forthcoming, Journal of Monetary
    Economics, 2005.

[22] Stockman, Alan C. and Linda L. Tesar “Tastes and Technology in a Two-
    Country Model of the Business Cycle: Explaining International Comove-
    ments”’ The American Economic Review, 85: 168-185, 1995.

[23] Zbaracki, Mark J., Mark Ritson, Daniel Levy, Shantanu Dutta, and Mark
    Bergen, “Managerial and Customer Dimensions of the Costs of Price Adjust-
    ment: Direct Evidence From Industrial Markets,” Review of Economics and
    Statistics, 86: 514-533, 2004.




                                     30
                                                               Table 1: Benchmark Calibration, Parameter Values

Common Parameters

 Distribution Margin, percent                                                50 ,   1
 Elasticity of labor supply                                                  4 ,   0. 25
 Elasticity of subst. in consumpt. between tradables and nontradables        0. 4 ,   0. 4
 Pre-devaluation markup                                                      20 ,   1. 2

Country Specific Parameters                                                           Korea                       Uruguay                 UK

 Share of tradable goods in CPI (inclusive of distribution costs), percent    40 ,   0. 31           40 ,   0. 31           40 ,   0. 31
 Foreign distribution margin, percent                                        50 ,  ∗  0. 21          50 ,  ∗  0. 43         50 ,  ∗  0. 24
 Elasticity of demand for exports                                               2. 53                  4. 16                   2. 67
 Share of exports in GDP, percent                                            32 , 1  ra 0  −0. 93 18 , 1  ra 0  0. 11   23 , 1  ra 0  −0. 27
 Level parameter, export production function                                 AX  19. 6               AX  3. 72                 AX  13. 62
 Level parameter, desutility of labor                                        B  0. 44                B  0. 46                  B  0. 41
                                Table 2: Prices and Quantities in Korea One Year after Devaluation

                                                  1                2                3                4           5

                                                                          Model                                 Data

                                            Expansionary      Expansionary    Contractionary Contractionary   Selected
                                            Flexible Prices   Sticky Prices   Flexible Prices Sticky Prices   Variables

Prices (log percent change)

Nominal Exchange Rate                            37.3              37.3            37.3           37.3           37.3
Real Exchange Rate                               0.0              -28.6           -14.2          -28.6          -30.4
Consumer Price Index                             37.3              8.7             23.1           8.7            6.6
 Nontradable Good                                37.3              0.0             19.3            0.0            5.1
 Tradable Good                                   37.3              20.4            28.7           20.4
Export Price                                     37.3              28.9            31.4           27.5
Nominal Wage                                     37.3              10.9            19.3           5.9

Quantities (log percent change)

Total employment                                 0.0              9.9             -15.3          -10.1
Export employment                                0.0              10.4             7.3            12.1
Exports                                          0.0              10.4             7.3            12.1           12.0
Consumption                                      0.0              8.5             -19.0          -14.5          -14.4
 Consumption of Tradable Good                    0.0              3.7             -21.2          -19.3
 Consumption of Nontradable Good                 0.0              9.9             -18.4          -13.1

Incentives to Change Prices (levels)

Post-devaluation markup, stayers                                  7.6                             13.1

Change in optimal price for deviator (K)                          4.5                             0.0
Optimal markup for deviator (K)                                   12.5                            13.1
Percentage change in deviator profits (K)                         9.85                            0.00
              Table 3: Prices and Quantities in Uruguay One Year after Devaluation

                                                  1              2                   3

                                                      Model                      Data

                                            Contractionary Contractionary      Selected
                                            Flexible Prices Sticky Prices      Variables

Prices (log percent change)

Nominal Exchange Rate                            41.5           41.5              41.5
Real Exchange Rate                              -15.5          -31.7             -30.6
Consumer Price Index                             26.0           9.8               28.6
 Nontradable Good                                21.7            0.0              22.9
 Tradable Good                                   32.1           22.9
Export Price                                     28.4           19.9
Nominal Wage                                     21.7           8.1

Quantities (log percent change)

Total employment                                -16.9           -5.8
Export employment                               -11.1            5.1
Exports                                         -11.1            5.1             -10.9
Consumption                                     -18.4           -9.0             -18.5
 Consumption of Tradable Good                   -20.9          -14.3
 Consumption of Nontradable Good                -17.7           -7.4

Incentives to Change Prices (levels)

Post-devaluation markup, stayers                                10.7

Change in optimal price for deviator (K)                        1.6
Optimal markup for deviator (K)                                 12.5
Percentage change in deviator profits (K)                       1.04
                   Table 4: Prices and Quantities in UK One Year after Devaluation

                                                   1                 2                  3

                                                        Model                          Data

                                             Expansionary       Expansionary         Selected
                                             Flexible Prices    Sticky Prices        Variables

Prices (log percent change)

Nominal Exchange Rate                             11.3              11.3                11.3
Real Exchange Rate                                0.0               -9.0               -12.3
Consumer Price Index                              11.3               2.4                1.7
 Nontradable Good                                 11.3               0.0                 4.8
 Tradable Good                                    11.3               5.8
Export Price                                      11.3               8.1
Nominal Wage                                      11.3               3.1

Quantities (log percent change)

Total employment                                  0.0               3.1
Export employment                                 0.0               4.3
Exports                                           0.0               4.3                4.3
Consumption                                       0.0               2.6                2.9
 Consumption of Tradable Good                     0.0               1.2
 Consumption of Nontradable Good                  0.0               3.0

Incentives to Change Prices (levels)

Post-devaluation markup, stayers                                    16.3

Change in optimal price for deviator (K)                            0.0
Optimal markup for deviator (K)                                     16.3
Percentage change in deviator profits (K)                           0.0

Change in optimal price for deviator (BF)                           1.6
Optimal markup for deviator (BF)                                    18.2
Percentage change in deviator profits (BF)                          0.5

Change in optimal price for deviator (DS)                           3.1
Optimal markup for deviator (DS)                                    20.0
Percentage change in deviator profits (DS)                          1.66
                                         Table 5: The Role of Different Margins in the Model

                                                   1                2               3            4          5

                                              Benchmark         Foreign     Share of Traded      1    Domestic
                                             Expansionary      Distribution  Goods in CPI              Distribution
                                                               Margin = 0%       25%                   Margin = 0%
Prices (log percent change)

Nominal Exchange Rate                            11.3             11.3            11.3          11.3      11.3
Real Exchange Rate                               -9.0             -9.0            -9.8          -9.0      -6.6
Consumer Price Index                              2.4              2.4             1.5           2.4       4.7
 Nontradable Good                                 0.0              0.0             0.0           0.0       0.0
 Tradable Good                                    5.8              5.8             5.8           5.8      11.3
Export Price                                      8.1              5.7             7.9           8.3       9.1
Nominal Wage                                      3.1              5.7             2.6           3.7       5.8

Quantities (log percent change)

Total employment                                  3.1             13.3             4.3          5.4        4.7
Export employment                                 4.3             15.1             4.5          4.0        2.9
Exports                                           4.3             15.1             4.5          4.0        2.9
Consumption                                       2.6             12.6             4.0          4.7        3.0
 Consumption of Tradable Good                     1.2             11.2             2.3          1.2        0.3
 Consumption of Nontradable Good                  3.0             12.9             4.3          5.6        4.9

Incentives to Change Prices (levels)

Post-devaluation markup, stayers                 16.3             13.4            17.0          15.7      13.2

Change in optimal price for deviator (BF)        1.6              4.1             1.0           2.1       4.2
Optimal markup for deviator (BF)                 18.2             18.2            18.2          18.2      18.2
Percentage change in deviator profits (BF)       0.48             3.69            0.19          0.90      3.92


                                              Column 6          Column 7        Column 8

                                              Elasticity of     Share of       Labor Supply
                                              Demand for      Exports in GDP     Elasticity
                                             Exports = 3.7        = 10%             1
Prices (log percent change)

Nominal Exchange Rate                            11.3             11.3            11.3
Real Exchange Rate                               -9.0             -9.0            -9.0
Consumer Price Index                              2.4              2.4             2.4
 Nontradable Good                                 0.0              0.0             0.0
 Tradable Good                                    5.8              5.8             5.8
Export Price                                      6.8              8.0             8.9
Nominal Wage                                      4.0              2.9             5.1

Quantities (log percent change)

Total employment                                  6.5              2.3             2.8
Export employment                                 8.2              4.4             3.3
Exports                                           8.2              4.4             3.3
Consumption                                       5.8              1.9             2.3
 Consumption of Tradable Good                     4.4              0.5             1.0
 Consumption of Nontradable Good                  6.2              2.2             2.7

Incentives to Change Prices (levels)

Post-devaluation markup, stayers                 15.3             16.5            14.0

Change in optimal price for deviator (BF)        2.4              1.4             3.6
Optimal markup for deviator (BF)                 18.2             18.2            18.2
Percentage change in deviator profits (BF)       1.16             0.36            2.65
                                   Table 6: Overvaluation Experiment

                                                   1                   2                3

                                             Flexible Prices     Sticky Prices    Sticky Prices
                                                               (No Devaluation) (With Devaluation)

Prices (log percent change)

Nominal Exchange Rate                              0.0                0.0              37.3
Real Exchange Rate                               -14.2                0.0             -28.6
Consumer Price Index                             -14.2                0.0              8.7
 Nontradable Good                                -18.0                0.0              0.0
 Tradable Good                                    -8.6                0.0              20.4
Export Price                                      -5.9               -1.7              27.5
Nominal Wage                                     -18.0               -5.1              5.9

Quantities (log percent change)

Total employment                                 -15.3              -20.5             -10.1
Export employment                                 7.3                2.2               12.1
Exports                                           7.3                2.2               12.1
Consumption                                      -19.0              -23.6             -14.5
 Consumption of Tradable Good                    -21.2              -23.6             -19.3
 Consumption of Nontradable Good                 -18.4              -23.6             -13.1

Incentives to Change Prices (levels)

Post-devaluation markup, stayers                  1.0               26.3               13.1

Change in optimal price for deviator (K)          0.0               0.0                0.0
Optimal markup for deviator (K)                    0.0              26.3               13.1
Percentage change in deviator profits (K)         0.00              0.00               0.00
