                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              DO SCHOOL-TO-WORK PROGRAMS
                               HELP THE “FORGOTTEN HALF”?

                                            David Neumark
                                            Donna Rothstein

                                         Working Paper 11636
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11636


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2005




Neumark is Senior Fellow, Public Policy Institute of California, Research Associate, NBER, Research
Fellow, IZA, and Visiting Scholar, Institute of Business and Economic Research, UC-Berkeley. Rothstein
is Research Economist, Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor. We are grateful to Chris
Jepsen and Heather Rose for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by David Neumark and Donna Rothstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Do School-To-Work Programs Help the “Forgotten Half”?
David Neumark and Donna Rothstein
NBER Working Paper No. 11636
September 2005
JEL No. I28, J15, J24

                                            ABSTRACT




This paper tests whether school-to-work (STW) programs are particularly beneficial for those less
likely to go to college in their absence – often termed the “forgotten half” in the STW literature. The
empirical analysis is based on the NLSY97, which allows us to study six types of STW programs,
including job shadowing, mentoring, coop, school enterprises, tech prep, and
internships/apprenticeships. For men there is quite a bit of evidence that STW program participation
is particularly advantageous for those in the forgotten half. For these men, specifically, mentoring
and coop programs increase post-secondary education, and coop, school enterprise, and
internship/apprenticeship programs boost employment and decrease idleness after leaving high
school. There is less evidence that STW programs are particularly beneficial for women in the
forgotten half, although internship/apprenticeship programs do lead to positive earnings effects
concentrated among these women.


David Neumark
Public Policy Institute of California
500 Washington Street, Suite 800
San Francisco, CA 94111
and NBER
neumark@ppic.org

Donna Rothstein
Bureau of Labor Statistics
2 Massachusetts Avenue, NE
Suite 4945
Washington, DC 20212
rothstein.donna@bls.gov
I. Introduction

        The 1994 Federal School-to-Work Opportunities Act (STWOA) provided more than $1.5 billion

to support increased career preparation activities in the country’s public schools. The STWOA was

spurred by a concern that youth labor markets in the United States entailed unnecessary periods of

joblessness, excessive job instability, and employment in dead-end jobs (U.S. General Accounting Office,

1990). It therefore aimed to help young people develop the skills needed in the workforce and make

better connections to careers through school-to-career transition systems, which fostered partnerships

among schools, employers, and others (Office of Technology Assessment, 1995).

        The “findings” on which the STWOA was based referred specifically to the problems that

disadvantaged and minority youths face in making the school-to-work transition.1 Furthermore, school-

to-work practitioners commonly argue that school-to-work programs are particularly helpful for less-

advantaged youths, or the broader group of those who in the absence of any intervention are unlikely to

go on to college—often termed the “forgotten half.”2 The main goal of this paper is to use the 1997

National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY97) to examine evidence on the effectiveness of school-to-

work programs for the forgotten half—namely, those less likely, ex ante, to attend college. It is important

to emphasize that the school-to-work programs covered in the NLSY97 reflect many of the types of

programs that the STWOA encouraged, but that the NLSY97 was not designed specifically to evaluate

the STWOA. Thus, while there is overlap in programs, there are surely cases of schools that were

running school-to-work programs prior to the STWOA, as well as schools that did not receive STWOA

funds yet ran related school-to-work programs during the period in which the STWOA was in effect.3

Thus, we are evaluating the effects of a variety of school-to-work programs, not the STWOA itself.


1
  Specifically, the Act notes that a “substantial number of youths in the United States, especially disadvantaged
   students, students of diverse racial, ethnic, and cultural backgrounds, and students with disabilities, do not
   complete high school,” and “Federal resources currently fund a series of categorical, work-related education and
   training programs, many of which serve disadvantaged youths, that are not administered as a coherent whole”
   (U.S. Congress, 1994).
2
  See, for example, Donahoe and Tienda (1999), and the references therein, and William T. Grant Foundation
   (1988).
3
  Hamilton and Hamilton (1999) note that the schools and states that appeared to make the most progress toward
   creating STW systems were those that began building them prior to the STWOA and drew on more resources than

                                                         1
        The actual language of the STWOA discussed three approaches to school-to-work (hereafter,

STW): work-based learning, school-based learning focusing on careers, and connecting activities between

the two types of learning.4 The specific STW programs covered in the NLSY97 include: job shadowing;

mentoring (matching students to an individual in an occupation); cooperative education (combining

academic and vocational studies);5 work in a school-sponsored enterprise;6 tech prep (a planned program

of study with a defined career focus); and internships or apprenticeships.7 Among those programs that

can be interpreted as work-based learning are job shadowing, cooperative education, work in a school-

based enterprise, and internships/apprenticeships. Mentoring ideally is also work-based, but may not

necessarily involve work. Job shadowing and mentoring are most likely considerably less intensive then

these other programs (Neumark and Joyce, 2001). Tech Prep is probably best classified as school-based

learning, since it is a curricular arrangement rather than a program based in the workplace.8

        Our analysis proceeds in two straightforward steps. First, to operationalize the “forgotten half”

we estimate a reduced form model for attending college. We do this without incorporating information

on STW participation, to establish the ex ante probabilities of college attendance. We use the estimates of

this model to distinguish between those in the top half and the bottom half of the distribution of the

predicted probability of college attendance, interpreting the latter as the “forgotten half.” We then

estimate regression models for the effects of participation in various STW programs on a number of post-

secondary education- and employment-related outcomes, allowing for separate effects of STW program

participation for those in the top and bottom half of the predicted probability of college attendance—in

other words, separate effects for the forgotten half. These estimates are then used to test which types of

STW programs boost post-secondary outcomes, and which do this particularly for the forgotten half.

   those made available by the STWOA. However, Neumark (forthcoming) documents the substantial overlap in
   one state (California) between programs supported by the STWOA and those covered in the NLSY97.
4
  See, e.g., http://www.fessler.com/SBE/act.htm (viewed June 26, 2005).
5
  See Stern, et al. (1997) for a description.
6
  See Stern, et al. (1994).
7
  The NLSY97 does not explicitly ask about participation in career academies, although it seems likely that students
   in career academies would have responded affirmatively to some of the other types of activities included in the
   STW questionnaire items.
8
  Career academies have a large school-based learning component, but typically also some work-based experiences
   such as internships.

                                                         2
        The NLSY97 provides researchers with the best opportunity available to date to study the impact

of STW, as it covers participation in many types of STW programs, and with the data now available

begins to capture post-secondary educational and labor market outcomes. On the other hand, the goal of

STW— “better career decision making” among young men and women completing their education and

entering the labor market—is multidimensional, and its fulfillment can only be assessed using long-term

observations on career trajectories. Although we cannot yet use the NLSY97 data to observe long-term

career trajectories, we can use them to study the early impact of STW programs on the beginnings of the

post-secondary STW transitions to employment and/or higher education. We believe that this more

limited perspective is still of interest to researchers and policymakers weighing the potential benefits of

STW programs. After all, core concerns of STW are moving people into higher-paying jobs, encouraging

skill formation among new labor market entrants, and increasing enrollment or employment in the

immediate post-high school period.

        The results we obtain from the analysis provide some evidence of differences in the effects of the

types of STW programs covered in the NLSY97. Specifically, among men in the forgotten half,

mentoring and coop programs increase post-secondary education, and coop, school enterprise, and

internship/apprenticeship programs boost employment and decrease idleness after leaving high school.

For women in the forgotten half, there is less evidence that STW programs are particularly effective,

although internship/apprenticeship programs do lead to positive earnings effects concentrated among

these women.

II. Endogenous Selection and Relationship to Previous Research

        A major challenge in studying the effects of STW programs is the traditional concern with

inferring causal effects of program participation. The potential for bias from endogenous selection is

clear. For example, program participants may be those who already—as high school students—have the

strongest career orientation, and therefore are more likely to work after participating in the program,

irrespective of program effects. However, much of the existing literature has, until recently, done

relatively little to control adequately for pre-program differences between participants and non-

                                                      3
participants. The National Center for Research in Vocational Education (NCRVE) provided a thorough

compendium of earlier research on STW programs (Stern, et al., 1995). As argued elsewhere, that

research provides little if any persuasive evidence of positive impacts of these programs on adult labor

market outcomes (Neumark and Rothstein, 2003), often even failing to construct reasonable comparison

groups, let alone to consider the problem of selection into the program on the basis of unobserved

characteristics that might also be correlated with outcomes. The conclusion that existing work on STW

has tended to shy away from trying to draw causal inferences is also reflected in a more recent survey of

published academic research on STW across the United States (Hughes, et al., 2001).

           Of course, in many respects experimental evidence based on random assignment to STW

programs is ideal. To the best of our knowledge, the only such study is the recent (and ongoing)

evaluation of career academies by the Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation (Kemple and

Snipes, 2000; Kemple, 2001; Kemple, 2004).9 The strength of this study is that it is based on random

assignment of students to career academies, as participants were chosen randomly from applicants to the

career academies in the study, with participants and non-participants followed. This study has found

some evidence of positive effects on employment and earnings up to four years after graduation from high

school (the study extends no longer at this point), although only for men, and with some hint of possible

reductions in post-secondary education. This type of research is clearly valuable, although by its nature it

is often restricted to studying only a single type of STW program. Moreover, such experiments are

expensive, extremely difficult to implement, and when they depart from their “ideal” setting are prone to

problems identified in the literature on the evaluation of other types of social programs (e.g., Heckman, et

al., 2000). For both of these reasons, and because of some of the advantages afforded by secondary

longitudinal data—including large and representative samples—we suspect that examination of the

effects of STW based on longitudinal micro-data sets such as the NLSY97 will continue to play an

important role in assessing the effectiveness of STW programs, and that ultimately the two types of

evidence will be complementary.

9
    The study covers nine schools across the country, all located in or near urban areas.

                                                             4
           This paper studies the impact of STW programs using the NLSY97, a large-scale longitudinal

data set with information on participation in a variety of STW programs. With data now extending

through Round 5, the NLSY97 provides a view of individuals up to three or four years after leaving high

school (or possibly more if they dropped out). In addition, the rich data available in the NLSY97 offer a

number of possible approaches to controlling for endogenous selection and hence uncovering the causal

impact of STW programs. In addition to simply including very rich sets of control variables including

intelligence test scores, information on parents’ education and socioeconomic circumstances, and school

behaviors, the data set includes questions on subjective probabilities about work and schooling outcomes

measured prior to STW participation, as well as repeated observations on individuals in the same school.

           In an earlier paper (Neumark and Rothstein, 2003), we used these data in a number of ways to

address the issue of biases from endogenous selection into program participation. The overall conclusion

was that, in these data, there is little evidence of endogenous selection into STW programs in a manner

that biases the estimates of program effects. Estimates of the impact of the various STW programs are

quite robust to incorporation of information on prior expectations, or school fixed effects, which provide

approaches to controlling for potentially different sources of endogenous selection. Given these earlier

results, in this paper we forego all of these types of analyses, and focus instead on standard cross-

sectional regression estimates—albeit using the very detailed information in the NLSY97 that may, more

than anything else, provide sufficient controls for the characteristics on which students select into STW

programs.10 Readers interested in learning more about the alternative approaches to causal inferences

using the NLSY97, and the details regarding the results, are referred to our earlier paper.

           To summarize the overall results from the earlier research briefly, however, we found that certain

types of programs did have positive effects on either post-secondary education or employment.

Specifically, the evidence indicated that school enterprises boost post-high school education and tech prep

may reduce it, while cooperative education and internships/apprenticeships boost post-high school


10
     In addition to focusing on the forgotten half, in the present paper we study a considerably broader set of outcomes
     than in Neumark and Rothstein (2003).

                                                             5
employment.11 The magnitudes implied by the estimates were reasonable yet also sizable, suggesting that

participation in these programs boosts the probabilities of enrollment or employment by about 0.05 to 0.1,

relative to base probabilities of about 0.5 for college attendance and 0.6 for employment. The STW-

induced increases in enrollment and employment largely come about without offsetting decreases in the

other activity, suggesting that for those STW programs that boost enrollment or employment, skill

formation is on net increased.12

         Although our previous paper focused on alternative approaches to inferring causal effects of STW

programs, it also addressed the question of whether STW programs had differential effects based on race,

ethnicity, or other characteristics related to socioeconomic status. For the most part, STW did not appear

to be particularly beneficial for disadvantaged students. Instead, the evidence suggested beneficial effects

for all groups, although the programs that deliver the benefits vary. One finding that perhaps does stand

out, though, is that internship/apprenticeship programs may be particularly advantageous for the less-

advantaged, as these programs boost college enrollment among those with the lowest test scores, and

boost employment among blacks and those with less-educated mothers and in non-traditional living

arrangements. These findings suggest that further efforts should attempt to establish which populations of

students gain more from different types of STW programs. This is the theme we take up in this paper,

with an explicit focus on a more specific hypothesis regarding heterogeneity in the effects of STW

programs that has been articulated in policy discussions about STW.

III. Data

         In the NLSY97, individuals were surveyed about “programs schools offer to help students

prepare for the world of work.” The six types of programs covered by the survey were listed in the

Introduction. A more detailed discussion of the STW questions in the NLSY97 is provided in Joyce and

Neumark (2001).

11
   There is also some evidence that job shadowing boosts college enrollment, but this finding is not as robust across
   the alternative statistical analyses.
12
   Neumark and Joyce (2001) attempted to evaluate the effects of STW using only the first round of the NLSY97,
   but given the newness of the data set they were restricted to estimating effects on work- and education-related
   expectations of high-school students.

                                                          6
         The analysis is based on data from the first five rounds of the NLSY97. When the first round was

administered, in 1997, respondents were aged 12-17.13 In Round 1, the STW questions covered the types

of programs in which individuals participated (at all and most recently), whereas in subsequent rounds the

questions shifted to participation in the past year. The questions were asked of all 9th to 12th graders in

Round 1. In Rounds 2-5 the questions were asked of any respondents enrolled in school (including

college), although we focus on participation while in high school by only using STW information for

years in which respondents were enrolled in high school.14 With the second round, in 1998, we can begin

to observe some respondents who have left high school, but we get many more such observations with the

third through fifth rounds, and therefore focus on post-secondary educational and employment outcomes

measured as of the third, fourth, or fifth round.15

         Table 1 gives some idea of the breakdown of the sample. Of the total 8,984 original respondents

to the NLSY97, 8,609 were interviewed in 1999, 2000, or 2001 (Rounds 3-5).16 Of these, attention is

restricted to those aged 18 or older, which eliminates about 1,800 observations, and to those respondents

with at least one post-high school observation in 1999, 2000, or 2001, yielding 5,966 observations. We

restrict the sample in this way to isolate those individuals for whom at least the initial years of their



13
   Respondents were aged 12-16 as of December 31, 1996.
14
   The manner in which the STW data are collected raises two issues. First, because some (and most likely the
   larger share of) STW participation occurs in the later high school years, we cannot use the NLSY97 to study the
   effects of STW on high school completion. Because high school dropouts would by construction report less STW
   participation, there would be a spurious negative correlation between STW participation and dropping out of high
   school. Second, a moderate share of individuals report some college enrollment in the last year in which they are
   enrolled in high school, so in principle these individuals could be reporting STW during their short initial spell of
   college. In past work, we have examined the sensitivity of the results to excluding the STW information for that
   interview year when calculating our STW measures, and found that our qualitative conclusions were unaffected.
15
   Post-secondary enrollment is based on the NLSY97’s definition of “regular schooling.” This refers to enrollment
   in a college, graduate school, law school, or nursing program leading to an RN degree, but not training in
   technical institutes, programs for trade licenses, etc., unless the credits can be transferred to a regular school and
   would count toward a diploma or degree.
16
   Like any longitudinal study, the NLSY97 suffers from some attrition, as indicated by the dropoff in interviews. In
   general, though, the National Longitudinal Surveys have been very successful at following cohort members over
   time. It is quite plausible that attriters differ from non-attriters with respect to their STW transitions—for
   example, those who become idle after leaving high school may be more like to attrit. However, only if attriters
   differ from non-attriters with respect to the effects of STW will the parameter estimates of interest be biased. This
   question can be explored using methods paralleling those in Falaris and Peters (1998), who test for attrition bias
   by comparing estimates of behavioral equations of “eventual” attriters and non-attriters in the period prior to
   attrition of the former. However, such an analysis will not be useful for the NLSY97 until quite a few more
   rounds of data are available.

                                                           7
employment or higher education after leaving high school is available. In future research, we will study

the longer-term career trajectories of STW participants and non-participants.

         In addition to meeting these criteria, information on STW participation is also required. In order

to get an accurate reading on STW participation during high school, and to be able to measure some

behaviors as of a well-defined date prior to the STW participation we study, we focus mainly on the STW

information provided in the surveys after the first round in 1997, which cover participation in the past

year.17 Requiring STW information after Round 1 drops sample observations for those who did not

answer the STW part of the survey after this round, either because they had not spent time in high school

in 1997 or a subsequent year, or in subsequent years were not enrolled as of the interview date and hence

were not asked the STW questions.18 Coupled with some final sample restrictions on availability of the

other data used in the study, this takes us down to 4,810 observations. For our baseline analysis sample,

we also exclude private schools, which are not the focus of STW policy, and vocational schools, which in

a sense offer nothing but STW. This leaves us with 4,292 observations.

         Finally, while some of the analyses are based on the respondent’s activities as of the first post-

high school interview, others are based on longitudinal information beginning after high school, from

continuous record files included in the NLSY97. We require that respondents have information available

for at least one year following the September after which they left high school, and we use as much data

as possible. The minimum requirement leaves us with a smaller sample of 2,855 for these analyses.

IV. Empirical Approach




17
   The school behaviors are measured as of Round 1. This approach also helps avoid the problem of early STW
   participation affecting the Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery (ASVAB) test scores that we use as
   controls. The ASVAB was administered in 1997 or 1998, so at worst this leaves open the possibility of some
   overlap between the period to which Round 2 STW questions refer and time prior to the administration of the
   ASVAB.
18
   The implication of using the data on STW participation in this way is that we ignore variation in participation
   reported in Round 1. If past participation has an effect and is associated with future participation, then this
   introduces a source of correlation between the STW participation that we measure and the error term. However,
   we are not too concerned about the potential bias that this creates, since it is generated from a correlation of the
   treatment variable with past STW participation, rather than with something that might spuriously generate an
   effect (or lack thereof) of STW. In addition, in our past work we have verified the robustness of the results to
   using information on any STW in which the respondent had ever participated.

                                                            8
           The basic approach with which we begin, and on which we build, is to estimate, at the individual

level, the relationship between various work-related or education-related measures in the post-high-school

period and participation in STW.19 STW participation is categorized in terms of participation in the six

specific types of programs discussed earlier. Generically, let Yi be the work- or education-related

measure for individual i, let STWi be a vector of dummy variables for whether the individual reports

participating in each STW program, and let Xi be a vector of controls. We estimate models of the form:

(1)        Yi =    + STWi + Xi + i.20

           The parameters of interest are . Consistent estimation of           requires that   i   be uncorrelated with

the controls in Xi as well as with STWi. As noted earlier, Neumark and Rothstein (2003) fully explores

potential biases in the NLSY97 from endogenous selection into STW program participation that could

generate a correlation between        i   and the independent variables. That study finds little if any evidence of

such biases from using school fixed effects or including controls for expectations prior to STW

participation. Because either of these approaches limits the data set (for example, the expectations

variables were asked only of a subsample), in this paper we rely instead on the full sample.

           A good part of the reason for these earlier findings may be that the NLSY97 offers a rich and

detailed set of control variables for characteristics of both individual respondents and their families. In

addition to fairly typical demographic controls (sex, race, ethnicity, and age), the data set includes three

additional sets of control variables that we view as potentially important. These include data on: living

arrangements and the respondent’s family (including urban residence, whether one lives with both

biological parents, only the biological mother or father, a biological parent and a step parent, or in some




19
     When we define employment, those who report their employer as the military are coded as employed.
20
     When the dependent variable is dichotomous, in the models for the effects of STW participation we report linear
     probability estimates. We verified that results were very similar using logit or probit models. Using the linear
     probability model simplifies the presentation and avoids distributional assumptions that underlie the logit or probit
     model. Throughout the empirical analysis, reported standard errors are robust to heteroscedasticity. Also,
     because there are often multiple observations on students within the same school, the reported standard errors
     allow for heteroscedasticity of the error term across schools and non-independence of an arbitrary nature within
     schools, which typically results in somewhat larger standard errors.

                                                             9
other arrangement, as well as information on household size, household income,21 and the biological

mother’s schooling); ASVAB test scores; and self-reported measures of school behavior (whether the

respondent was threatened at school, or had gotten into a physical fight at school, and whether the

respondent had been late with no excuse two or more times, or absent two or more weeks, all measured in

1997). This rich array of variables seems likely to capture many sources of variation in underlying

propensities for post-high school enrollment or employment, including the quality and quantity of human

capital investments in children, resources available in the household, educational norms in the family,

labor market networks, the individual respondent’s academic ability, and the extent to which the

respondent is learning traits such as timeliness and reliability that are valued by employers.

        Given the earlier evidence that including a detailed set of control variables appears to be

sufficient, and given that the question we ask in this paper demands more of the data by testing for

heterogeneity in the effects of STW programs, we do not revisit the alternative approaches to testing for

biases from endogenous selection, but simply work with the fullest set of control variables available for

the full sample. These are listed explicitly in Tables 2A and 2B. Moreover, even these control variables

tend to be largely uncorrelated with STW program participation. This evidence is reported in these tables,

in the form of linear probability estimates for participation in each of the six types of STW programs,

estimated separately by sex.

        The tables present, in the first row, the proportions of students participating in each type of

program covered in the individual survey, and in the remaining rows the linear probability estimates for

participation in each type of program. The results indicate that very few variables are significantly related

to STW participation, aside from what might be considered a smattering of estimated coefficients the

statistical significance of which could just reflect randomness.22 The finding that very few variables


21
   Household income is from Round 1, and is from the parent questionnaire except in the rare event that the youth is
   defined as independent in 1997.
22
   The one exception, perhaps, is the black-white differences. Neumark and Rothstein (2003) also found some
   evidence of higher STW participation for blacks. The evidence suggested that this is a within-school
   phenomenon, as there was no significant evidence that schools with more black students were more likely to offer
   STW. At the same time, evidence in that paper did not point to particularly stronger benefits of STW program
   participation for blacks, with the exception of internship/apprenticeship programs.

                                                         10
predict STW participation reinforces the conclusion that problems from endogenous selection into STW

participation may be minimal.23

           Our particular interest in this paper, however, is in the effects of STW programs on the forgotten

half and how these effects contrast with those for the rest of the population. We first estimate a probit

model for whether the respondent attended college (two- or four-year) at any time after leaving high

school (including currently), insofar as we can observe this in our data. This model includes the same set

of control variables used in the preceding table and in the models for estimating the effects of STW

program participation that follow. We then use this model to rank the predicted probability of college

attendance and distinguish between those in the bottom and top halves of the distribution of predicted

probabilities. We use sample weights in computing the median of this distribution, so that our approach

identifies those whose predicted probabilities of college attendance are in the bottom half of the

population distribution, not the sample distribution. In doing this, we do not include STW participation in

the college attendance model. This better aligns our approach with what might be viewed as a policy

intervention of identifying those who, ex ante, have lower probabilities of college attendance, and then

asking what the benefits of STW would likely be for a subpopulation chosen this way—in particular,

those in the bottom half of the ex ante distribution. A more complete model of college attendance might

include STW participation, but that is a different exercise from identifying which individuals are more or

less likely to attend college absent STW programs.

           From the estimates of the model of college attendance, we construct an indicator for those in the

bottom half of the distribution of predicted probabilities, denoted FHi (for “forgotten half”). We then

estimate models of the form:

(2)        Yi =    + STWi + STWi FHi ’ + Xi + FHi + i.

23
     One potential issue is that the ASVAB test scores may appear insignificant because of a high degree of
     multicollinearity among them. Tests for the joint significance of the test score coefficients—which are not
     affected by the multicollinearity—indicated that multicollinearity is not an important issue, as it was rare for the
     joint test to indicate significance when none of the individual tests did. More generally, collinearity among the
     other variables in the models in Tables 2A and 2B could obscure significant coefficients. But the R-squares are
     also extraordinarily low, ranging from 0.010 to 0.022. These may be low in part because of the dichotomous
     nature of the dependent variable. But in our earlier paper we found much higher R-squares for regressions for
     school-level offerings of STW programs as functions of school characteristics.

                                                             11
        Using estimates of models of this form, we can address a couple of different questions. First,

whereas estimates of    in equation (2) capture the effects for those in the upper half of the distribution of

the predicted probability of college attendance, the estimates of ’ capture the differences between the

effects of STW programs for the forgotten half and the rest of the sample, so the statistical significance of

these estimates provides a test for differences in the effects. Second, the estimates of ( + ’) capture the

overall effects of STW programs for those in the forgotten half, and the significance of these summed

coefficient estimates indicates whether there are effects for this subpopulation. The tables that follow

report results regarding both types of estimates, and then present a summary of the effects of STW

programs overall, the effects for the forgotten half, and how the effects differ for the forgotten half.

V. Results

Homogeneous Effects of STW Participation

        We begin by briefly discussing estimates of equation (1), which excludes the direct indicator for

being in the forgotten half and its interactions with STW participation. These estimates expand upon

many of the findings reported in Neumark and Rothstein (2003) in two ways. First, we use an additional

round of NLSY97 data, and hence more observations and later ones. Second, we expand the set of

outcomes considered. Previously, we restricted attention to transitions to higher education or

employment, studying only the impact of STW programs on whether respondents were employed or had

enrolled in higher education as of the first post-high school interview. Here, we also study whether the

respondent attended a two-year or four-year college, whether the respondent was currently enrolled in

either type of college, whether the respondent had participated in a training program, and whether the

respondent was currently idle (neither working nor enrolled currently). More significantly, we use the

additional data afforded by Round 5 of the NLSY97 to construct longitudinal measures of time spent in

different activities, and to measure early labor market outcomes. Specifically, we study the proportion of

weeks since leaving high school spent in college, working, or idle, and average hours worked over all




                                                      12
weeks.24 In addition, we study earnings and wages, as well as whether the person is working full-time,

for the most recent job in which the respondent is observed. We study all of these outcomes in the

subsequent analysis of differences in STW outcomes for the forgotten half, as well. Finally, in contrast to

our previous paper, here the results are all reported disaggregated by sex.

         The results are reported in Tables 3-5. Table 3 reports the results for the various outcomes

defined as of the first post-high school interview, which gives us a sense of the post-secondary transitions

associated with STW programs (the sole focus of our earlier work). The control variables included are

the same as those in Table 2. The first four columns in Table 3 are for alternative measures of post-

secondary education. For females, in the top panel, we find that job shadowing has a significant positive

effect on current enrollment and on attending a two-year college, but not on the other two measures of

education. Mentoring, on the other hand, has significant positive effects on all of the education measures

with the exception of attendance at two-year colleges. In contrast, coop programs appear to reduce

attendance at four-year colleges, but to boost attendance at two-year colleges, while school enterprise

programs have a weak positive effect on the likelihood of any enrollment. Except for education at two-

year colleges, tech prep appears to rather unambiguously reduce post-secondary education (although only

two of three effects are significant). Finally, internship/apprenticeship programs appear to boost the

likelihood of any college attendance as well as four-year college attendance. Thus, with the exception of

tech prep, many of the STW programs appear to increase post-secondary education for women, although

the effects differ across programs—in particular, with respect to two-year vs. four-year college

attendance. The effects are often sizable—for example, with effects often in the range of 0.05 to 0.07 (in

absolute value), relative to mean attendance or enrollment rates on the order of 0.2 to 0.5.

         The results in columns (5)-(7) capture current work, training, and idleness. Here there are

virtually no significant effects for women, with a couple of exceptions.25 Most significantly, perhaps,

24
   This is computed on a weekly basis, with zeros for weeks with no work; the average over all weeks is then
   computed. When we estimate equation (1) for these longitudinal measures, we include a control for the total
   number of weeks from the first September after leaving school until the interview.
25
   Note that a program that affects schooling (such as mentoring) need not have offsetting effects on work, because
   individuals can engage in both work and schooling.

                                                         13
tech prep—which was associated with less post-secondary schooling—has a positive effect on the

likelihood of participating in a training program, suggesting that tech prep leads to some substitution

among opportunities for further learning.

         The bottom panel reports results for men. There are quite a few similarities. As for women, there

is some evidence for men that job shadowing, mentoring, and school enterprise programs increase post-

secondary education, but tech prep reduces it. The magnitudes are in the same range as for women.26

However, no effects of internship/apprenticeship programs on schooling are apparent for men, while

school enterprise programs have rather strong positive effects (in contrast to limited evidence of positive

effects for women).27 There are also some sharper differences regarding the effects of STW programs on

work, training, and idleness, as reported in columns (5)-(7). First, as for women, tech prep increases the

likelihood of participating in a training program. However, for men, in contrast to women, some STW

programs appear to boost employment and correspondingly to decrease idleness. This is the case for coop

programs (which also increase training participation) and for internship/apprenticeship programs. The

estimated employment effects are about 0.09, relative to an employment rate of 0.61. The corresponding

negative effects on idleness are about the same magnitude but represent large percentage declines (by

about one-third).

         Table 4 reports results for the longitudinal measures of the percentage of weeks in school,

working, or idle, as well as average hours. The education results for women do not parallel very closely

the enrollment results from Table 3. Indeed, only for school enterprise programs is there a significant

effect (positive) on the proportion of weeks spent in school, whereas this type of program had among the

weaker positive effects in Table 3. Similarly, in this table there is stronger evidence that STW programs

boost employment for women, with job shadowing and coop programs boosting weeks of work, and coop

26
   One striking finding is that the effects of job shadowing and mentoring appear relatively large, despite these
   program being considerably less intense in terms of hours devoted to them than, for example, coop or
   internship/apprenticeship programs. That could indicate problems with the data, or that the effectiveness of
   different programs is not that closely related to the intensity of the programs.
27
   Research by Stern (1984) and Stern, et al. (1994) reports that enterprise-based jobs are more closely related to
   students’ education than are out-of-school jobs, and that enterprise-based jobs provide more opportunity to apply
   what students are learning in school; so school enterprises may be a particular type of STW program that
   enhances the educational experience and therefore encourages higher education.

                                                         14
programs also boosting average hours. For men, as well, the schooling evidence does not line up very

well with Table 3, with a positive effect on schooling apparent only for job shadowing programs. In

contrast, coop, school enterprise, and internship/apprenticeship programs all have significant positive

effects on weeks worked (and the latter two also reduce idleness), and coop programs and tech prep

appear to boost average hours. Thus, the longitudinal measures, which seem that they should be more

informative because they are not based on a single snapshot, tend to weaken the evidence of STW effects

on schooling, but to reinforce and perhaps strengthen the evidence of positive employment effects.28 For

the employment-related outcomes, the estimated effects of STW participation are somewhat more

moderate than those in Table 3, but still sizable. For example, for both men and women, participation in

coop programs boosts the share of weeks worked by about five percentage points, an increase of a bit less

than ten percent. And the negative effect on idleness of internship/apprenticeship programs for males is

still over 25 percent.

           Table 5 turns to measures related to the quality of employment on the most recent job (for those

observed employed), including earnings and wages as well as full-time status. The results for wages and

earnings are reported both without and with conditioning on schooling, experience, and full-time status,

with the idea being that the unconditional estimates capture the full effects of STW programs including

those acting through schooling, experience, etc. For women, in the top panel, many of the programs that

were associated with increased schooling or work appear to have less effect on characteristics of the most

recent job. Mentoring programs, which increase education for women based on the estimates in Table 3,

if anything reduce wages and full-time status, although it is conceivable that this is partly attributable to


28
     One possible explanation for this is that the continuous history files capture schooling experiences with more
     error, although it is not obvious why this would be the case, and we leave it to future work to explore this
     possibility more fully. Another possibility is that estimates are biased because of the incidence of zeros for the
     dependent variables. We re-estimated the models in Table 4 (and Table 8, which studies the same dependent
     variables distinguishing effects for those in the forgotten half) using Tobits. In most cases the results were very
     similar. Finally, we considered the possibility that the results in Table 4 are weaker because of the smaller
     sample. Re-estimating the models in Table 3 for the Table 4 sample did in fact point to weaker effects of STW
     participation than indicated in Table 3 (and similarly for the models with the forgotten half interactions that come
     later). Our best estimates come from using the largest sample possible. What this indicates, then, is that we may
     need more rounds of the NLSY97 to better pin down the effects of STW on the longer-term measures of post-
     secondary outcomes, something we will pursue in future research.

                                                             15
combining work with schooling, given the young ages of respondents. Only coop programs (weakly) and

internship/apprenticeship programs (much more strongly) appear to increase wages and earnings. For

men, as well, many of the effects of STW programs do not carry over to the job, as it is only coop

programs that appear to increase wages. These results must be interpreted cautiously, however, as they

pertain to jobs held early in the life-cycle, and may be contaminated by such factors as ongoing schooling

and lower current wages associated with greater opportunities for human capital investment.

STW Effects for the Forgotten Half

           Having examined the evidence on the overall effects of STW programs, we now turn to the core

of our new analysis, examining how effects differ for those who are less likely, ex ante, to attend

college—or for the “forgotten half.” Table 6 presents the results from the first step in this analysis,

estimates of models for the likelihood of college attendance (excluding information on STW

participation). These estimates are used to compute the probability of college attendance for each

respondent in the sample.29

           These estimates do not contain any surprises. Blacks are more likely to attend college, which is

not true in the raw means but is not an uncommon result conditional on socioeconomic status, test scores,

etc. (e.g., Cameron and Heckman, 2000). Those respondents living with their biological mother only, and

more generally those living in an arrangement other than with two biological parents, are considerably

less likely to attend college, which may partly reflect socioeconomic status. For males, household size is

negatively associated with college attendance, while both male and female respondents with more-

educated mothers are more likely to attend college. Test scores are positively associated with college

attendance, especially the math knowledge score on the ASVAB. Finally, troublesome school behaviors

including both violence and absences are generally associated with a lower likelihood of college




29
     Although we report linear probability estimates for our outcomes (as in Tables 3-5, thus far), here we somewhat
     arbitrarily use a probit model. For the classification of who is in the forgotten half, it should matter little which
     model we use, and we verified that the results were robust to using a linear probability model in Table 6 instead.
     We prefer the linear probability model for the key outcomes, since in the probit model consistency and asymptotic
     inference rely on the correct specification of the error distribution.

                                                             16
attendance. In general, these models predict college attendance correctly (based on the predicted

probability being above or below the median) in a high fraction of cases—between 71 and 74 percent.

           The next three tables report models for the same outcomes covered in Tables 3-5, but now

expanded to include the indicator for whether the predicted probability of college attendance—based on

the estimates in Table 6—was below the median, and its interaction with the dummy variables for

participation in each type of STW program (equation (2)).30 Table 7 covers the education- and work-

related outcomes as of the first post-high school interview; Table 8 covers the longitudinal measures of

schooling, work, idleness, and hours; and Table 9 covers wages, earnings, and full-time status on the most

recent job. In each of these tables, the main effects of STW programs ( ) measure the effects for those in

the top half of the distribution of predicted probabilities, while the interactive coefficients ( ’) measure

the difference in the effects for the bottom half. For each STW program the sum of these—not reported

in the table, but summarized later—measures the effect for those in the forgotten half. However, in the

tables the statistical significance of the results for those in the forgotten half is reported in two ways.

First, with asterisks we denote whether the interactive coefficients are significantly different from zero—

that is, whether the effects of STW programs are different for those in the forgotten half. And second,

with plus signs we denote whether the overall effects for those in the forgotten half—( + ’) in equation

(2)—are significantly different from zero.

           The estimates in the top half of Table 7, for women, indicate that the effects of mentoring and

internship/apprenticeship programs on post-secondary schooling persist in the main effects, and appear no

different for the forgotten half. The main effects of coop programs are if anything stronger (on attending

four-year and two-year colleges), but are weaker for those in the forgotten half. In contrast, the adverse

effects of tech prep on schooling are clearly stronger for those less likely, ex ante, to attend college. In

the four outcomes covered in columns (1)-(4), there are only a couple of cases where plus signs indicate

statistically significant effects for the forgotten half—namely, for the positive effects of job shadowing on

30
     We also estimated augmented models in which we included interactions between the forgotten half indicator and
     all of the other control variables, to be sure we were not picking up omitted interactions in the forgotten half-STW
     interactions. The results were very robust to the inclusion of these interactions.

                                                            17
current enrollment and on attending a two-year college, and the negative effect of tech prep on college

attendance. Otherwise, the absence of plus signs implies no evidence of significant effects of STW

programs for the forgotten half.

        As in Table 3, for women there is not much evidence of effects of STW on current work, training,

and idleness. There is evidence that the positive effect of coop programs on current employment is not

present for those less likely to attend college, as the estimated interactive effect is negative and

significantly different from zero. On the other hand, there is evidence that job shadowing reduces

idleness only for those in the lower half of the distribution of the predicted probability of college

attendance, consistent with the increased schooling for these respondents evident in columns (2) and (4).

        For men, there is stronger evidence of different effects of STW programs for the forgotten half.

The first four columns indicate that mentoring, coop, and internship/apprenticeship STW programs boost

post-secondary education only for the forgotten half, while school enterprise programs tend to have

positive main effects as well. In the last three columns, there is evidence that coop programs increase

employment overall and for the forgotten half, but coop programs decrease idleness only for the forgotten

half. Similarly, the effects of internship/apprenticeship programs in increasing employment and reducing

idleness are quite strong, with the employment effect present only for those less likely to attend college.

        The evidence on the longitudinal measures of schooling, work, idleness, and hours, is reported in

Table 8. For women, the evidence appears weaker, as there is only one case of a significant effect for the

forgotten half—for the effect of coop programs on hours—and the effect is small. For men, though,

paralleling the previous table, there is stronger evidence. In particular, we now find that school enterprise

programs reduce idleness only for the forgotten half, while internship/apprenticeship programs boost the

proportion of weeks worked only for this part of the sample.

        Table 9 turns to the analysis of effects on wages, earnings, and full-time status. For women, the

one set of results that stands out is that internship/apprenticeship programs boost wages and earnings

(unconditional and conditional) for those in the forgotten half only. For men, there is little evidence of

effects of STW programs on these outcomes, paralleling the simpler analysis in Table 5.

                                                      18
Summary of the Findings

        The three preceding tables present a large number of estimates, and it is difficult to get a sense of

their overall message by perusing the tables. Therefore, in Table 10 we offer a summary of the results

from Tables 7-9. In columns (1) and (3) we summarize the results for the forgotten half, and in columns

(2) and (4) we summarize the results for those in the top half of the distribution of the predicted

probability of college attendance. We list all effects that are significantly different from zero for the

forgotten half. Plus signs indicate a positive effect and minus signs a negative effect. These signs appear

three, two, or one time depending on whether the result is significant at the one-, five, or ten-percent

level. For the estimates for the forgotten half, we also distinguish two important cases. First, if the

evidence points to effects that are significant only for the forgotten half (or significant with the opposite

sign compared to the top half), the result is reported in boldface. Second, for the subset of these cases

where the estimate for the forgotten half was significantly different from that for the rest of the sample—

that is, where we reject equality for the two halves of the sample—the entry is underlined as well. Both

of these types of results are of interest; the first indicate that for the forgotten half, only, the effects are

significant or of a particular sign; the second set indicate the stronger result that the effects are

significantly stronger for the forgotten half.

        Looking first at the results for women, for the schooling-related outcomes the impression given

by Table 10 is that STW programs are generally less effective for those in the forgotten half. There are

considerably more significant effects for those in the top half, with generally positive effects for

mentoring, school enterprise, and internship/apprenticeship programs. And the negative effects of tech

prep on post-secondary education appear for both halves of the distribution. The findings are somewhat

different for the job-related outcomes, with evidence that internship/apprenticeship programs boost wages

and earnings for the forgotten half—and only for the forgotten half.

        For men, there is more evidence of beneficial effects of STW programs on those in the forgotten

half. For the schooling-related outcomes, there are roughly equal numbers of significant effects in the

two halves of the distribution of predicted probabilities of college attendance. But note that for those in

                                                        19
the forgotten half these effects are almost always positive (with the exception of internship/apprenticeship

programs, which reduce attendance at 4-year colleges but boost it at 2-year colleges). In contrast, for

those in the top half, many more of the estimated effects on post-secondary schooling are negative.

Similarly, for the job-related outcomes there is particularly strong evidence that internship/apprenticeship

programs boost employment and decrease idleness among men in the forgotten half, with similar results

for coop and school enterprise programs (although coop programs and tech prep also boost employment

for those in the top half). At the same time, there are some other effects of STW participation that are

more concentrated among men in the top half, in particular for job shadowing and tech prep.

           Overall, then, this summary points to some evidence that STW programs are particularly

advantageous for men in the forgotten half, but not for women. Among the strongest evidence for men in

the forgotten half is that mentoring and coop programs increase post-secondary education, and that coop,

school enterprise, and internship/apprenticeship programs boost employment and decrease idleness.

VI. Conclusions

           This paper tests whether school-to-work (STW) programs are particularly beneficial for those less

likely to go to college in their absence—often termed the “forgotten half” in the STW literature. The

empirical analysis is based on the NLSY97, which provides the best data available to date on participation

in a wide array of STW programs. The NLSY97 data allow us to study six types of STW programs,

including job shadowing, mentoring, coop, school enterprises, tech prep, and internships/apprenticeships.

           The data provide some evidence that STW program participation is particularly advantageous for

men in the forgotten half. Among these men, mentoring and coop programs increase post-secondary

education, and coop, school enterprise, and internship/apprenticeship programs boost employment and

decrease idleness after leaving high school,31 while there is less evidence of such beneficial effects for

other men. The evidence that STW programs are particularly beneficial for women in the forgotten half is




31
     Because these results for the effects of STW on idleness appear mainly for men, we doubt that they reflect
     substitution between work and parenting.

                                                           20
limited to findings that internship/apprenticeship programs lead to positive earnings effects—measured

early in the life cycle—concentrated among these women.

           Overall, then, especially for men there is rather compelling evidence that participation in some

STW programs increases education and employment and decreases idleness among the forgotten half.

Returning to the policy issue that helped frame this paper, these findings suggest that there may be

substantial benefits to STW efforts targeted towards those male high school students whose

characteristics and backgrounds make them less likely to attend college.

           There are, of course, some qualifications to these conclusions, or further clarifications that are

necessary. First, the empirical analysis in this paper only weighs some of the benefits of a set of

programs. It does not consider the costs of these programs, nor does it compare the benefits with the

potential benefits of other programs. For example, while we posed the question as addressing, in part,

whether national policy changes downgrading STW efforts and emphasizing testing might not serve the

forgotten half, we have not presented evidence that test-based reforms are not particularly helpful to those

in the forgotten half.32 Second, as noted in the text, we have not revisited all of the issues of endogenous

selection that we studied in our earlier paper (Neumark and Rothstein, 2003) in analyzing the effects of

STW programs on a more limited set of outcomes. In that paper, we found that biases from endogenous

selection into STW programs were minimal, and we strongly believe that these results would carry over

to the more detailed analyses that we conduct in this paper. However, the more demanding nature of the

specifications estimated in this paper makes it difficult to address both selectivity issues and

heterogeneous effects of STW programs simultaneously, in part because addressing selection issues

eliminates many observations that we can otherwise use. And finally, while the NLSY97 provides, in our

view, the best available data for studying the effects of a wide array of STW programs, the data set as yet

does not follow respondents very far into their careers or even all the way through their post-secondary

education, but at best into their early 20’s. Thus, firmer conclusions clearly await analysis five or more


32
     Rose (2004) presents some evidence that, for men, test score gains achieved during high school have a positive
     impact on post-high school earnings for those whose eighth-grade test scores were in the bottom quartile.

                                                           21
years down the road when the NLSY97 data will permit a more detailed characterization of the

developing careers of sample members.




                                                  22
                                              References

Cameron, Stephen V., and James J. Heckman. 2000. “The Dynamics of Educational Attainment for
Blacks, Hispanics, and Whites.” NBER Working Paper No. 7249.

Donahoe, Debra, and Marta Tienda. 1999. “Human Asset Development and the Transition from School to
Work: Policy Lessons for the 21st Century.” Unpublished manuscript, Office of Population Research,
Princeton University.

Falaris, Evangelos M., and H. Elizabeth Peters. 1998. “Survey Attrition and Schooling Choices.” Journal
of Human Resources, Vol. 33, No. 2, Spring, pp. 531-54.

Hamilton, Stephen F., and Mary A. Hamilton. 1999. Building Strong School to Work Systems:
Illustrations of Key Components (Washington, DC: National School-to-Work Office).

Heckman, James, Neil Hohmann, and Jeffrey A. Smith. 2000. “Substitution and Dropout Bias in Social
Experiments: A Study of an Influential Social Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 115,
No. 2, pp. 651-94.

Hughes, Katherine L., Stephen F. Hamilton, and Robert J. Ivry. 2001. School-to-Work: Making a
Difference in Education (New York: Institute on Education and the Economy, Teachers College,
Columbia University).

Joyce, Mary, and David Neumark. 2001. “School-to-Work Programs: Information from Two Surveys.”
Monthly Labor Review, Vol. 124, No. 8, August, pp. 38-50.

Kemple, James J., and Jason C. Snipes. 2000. Career Academies: Impacts on Students’ Engagement and
Performance in High School (New York: Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation).

Kemple, James J. 2001. Career Academies: Impacts on Students’ Initial Transitions to Post-Secondary
Education and Employment (New York: Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation).

Kemple, James J. 2004. “Having an Impact on the Transition from School to Work: Evidence from
Career Academies.” Unpublished manuscript, Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation.

Neumark, David. “Evaluating Program Effectiveness: A Case Study of the School-to-Work Opportunities
Act in California.” Forthcoming in Economics of Education Review.

Neumark, David, and Mary Joyce. 2001. “Evaluating School-to-Work Programs Using the New NLSY.”
Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 36, No. 4, Fall, pp. 666-702.

Neumark, David, and Donna Rothstein. 2003. “School-to-Career Programs and Transitions to
Employment and Higher Education.” NBER Working Paper No. 10060.

Office of Technology Assessment, United States Congress. 1995. Learning to Work: Making the
Transition from School to Work (Publication No. OTA-HER 637) (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government
Printing Office).

Rose, Heather. 2004. “Do Gains in Test Scores Explain Labor Market Outcomes?” Unpublished
manuscript, Public Policy Institute of California.
Stern, David. 1984. “School-Based Enterprise and the Quality of Work Experience.” Youth & Society,
Vol. 15, No. 4, June, pp. 401-27.

Stern, David, Neal Finkelstein, Miguel Urquiola, and Helen Cagampang. 1997. “What Difference Does It
Make If School and Work are Connected? Evidence on Co-operative Education in the United States.”
Economics of Education Review, Vol. 16, No. 3, June, pp. 213-29.

Stern, David, Neal Finkelstein, James R. Stone, John Latting, and Carolyn Dornsife. 1995. School to
Work: Research on Programs in the United States (London and Washington: Falmer Press).

Stern, David, James Stone III, Charles Hopkins, Martin McMillion, and Robert Crain. 1994. School-
Based Enterprise: Productive Learning in American High Schools (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass
Publishers).

United States Congress. 1994. School-to-Work Opportunities Act of 1994, Public Law 103-239, 108 Stat
568, H.R. 2884.

U.S. General Accounting Office. 1990. Preparing Noncollege Youth for Employment in the U.S. and
Foreign Countries (Washington, D.C.).

William T. Grant Foundation. 1988. The Forgotten Half: Pathways to Success for America’s Youth and
Young Families (Washington, D.C.).
Table 1: Sample Construction and Analysis Samples
                       Sample inclusion criteria                                  Number of observations
                                  (1)                                                      (2)
 Post-high school cross-sectional analysis
 Total sample in 1997                                                                       8,984
 Interviewed in 1999, 2000, or 2001                                                         8,609
 Age 18 at 1999, 2000, or 2001 interview                                                    6,837
 Not enrolled in high school by 1999, 2000, or 2001 interview                               5,966
 Answered STW questions covering high school after Round 1                                  4,989
 Complete data on baseline controls                                                         4,810
 Exclude private/vocational school students                                                 4,292*
 Post-high school longitudinal analysis
 Followed for at least one year from September after leaving high                           2,855*
 school
For the post-high school enrollment/employment analysis, we use the 1999, 2000, or 2001 interview as the
“post-high school interview,” choosing the earliest one at which the respondent is aged 18 or older and no
longer enrolled in high school. More restrictive sample inclusion criteria are imposed in each successive row.
Baseline controls include race/ethnicity, education, and family structure (whether respondent lives with one,
two, or no biological parents, and which ones, and household size). When other control variables are
introduced in the regression models, dummy variables indicating missing data are included. For the post-high
school longitudinal analysis, we use the latest data possible beginning with the September after respondents
leave high school. The ‘*’ for the sample sizes indicates that for the analysis of different dependent variables
the sample is sometimes smaller because of missing data.
Table 2A: Linear Probability Estimates of Individual Characteristics Associated with STW Participation, Females
                                    Job                                        School                         Internship /
                                shadowing       Mentoring        Coop         enterprise      Tech prep      apprenticeship
                                    (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)               (6)
  Means                            .208           .101           .150            .084           .105              .105
  Regression estimates
  Demographic
  Black                              -.007            .014           .024             .016          .078***         -.007
  Hispanic                           -.036            .012           .004            -.022            .024           .014
  Age                                 .002           -.000           .008          -.019**           -.007           .012
  Living arrangement /
  family
  Urban                              -.027            .006           .027             .022           -.022           .008
  Biological parent & step-          -.011           -.019           -.024            .032            .005           .005
  parent
  Biological mother only            -.050**          -.017           .004             .003           -.019          -.021
  Biological father only             -.048           -.026           .025            -.035            .045          -.039
  Other arrangement                  -.020            .023           -.001           -.018           -.013           .014
  Household size                     -.003         -.010***          -.005          -.007*          -.010**        -.010**
  Log household income                .004            .001           .001             .000           -.006           .001
  Biological mother’s                 .001            .003           .001            -.001            .000          .005*
  schooling
  ASVAB
  Arithmetic reasoning                .013           -.006           .008             .002            .006           .001
  Word knowledge                     -.010            .004          -.028*           -.004            .001          -.024*
  Paragraph comprehension             .002           -.010           .003           .027**           -.020           .017
                                           *
  Math knowledge                     -.036            .003           -.017          -.023*           -.006           .001
  School behaviors
  Threatened at school                .019            .017          .055**            .004            .014          -.008
                                                         ***
  Got into physical fight at         -.048         -.062             -.022           -.015           -.013           .007
  school
  Late with no excuse 2+             -.014           -.008           -.021            .027           -.000           .015
  times
  Absent 2+ weeks                    -.049*          -.011           -.031           -.030            .026          -.036*
Linear probability estimates are reported. There are 2,172 observations. ***, **, and * indicate that the estimated
coefficients are significantly different from zero at the one-, five-, or ten-percent level, respectively. Dummy variables are
included for missing data on some individual variables. STW participation is measured based on responses from the 1998
interview on regarding school-to-work participation while in high school. All other variables are defined as of the first round
(1997), with the exception of age, which is measured (in months) at the 1999, 2000, or 2001 interview, whichever is defined
as the “post-high school interview” (see notes to Table 1). The ASVAB test scores are standardized to have mean zero and
standard deviation of one for the calibration sample that took the test. The subset of ASVAB scores we use are those that
make up the AFQT. Standard errors are robust to heteroscedasticity, and were adjusted to account for the clustering of
observations within schools, allowing for non-independence within schools and heteroscedasticity across schools.
Table 2B: Linear Probability Estimates of Individual Characteristics Associated with STW Participation, Males
                                 Job                                 School                      Internship /
                             shadowing       Mentoring   Coop       enterprise    Tech prep     apprenticeship
                                 (1)            (2)       (3)           (4)          (5)              (6)
 Means                          .189           .085      .150          .070         .137             .096
 Regression estimates
 Demographic
 Black                           -.018         .055***    .017       .048***        .032             .019
 Hispanic                        -.015         .054***    -.016       .011          .004             .019
 Age                              .003           .003    .039***      .007          .019            -.003
 Living arrangement /
 family
 Urban                          -.067**          .002    .011         -.019         -.025            .010
 Biological parent & step-       -.013          -.011    -.011        -.010         -.003           -.006
 parent
 Biological mother only          -.034        -.059***   -.006        -.010         -.012            .007
 Biological father only          -.053          -.042    -.014        -.009         -.008           -.044
 Other arrangement               -.015           .022    -.004        -.018         -.036            .010
 Household size                  -.007          -.006    .004         -.004          .002           -.006
 Log household income             .000          -.005    -.004        .003*         -.002           -.002
 Biological mother’s              .004           .004    -.001         .002         -.003           .004*
 schooling
 ASVAB
 Arithmetic reasoning             .020          -.010    .000          .001           .004          -.023*
 Word knowledge                  -.019          -.007    .012        .036***        .032**          -.011
 Paragraph comprehension         -.012           .001    -.002        -.011          -.018           .002
 Math knowledge                 -.038**          .010    -.009        -.013         -.024*          .023*
 School behaviors
 Threatened at school             .001           .016    -.006         .006          .022           .023
 Got into physical fight at       .021           .020    .027         .041**        -.023           .006
 school
 Late with no excuse 2+           .015          -.022    -.006        -.004         -.012           -.006
 times
 Absent 2+ weeks                 -.055*        -.040**   -.055**      -.031         -.015           -.033
See notes to Table 2A. There are 2,120 observations.
Table 3: Post-High School Analysis of Effects of STW Participation on Cross-Sectional Measures of Schooling,
Employment, and Training
                                                            Attended                    Participated    Neither working
                       Any      Currently     Attended      two-year      Currently      in training     nor enrolled
                      college   enrolled      four-year      college      working         program          currently
                        (1)        (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)              (6)             (7)
 Females
 Means                 .540        .481         .343          .197          .609            .083              .200
 Regression
 estimates
 Job shadowing          .023      .055**        -.022         .045*           .027          -.014            -.039*
                      (.026)      (.026)       (.025)        (.023)         (.028)         (.016)            (.021)
 Mentoring            .069**      .077**      .110***         -.042          -.016          -.013             -.026
                      (.034)      (.033)       (.034)        (.028)         (.036)         (.020)            (.028)
 Coop                  -.012       -.043      -.080***       .068**           .034           .008              .037
                      (.027)      (.028)       (.027)        (.027)         (.031)         (.019)            (.026)
 School enterprise     .056*       .057          .051          .005           .009           .016             -.041
                      (.034)      (.035)       (.034)        (.032)         (.040)         (.023)            (.028)
 Tech prep            -.064*       -.044      -.068**          .004         -.023          .040*               .027
                      (.033)      (.034)       (.028)        (.032)         (.034)         (.024)            (.028)
 Internship /         .077**       .022         .051*          .027         -.015          -.013               .005
 apprenticeship       (.030)      (.033)       (.029)        (.029)         (.036)         (.019)            (.028)
 N                     2172        2172         2172          2172           2172           2134              2172
 Males
 Means                 .414        .371         .260          .153          .622            .114              .222
 Regression
 estimates
 Job shadowing           .054**      .047*        .038*         .016             .005           .009             -.017
                        (.026)      (.026)       (.023)        (.022)          (.026)         (.020)            (.022)
 Mentoring                .057        .027       .070**         -.013           -.044          -.001             -.013
                        (.036)      (.036)       (.033)        (.030)          (.048)         (.027)            (.032)
 Coop                     .013        .020        -.026         .038          .089***         .046**           -.063***
                        (.029)      (.029)       (.024)        (.025)          (.029)         (.023)            (.024)
 School enterprise .113***          .080**         .037        .076**            .042          -.039             -.029
                        (.036)      (.037)       (.035)        (.035)          (.041)         (.025)            (.031)
 Tech prep              -.060**      -.039       -.043*         -.017           .054*          .041*             -.001
                        (.030)      (.029)       (.025)        (.026)          (.030)         (.025)            (.026)
 Internship /             .009        .013        -.024         .033           .086**           .034           -.082***
 apprenticeship         (.035)      (.035)       (.028)        (.029)          (.035)         (.029)            (.026)
 N                        2120       2120         2120          2120            2120           2080              2120
All of the specifications include the demographic, living arrangement/family, ASVAB, and school behavior variables (see
Table 2). Estimates are from linear probability models. The training programs include formal programs at schools or
other centers, apprenticeships, formal company training programs, and government training programs. Standard
deviations of means or standard errors of regression estimates are reported in parentheses for means. The standard errors
allow for general heteroscedasticity, and were adjusted to account for the clustering of observations within schools,
allowing for non-independence within schools.
Table 4: Post-High School Analysis of Effects of STW Participation on Longitudinal Joint
Work and Schooling Measures
                        Prop. of weeks       Prop. of weeks       Average hours worked       Prop. of weeks
                           in school            working              over all weeks               idle
                               (1)                 (2)                     (3)                     (4)
 Females
 Means                        .545                 .653                    20.21                  .156
 Regression
 estimates
 Job shadowing                -.005                .038*                    .93                  -.031**
                             (.028)               (.022)                  (1.00)                 (.016)
 Mentoring                    .040                 -.030                  -1.15                   -.003
                             (.037)               (.030)                  (1.32)                 (.021)
 Coop                        -.036                 .046*                  2.56**                  -.020
                             (.028)               (.025)                  (1.10)                 (.017)
 School enterprise           .064*                 -.015                  -1.21                   -.016
                             (.037)               (.032)                  (1.20)                 (.022)
 Tech prep                   -.014                 -.017                    .43                    .018
                             (.034)               (.026)                  (1.24)                 (.020)
 Internship /                 .033                  .013                    .69                   -.004
 apprenticeship              (.032)               (.027)                  (1.20)                 (.019)
 N                            1470                 1470                    1420                   1470
 Males
 Means                        .441                 .677                    23.75                  .154
 Regression
 estimates
 Job shadowing               .066**                  .023                   -.32                  -.020
                             (.028)                (.024)                 (1.13)                 (.018)
  Mentoring                   .014                  -.024                   .71                   .021
                             (.044)                (.033)                 (1.71)                 (.026)
  Coop                        -.015                .050**                 2.97**                  -.025
                             (.036)                (.025)                 (1.32)                 (.019)
  School enterprise           .050                  .061*                  1.30                  -.042*
                             (.046)                (.035)                 (1.70)                 (.023)
  Tech prep                   .020                   .039                  2.74*                  -.031
                             (.036)                (.028)                 (1.41)                 (.020)
  Internship /                -.011               .086***                  3.05                  -.040*
  apprenticeship             (.038)                (.030)                 (1.46)                 (.022)
  N                           1336                  1337                   1235                   1336
See notes to Table 3. All estimates are from linear regressions. The variables are based on the period
beginning with the first September since leaving high school; the specifications include a control for the
total number of weeks from that time until the interview.
Table 5: Post-High School Analysis of Effects of STW Participation on Earnings, Wages, and Full-Time
Status of Most Recent Job
                       Hourly earnings        Hourly wage          Full-time       Hourly earnings       Hourly wage
                             (1)                  (2)                 (3)                (4)                 (5)
 Females
 Means                       2.07                 1.97                .440               2.08                1.97
 Regression
 estimates
 Job shadow                  .049*                 .039                .031                .034               .031
                           (.027)                (.030)              (.035)              (.027)              (.029)
 Mentoring                 -.073**                -.028              -.097**             -.054*              -.016
                           (.033)                (.033)              (.049)              (.032)              (.033)
 Coop                        .051*                 .014                .025                .045               .008
                           (.026)                (.031)              (.039)              (.025)              (.031)
 School enterprise            .008                 .019                .046                .015               .018
                           (.038)                (.039)              (.053)              (.037)              (.040)
 Tech prep                    .008                 .006                .044               -.002               .009
                           (.035)                (.038)              (.047)              (.033)              (.037)
 Internship /               .089**               .082**               -.002              .085**             .095***
 apprenticeship            (.035)                (.037)              (.043)              (.035)              (.036)
 N                           1264                 1359                1404                1239                1331
 Males
 Means                       2.15                 2.09                .578               2.15                2.09
 Regression
 estimates
 Job shadow                   .019                .003               -.016                .030               .010
                            (.033)               (.033)              (.039)              (.032)             (.032)
 Mentoring                   -.020                .012               -.017               -.008               .026
                            (.052)               (.052)              (.059)              (.046)             (.048)
 Coop                        .063*                .026               .073*                .055               .015
                            (.036)               (.036)              (.040)              (.035)             (.036)
 School enterprise           -.002                .016               -.028               -.041              -.022
                            (.051)               (.048)              (.062)              (.042)             (.040)
 Tech prep                   -.018                .027                .053               -.028               .015
                            (.037)               (.034)              (.043)              (.035)             (.032)
  Internship /                .027                .018                .025                .003              -.007
  apprenticeship            (.042)               (.037)              (.046)              (.041)             (.037)
  Condition on                 No                  No                  No                 Yes                Yes
  schooling,
  experience and
  its square, and
  full-time
  N                           1075                1160                1219                1058              1142
See notes to Table 3. All estimates are from linear regressions. The definition of full-time is 35 or more hours per
week. Earnings include tips, bonuses, overtime, etc. Earnings, wages, and full-time status are for the most recent
job, for jobs held during or after the September after leaving high school. The specifications include a control for the
total number of weeks since leaving high school.
Table 6: Estimates of Equations for College Attendance
                      College attendance,       College attendance,
                      females (N=2172)           males (N=2120)
                              (1)                       (3)
  Means                      .573                      .455
  Regression
  estimates
  Demographic
  Black                       .097***                    .063*
  Hispanic                      .025                      .015
  Age                         .067***                     .026
  Living
  arrangement /
  family
  Urban                         .029                     .054*
  Biological parent            -.023                  -.121***
  & step-parent
  Biological                 -.125***                 -.125***
  mother only
  Biological father            -.078                   -.148**
  only
  Other                      -.140***                   -.110*
  arrangement
  Household size               -.013                   -.020**
  Log household                 .002                      .014
  income
  Biological                  .033***                  .040***
  mother’s
  schooling
  ASVAB
  Arithmetic                    .002                      .008
  reasoning
  Word knowledge                .034                    .052**
                                    *
  Paragraph                    .048                       .029
  comprehension
  Math knowledge              .167***                  .179***
  School
  behaviors
  Threatened at                -.043                  -.090***
  school
  Got into physical          -.156***                 -.107***
  fight at school
  Late with no                 -.044                     -.018
  excuse 2+ times
  Absent 2+ weeks            -.165***                  -.112**
  Share correctly               .707                      .736
  predicted
All estimates are from probit models; partial derivatives are reported.
See notes to Table 2 for additional details. The means are weighted.
The specifications include a control for the total number of weeks
since leaving high school. Share correctly predicted, in last row, is
based on a comparison between actual outcomes and whether
predicted probability of outcome is above or below median
probability (weighted). Estimates reported here are for the samples
in Table 3. Results were very similar for the samples used in Tables
4 and 5 (and 8 and 9 below).
Table 7: Post-High School Analysis of Effects of STW Participation on Cross-Sectional Measures of Schooling,
Employment, and Training, By Position in Distribution of Predicted Probability of College Attendance
                                                          Attended       Attended                    Participated
                               Any         Currently      four-year      two-year      Currently      in training     Neither working nor
                              college      enrolled        college        college      working         program         enrolled currently
                                (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)              (6)                (7)
 Females
 Job shadowing                  -.005          .042          -.025          .020          .015           -.008                 -.002
                               (.003)        (.036)         (.039)        (.033)        (.041)          (.019)                (.026)
  x lower half                   .005         .027+           .016         .039+          .017           -.010               -.066++
                               (.051)        (.053)         (.050)        (.047)        (.055)          (.029)                (.041)
 Mentoring                     .081**        .100**        .154***        -.074*         -.003          -.052**                -.042
                               (.039)        (.046)         (.048)        (.041)        (.051)          (.021)                (.029)
  x lower half                  -.024         -.047          -.089          .065         -.021           .073*                  .028
                               (.064)        (.069)         (.066)        (.060)        (.071)          (.038)                (.055)
 Coop                           -.034         -.051        -.135***       .101**        .105**            .010                  .015
                               (.044)        (.046)         (.050)        (.047)        (.047)          (.027)                (.033)
  x lower half                   .044          .021          .099*         -.056        -.118**          -.002                  .037
                               (.056)        (.058)         (.055)        (.056)        (.058)          (.037)                (.046)
 School enterprise              .081*        .095**          .103*         -.022         -.053            .045                 -.026
                               (.044)        (.047)         (.054)        (.044)        (.062)          (.034)                (.031)
  x lower half                  -.051         -.077          -.091          .041          .112           -.052                 -.018
                               (.068)        (.068)         (.065)        (.062)        (.080)          (.046)                (.055)
 Tech prep                      -.029         -.006         -.105*          .076          .009            .047                 -.025
                               (.050)        (.054)         (.056)        (.050)        (.054)          (.036)                (.032)
  x lower half                -.053++         -.059           .062        -.115**        -.045           -.013                  .080
                               (.063)        (.067)         (.062)        (.057)        (.072)          (.046)                (.051)
 Internship /                  .083**          .004         .093**         -.010         -.022            .002                  .018
 apprenticeship                (.037)        (.045)         (.044)        (.039)        (.050)          (.024)                (.032)
  x lower half                  -.014          .036          -.083          .069          .008           -.028                 -.022
                               (.062)        (.065)         (.058)        (.059)        (.054)          (.037)                (.055)
 Males
 Job shadowing                 .116***       .098**             .061          .056           .041         -.012                -.017
                                (.044)       (.044)           (.046)        (.036)         (.044)        (.031)               (.029)
   x lower half                  -.101        -.082            -.036         -.065          -.060          .036                -.000
                                (.053)       (.052)           (.052)        (.043)         (.059)        (.040)               (.046)
  Mentoring                      -.013        -.046             .056        -.069*          -.081          .030                -.021
                                (.054)       (.057)           (.055)        (.042)         (.055)        (.042)               (.035)
   x lower half                .126*,++      .134*,+          .021++         .105*           .068         -.061                 .013
                                (.075)       (.077)           (.068)        (.062)         (.078)        (.054)               (.061)
  Coop                         -.102**       -.121**         -.109**          .008        .118***         .066*                -.000
                                (.046)       (.048)           (.044)        (.038)         (.045)        (.036)               (.032)
   x lower half              .197***,+++ .245***,+++         .147***         .050+         -.052+         -.034             -.105**,+++
                                (.058)       (.060)           (.051)        (.049)         (.059)        (.047)               (.047)
  School enterprise            .143***        .107*             .092          .051           .083       -.113***               -.042
                                (.054)       (.059)           (.063)        (.051)         (.061)        (.025)               (.038)
   x lower half                -.045++        -.039            -.091        .046++          -.077          .129                 .020
                                (.072)       (.075)           (.072)        (.071)         (.082)        (.046)               (.061)
  Tech prep                   -.134***       -.095*          -.104**         -.030          .085*        .084**                 .023
                                (.051)       (.050)           (.048)        (.042)         (.049)        (.043)               (.038)
   x lower half                  .118*         .087            .101*          .017          -.051         -.066                -.036
                                (.061)       (.060)           (.054)        (.050)         (.063)        (.050)               (.053)
  Internship /                   -.034         .005             .035        -.068*           .025          .033               -.052*
  apprenticeship                (.054)       (.054)           (.052)        (.041)         (.053)        (.040)               (.031)
   x lower half                   .070         .005         -.106*,++     .176***,++      .111+++          .003              -.049+++
                                (.070)       (.067)           (.057)        (.061)         (.072)        (.054)               (.049)
See notes to Tables 3 and 6. In constructing the lower half of the distribution of predicted probabilities of college attendance, the
weighted median of the predicted probability of college attendance based on the model in Table 6 is used. ***, **, and * indicate that
the estimated coefficients are significantly different from zero at the one-, five-, or ten-percent level, respectively. For the interactions
with the lower half, +++, ++, and + indicate that the overall effects for the lower half (the sums of the main and interactive effects) are
significantly different from zero at the one-, five-, or ten-percent level, respectively.
Table 8: Post-High School Analysis of Effects of STW Participation on Longitudinal Joint
Work and Schooling Measures, By Position in Distribution of Predicted Probability of
College Attendance
                        Prop. of weeks   Prop. of weeks   Average hours worked    Prop. of
                           in school        working          over all weeks      weeks idle
                               (1)             (2)                 (3)              (4)
 Females
 Job shadowing                -.046            .041              1.02              -.024*
                             (.038)          (.032)             (1.32)             (.013)
  x lower half                .066            -.005               -.04              -.012
                             (.054)          (.046)             (1.99)             (.030)
 Mentoring                    .059            -.019               -.98              -.008
                             (.047)          (.046)             (1.81)             (.016)
  x lower half                -.033           -.018               -.26              .009
                             (.065)          (.062)             (2.49)             (.039)
 Coop                         -.034           .072*              2.41               -.017
                             (.047)          (.040)             (1.66)             (.019)
  x lower half                -.001           -.042               .37+              -.003
                             (.064)          (.050)             (2.17)             (.031)
 School enterprise           .113**           -.068             -3.25**             -.025
                             (.048)          (.046)             (1.47)             (.017)
  x lower half                -.083            .086              3.37               .017
                             (.068)          (.062)             (2.24)             (.039)
 Tech prep                    -.054            .028              2.12               .013
                             (.052)          (.047)             (2.00)             (.027)
  x lower half                .065            -.067              -2.67              .007
                             (.069)          (.058)             (2.32)             (.040)
 Internship /                 .021             .010              1.15               .013
 apprenticeship              (.039)          (.042)             (1.81)             (.022)
  x lower half                .030             .002              -1.13              -.032
                             (.063)          (.057)             (2.45)             (.038)
 Males
 Job shadowing                 .079*           .056              1.09               -.023
                              (.044)         (.039)             (1.65)             (.019)
  x lower half                -.018+          -.056              -2.49              .003
                              (.056)         (.049)             (2.17)             (.031)
 Mentoring                     -.010          -.020               .07               .011
                              (.059)         (.048)             (2.26)             (.029)
  x lower half                  .048          -.008               .86               .014
                              (.082)         (.070)             (3.48)             (.050)
 Coop                        -.107**         .089**             6.29***             .007
                              (.051)         (.041)             (1.89)             (.025)
  x lower half                .147**          -.064             -5.34**             -.051
                              (.067)         (.052)             (2.55)             (.037)
 School enterprise              .047           .021               -.72              .013
                              (.064)         (.049)             (2.27)             (.031)
  x lower half                  .032          .060+              2.87            -.106**,++
                              (.094)         (.068)             (3.31)             (.045)
 Tech prep                     -.069         .090**             5.56**              -.018
                              (.060)         (.042)             (2.47)             (.023)
  x lower half                 .137*          -.075              -4.03              -.020
                              (.073)         (.052)             (2.84)             (.035)
 Internship /                  -.033           .048              3.28               -.026
 apprenticeship               (.059)         (.045)             (2.09)             (.028)
  x lower half                  .042        .066+++               -.48             -.028+
                              (.074)         (.058)             (2.78)             (.042)
See notes to Tables 3, 4, 6, and 7.
Table 9: Post-High School Analysis of Effects of STW Participation on Earnings, Wages, and
Full-Time Status of Most Recent Job, By Position in Distribution of Predicted Probability of
College Attendance
                       Hourly earnings   Hourly wage      Full-time     Hourly earnings    Hourly wage
                             (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)              (5)
 Females
 Job shadowing               .083*           .062           -.012              .070             .068
                            (.043)         (.045)           (.052)           (.043)            (.044)
  x lower half               -.061          -.042            .085             -.064             -.066
                            (.057)         (.062)           (.073)           (.056)            (.060)
 Mentoring                 -.146***         -.085           -.080           -.125***            -.082
                            (.046)         (.054)           (.071)           (.046)            (.055)
  x lower half                .134           .106           -.025             .127*             .117
                            (.066)         (.072)           (.097)           (.067)            (.074)
 Coop                        .075*           .051           -.061              .063             .041
                            (.045)         (.051)           (.060)           (.044)            (.052)
  x lower half               -.043          -.065           .137*             -.033             -.057
                            (.055)         (.064)           (.078)           (.055)            (.066)
 School enterprise           -.051           .019            .029             -.018             .036
                            (.066)         (.065)           (.080)           (.0670            (.068)
  x lower half                .098          -.001            .019              .054             -.032
                            (.084)         (.085)           (.107)           (.084)            (.087)
 Tech prep                    .081           .036            .106              .040             .033
                            (.058)         (.075)           (.083)           (.055)            (.070)
  x lower half               -.109          -.044           -.110             -.060             -.034
                            (.071)         (.081)           (.099)           (.069)            (.078)
 Internship /                 .082           .062           -.033              .081             .086
 apprenticeship             (.059)         (.059)           (.059)           (.059)            (.058)
  x lower half              .012++         .043++            .040            .010++            .025++
                            (.071)         (.074)           (.086)           (.071)            (.073)
 Males
 Job shadowing                -.023         -.029            .035            -.019             -.027
                             (.049)        (.053)           (.065)           (.049)            (.031)
  x lower half                 .073          .050           -.086              .084             .061
                             (.063)        (.063)           (.083)           (.066)            (.064)
 Mentoring                    -.005          .063           -.026              .034             .099
                             (.077)        (.083)           (.078)           (.064)            (.074)
  x lower half                -.025         -.092            .001            -.078             -.131
                             (.088)        (.091)           (.107)           (.088)            (.092)
 Coop                          .070          .036           .126*              .045             .009
                             (.061)        (.061)           (.065)           (.057)            (.059)
  x lower half                -.021         -.024           -.088              .008             .003
                             (.076)        (.077)           (.084)           (.075)            (.076)
 School enterprise             .065          .089           -.072             -.006             .032
                             (.082)        (.081)           (.090)           (.060)            (.064)
  x lower half                -.113         -.135            .070            -.054             -.095
                             (.102)        (.096)           (.120)           (.085)            (.081)
 Tech prep                    -.059          .016            .071            -.062              .008
                             (.069)        (.066)           (.075)           (.064)            (.061)
  x lower half                 .065          .022           -.027              .057             .018
                             (.080)        (.076)           (.091)           (.077)            (.072)
 Internship /                  .030         -.053            .042             -.001            -.087
 apprenticeship              (.075)        (.069)           (.071)           (.072)            (.065)
  x lower half                -.005          .122           -.029              .007            .136*
                             (.089)        (.083)           (.092)           (.086)            (.080)
 Conditional                    No            No              No               Yes              Yes
See notes to Tables 3, 5, 6, and 7.
Table 10: Summary of Differences in Effects of STW Participation
                           Schooling-related,                Schooling-related,                 Job-related,                   Job-related,
                            Forgotten Half                       top half                      Forgotten Half                    top half
                                  (1)                               (2)                             (3)                            (4)
 Females
 Job shadowing       Currently enrolled: +                                               Idle: −−                       Weeks idle: −
                     Attended 2-year college: +                                                                         Earnings, uncond.: +

 Mentoring                                            Any college: ++                                                   Training: −−
                                                      Currently enrolled: ++                                            Earnings, uncond.: −−−
                                                      Attended 4-year college: +++                                      Earning, cond.: −−−
                                                      Attended 2-year college: −
 Coop                                                 Attended 4-year college: −−−       Hours: +                       Currently working: ++
                                                      Attended 2-year college: ++                                       Weeks working: +
                                                                                                                        Earnings, uncond.: +
 School                                               Any college: +                                                    Hours: −−
 enterprise                                           Currently enrolled: ++
                                                      Attended 4-year college: +
                                                      Weeks in school: ++
 Tech prep           Any college: −−                  Attended 4-year college: −
 Internship/                                          Any college: ++                    Earnings, uncond.: ++
 apprenticeship                                       Attended 4-year college: ++        Wage, uncond.: ++
                                                                                         Earnings, cond.: ++
                                                                                         Wage, cond.: ++
 Males
 Job shadowing       Weeks in school: +               Any college: +++
                                                      Currently enrolled: ++
                                                      Weeks in school: +
 Mentoring           Any college: ++                  Attended 2-year college: −
                     Currently enrolled: +
                     Attended 4-year college: ++
 Coop                Any college: +++                 Any college: −−                    Currently working: +           Currently working: +++
                     Currently enrolled: +++          Currently enrolled: −−             Idle: −−−                      Training: +
                     Attended 2-year college: +       Attended 4-year college: −−                                       Weeks working: ++
                     Weeks in school: −−              Weeks in school: −−                                               Hours: +++
                                                                                                                        Full-time: +
 School              Any college: ++                  Any college: +++                   Weeks working: +               Training: −−
 enterprise          Attended 2-year college: ++      Currently enrolled: +              Weeks idle: −−
 Tech prep                                            Any college: −−−                                                  Currently working: +
                                                      Currently enrolled: −                                             Training: ++
                                                      Attended 4-year college: −−                                       Weeks working: ++
                                                                                                                        Hours: ++
 Internship/         Attended 4-year college: −−      Attended 2-year college: −             Currently working: +++     Idle: −
 apprenticeship      Attended 2-year college: ++                                             Idle: −−−
                                                                                             Weeks working: +++
                                                                                             Weeks idle: −
Results are from Tables 7-9. The sign is as indicated, appearing three, two, or one, times to indicate that the estimate is significantly
different from zero at the one-, five-, or ten-percent level, respectively. In columns (1) and (3), entries appearing in bold are statistically
significant at the ten-percent level or better only for the forgotten half (or significant with the opposite sign). Those underlined as well are
significantly different from the effects for those in the rest of the distribution, at the ten-percent level or better.
