                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            BILATERAL FDI FLOWS: THRESHOLD
                           BARRIERS AND PRODUCTIVITY SHOCKS

                                              Assaf Razin
                                              Efraim Sadka
                                                Hui Tong

                                         Working Paper 11639
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11639


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2005




Razin: Tel-Aviv University and Cornell University, CEPR, NBER and CESifo. The paper was written while
the author visited the Bank of England. Sadka: Tel-Aviv University, CESifo and IZA. Tong: Bank of
England. This paper represents the views of the authors and should not be thought to represent those of the
Bank of England. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Assaf Razin, Efraim Sadka and Hui Tong. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Bilateral FDI Flows: Threshold Barriers and Productivity Shocks
Assaf Razin, Efraim Sadka and Hui Tong
NBER Working Paper No. 11639
September 2005
JEL No. F2, F3

                                            ABSTRACT




A positive productivity shock in the host country tends typically to increase the volume of the desired
FDI flows to the host country, through the standard marginal profitability effect. But, at the same
time, such a shock may lower the likelihood of making any new FDI flows by the source country,
through a total profitability effect, derived from the a general-equilibrium increase in domestic input
prices. This is the gist of the theory that we develop in the paper. For a sample of 62 OECD and
Non-OECD countries over the period 1987-2000, we provide supporting evidence for the existence
of such conflicting effects of productivity change on bilateral FDI flows. We also uncover sizeable
threshold barriers in our data set and link the analysis to the Lucas Paradox.


Assaf Razin
Eitan Berglas School of Economics
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv 69978
ISRAEL
and NBER
razin@post.tau.ac.il
1         Introduction

Maurice Obstfeld and Alan M. Taylor (2003) make a succinct observation :
"A century ago, world income and productivity levels were far less divergent
than they are today, so it is all the more remarkable that so much capital
was directed to countries at or below the 20 percent and 40 percent income
levels (relative to the United States). Today, a much larger fraction of the
world’s output and population is located in such low-productivity regions,
but a smaller share of global foreign investment reaches them." Earlier, in a
similar vein, Lucas (1990) put it like this: "Why doesn’t capital flow from
rich to poor countries?" Indeed, the law of diminishing returns implies that
the marginal product of capital is high in poor, labor-abundant countries and
low in rich, capital-abundant countries. With a standard constant-returns-
to-scale production function, when the wage (per eﬃciency unit of labor) is
higher in the rich country (due to poor-rich country diﬀerences in relative
supplies of capital and labor), the return to capital must be lower in the rich
countries than in the poor country. Therefore, capital is expected to flow
from rich to poor countries. In practice, however, this is not easily seen in
the data. Even though barriers to international capital mobility are by and
large being eliminated, the wage gap is still in force, and migration quotas
from poor to rich countries have to be enforced1 .
    1
        Lucas reconciles this paradox (with a simple theory and skillful calibration) by appeal-
ing to a human capital externality (proxied by average years of schooling) that generates a
Hicks-neutral productivity advantage for rich countries over poor countries.Note also that
despite the expansion of international trade in goods, still the Stolper-Samualson factor
price equalization theorem does not manage to eliminate the wage gap; see Stolper and


                                                 2
    The present paper focuses on foreign direct investment (FDI), as a key
channel of international capital flows, which is expected to be closely as-
sociated with cross country productivity diﬀerences. We develop a model
with "lumpy" setup costs of new investments that govern the flow of bilat-
eral foreign direct investment. Every country in this model may potentially
be a source for FDI flows to several host countries; and each country may
be a host for FDI flows from several source countries. But the rich and
technologically-advanced countries have a comparative advantage in setting
up foreign subsidiaries. As this advantage may also be industry-specific,
the model is capable of generating two-way rich-rich, and rich-poor FDI
flows. With setup costs of investment, it does not pay a firm to make a
"small" foreign investment, even if such an investment is called for by mar-
ginal productivity conditions (that is, the standard first-order conditions for
profit maximization). Put diﬀerently, a typical foreign investment decision
is two-fold now: marginal productivity conditions determine how much to
invest, whereas a selection condition, based on total profitability, determines
whether to invest at all.
    Lucas (1990) focuses on capital flows from rich to poor countries. This was
the major direction of flows in the era of free capital mobility that preceded
World War I2 . However, the increased mobility of capital that followed World
War II, and accelerated with the end of the Cold War, is of a diﬀerent nature.
As Obstfeld and Taylor (op. cit.) note: "Globalized capital markets are back,
but with a diﬀerence: capital transactions seem to be mostly a rich-rich
Samuelson (1941).
  2
    Most notably were the flows of capital from imperialist countries to their colonies.




                                            3
aﬀair, a process of ’diversification finance’ rather than ’development finance’.
The creditor-debtor country pairs involve more rich-rich than rich-poor, and
today’s foreign investment in the poorest developing countries lag far behind
the levels attained at the start of the last century".
   Threshold barriers play an important role in determining the extent of
trade-based foreign direct investment; see, for instance, Zhang and Markusen
(1999), Carr, Markusen and Maskus (2001), and Helpman, Melitz and Yeaple
(2003). The trade-based literature typically focuses on issues such as the
interdependence of FDI and trade in goods and the ensuing industrial struc-
ture. For instance, they attempt to explain how a source country can export
both FDI and goods to the same host country. The explanation rests on pro-
ductivity heterogeneity within the source country, and diﬀerences in setup
costs associated with FDI and export of goods. The trade-based literature
on FDI is thus geared towards a firm-level decisions on exports and FDI in
the source country. Our focus is on aggregate bilateral FDI. Thus, trade-
based empirical applications typically use micro dataset, whereas we utilize
country-wide data set.
   The organization of the paper is as follows. Section 2 develops the model.
Section 3 demonstrates the conflicting eﬀects of productivity shocks. Sec-
tion 4 outlines the econometric approach and describes the data. Section 5
presents the empirical findings. Section 6 concludes.




                                       4
2         The Model
In a nutsheel, the model of FDI works as follows. First, a potential FDI in-
vestor decides how much she would like to invest. This decision is governed
by the marginal profitability considerations, so as to equate the marginal
factor productivity to factor prices (that is, the standard first-order condi-
tion). In an econometric terminology, this decision is described by a flow
(or "gravity") equation. Second, the potential FDI investor must also decide
whether to carry out at all new investments, because of fixed costs of new
investments. The decision is governed by the total (rather than marginal)
profitability of the new investment. In an econometric terminology, such de-
cision is described by the so-called selection equation. A productivity shock
in the host country may, on the one hand, increase the volume of the desired
FDI flows to this country, but, on the other hand, and somewhat counter to
conventional thinking, the shock may lower the likelihood of making new FDI
flows at all, by the source country. A source-country positive productivity
shocks has a negative eﬀect in the likelihood of making a new FDI, but is
inconsequential for the flow of FDI. As we focus on aggregate bilateral capital
flows in the econometric analysis, we specify in the theory background the
general productivity level of a country, and ignore for simplicity heterogeneity
among firms within a country 3 .
        Consider a representative industry in a given host country (H) in a world
of free capital mobility, which fixes the world rate of interest, denoted by
r. As before, there is a single good which serves both for consumption and
    3
        For notational simplicity we also set the number of firms in the industry to be equal
to one.


                                               5
investment. In a straightforward extension of the model to more than one
industry every country becomes potentially both a source for FDI flows to
several host countries, and a host for FDI flows from several source countries.
But because of fixed costs, some of the source-host pairs are inactive.
   As our focus here is on the country-specific productivity shocks, we would
like to reckon with the possibility that a productivity change aﬀects wages.
If the setup cost is in part in domestic (host-country) inputs, we have to take
into account the indirect eﬀect of a productivity change on the setup cost.
Therefore, we assume that the setup cost is of the form


                                 CH = CSH + wH LC
                                                H,                         (1)

where CSH is a cost incurred in the source country and LC
                                                        H is a fixed input

of domestic labor, proxying other domestic input prices.
   Consider a representative firm which does invest in the first period an
                0
amount I = K − KH in order to augment its stock of capital to K. Its
present value becomes

                             ½                                             ¾
  +                              AH F (K, L) − wH L + K          0
 V (AH , CH , wH ) = max                                − [(K − KH ) + CH ] .
                     (K,L)                1+r
                                                                           (2)
   Input L stands for a variety of domestic inputs, such as labor, land,
etc. The demand of the firm for K and L are denoted by K + (AH , wH ) and
L+ (AH , wH ), respectively. They are defined by the marginal productivity
conditions:


                                  AH FK (K, L) = r,                        (3)

                                          6
and


                                      AH FL (K, L) = w.                                  (4)

   Note again that the firm may choose not to invest at all (that is, to stick
                                  0
to the existing stock of capital KH ) and thereby avoid the lumpy setup cost
CH . In this case its present value is:

                                             ½          0                0
                                                                              ¾
               −          0                      AH F (KH , L) − wH L + KH
           V       (AH , KH , wH )   = max                                        ,      (5)
                                        L                   1+r
and its labor demand, denoted by L− (AH , KH
                                           0
                                             , wH ), is given by


                                  0
                          AH FL (KH , L− (AH , KH
                                                0
                                                  , wH )) = wH .                         (6)

   The firm will make a new investment if, and only if,


                         V + (AH , CH , wH ) ≥ V − (AH , KH
                                                          0
                                                            , wH ).                      (7)

That is, the firm makes the amount of investment that is called for by the
marginal productivity conditions, (3) and (4), if and only if, a global selection
condition (7), is met.
   As before, we assume that labor is confined within national borders. De-
noting the country’s endowment of labor by L0H , we have the following labor
market clearing equation:

                                                                                         
   LC          +
        + L (AH , wH ) =        L0H          +
                                        if V (AH , CH , wH ) ≥ V   −          0
                                                                       (AH , KH , wH )   
    H

        L− (AH , wH ) = L0H             if V + (AH , CH , wH ) < V − (AH , KH
                                                                            0
                                                                              , wH ) 
                                                                                      (8)


                                                 7
This market clearing equation determines the wage rate in the host country,
as a function wH (AH ) of the host-country productivity factor.4



3         Conflicting Eﬀects of Productivity Shocks
We now turn to discuss the determinants FDI flows from the source country
S to the host country H. We treat as FDI the investment of source-country
entrepreneurs in the mergers and acquisitions (M&A) of host-country firms.
Suppose that the source-country entrepreneurs are endowed with some "in-
tangible" capital, or know-how, stemming from their specialization or ex-
pertise in the industry at hand. We model this comparative advantage by
assuming that the lumpy setup cost of investment in the host country, when
investment is done by the source country entrepreneurs (FDI investors) is
below the lumpy setup cost of investment, if carried out by the host country
direct investors. This means that the foreign direct investors can bid up the
direct investors of the host country in the acquisition of the investing firms in
the host country. The representative firm is purchased at its value which is
V + [AH , CH , wH (AH )]. This essentially assumes that competition among the
foreign direct investors pushes the price of the acquired firm to a maximized
value. Thus, the FDI investors shift all the gains from their lower setup cost
to the host-country original owners of the firm. The new owners also invest
an amount K + [AH , wH (AH )] to expand the capital stock of the acquired the
firm. On the other hand, if the selection condition (7) does not hold, then
    4
        See Appendix A for a derivation of the partial derivative of FDI with respect to the
productivity shock.




                                               8
there will be no FDI flows from country S to country H. Thus, aggregate
foreign direct investment is equal to:

           
           
            V + [AH , CH , wH (AH )] + K + [AH , wH (AH )] − KH0
                                                                  + wH (AH )L∗C
           
                                                                            H
           
           
                         +                          −        0
                      if V [A , C , w (A )] ≥ V [A , K , w (A )]
                               H   H    H       H         H    H    H    H
F DI =                                                                                 .
           
                                                   0
           
           
           
           
                      if V + [AH , CH , wH (AH )] < V − [AH , KH
                                                                0
                                                                  , wH (AH )]
                                                                                 (9)
   The model thus suggests that if the productivity factor (AH ) is suﬃciently
high, and/or the wage rate (wH ) is suﬃciently low, and/or the setup cost
(CSH + wH LC
           H ) is suﬃciently low, then FDI flows from country S to country

H are positive. Otherwise, the flow of FDI from country S to country H must
be zero.
   As a preamble to our empirical analysis in the next part, recall that the
model’s special feature is the two-fold mechanism of FDI decisions. First,
one decides how much to invest abroad, while ignoring the fixed setup cost.
Second, a decision is made whether to invest at all, taking into account
this cost. The hallmark of our empirical approach to follow is based on the
two equations (conditions) that govern these decisions. The deterministic
analogous of the "flow" and the "selection" equations are as follows. First,
ignoring the setup cost, the FDI flows from country S to country H (denoted
by F DIN OF ) is govern by a "notional flow" equation:



F DINOF = V + [AH , CH , wH (AH )] + K + [AH , wH (AH )] − KH
                                                            0
                                                              + wH (AH )LC
                                                                         H.

                                                                                (10)

                                            9
That is, the quantity of investment (K + ) and the acquisition price (V + ) are
govern by the marginal productivity conditions (2) and (3). Second, the
question whether FDI flows from country S to country H are at all positive
is govern by a "selection" equation (condition):


                 V + [AH , CH , wH (AH )] − V − [AH , KH
                                                       0
                                                         , wH (AH )] = 0.              (11)



       Consider now the eﬀect of a positive productivity shock which raises the
host country’s productivity factor, AH . As before, suppose initially that the
wage rate in the host country (wH ) is fixed [that is, ignore the labor market
clearing condition in equation (8)]. An increase in AH raises the quantity of
new investment (K + ), if the investment is carried out at all, the acquisition
price (V + ) that FDI investors pay, the amount of FDI, and the demand for
the labor in the host country. The increase in the demand for labor raise
the wage rate (wH ) in the host country (and the fixed setup cost wH L∗C
                                                                      H ),

thereby countering the above eﬀects on K + , V + , and FDI. With a unique
equilibrium, the initial eﬀects of the increase in AH are likely to dominate
the subsequent counter eﬀects of the rise in wH , so that FDI still rises5 .
       Thus, an increase in the host country’s productivity factor (AH ) raises the
volume of FDI flows from country S to country H that is governed by the flow
equation. But, at the same time, the rise in AH increases also the value of
the domestic component of the setup cost, wH (AH )LC
                                                   H . Thus, it may weaken
   5
       However, with fixed setup cost the equilibrium need not to be unique, and an increase
in AH may, somewhat counter-intuitively, reduce FDI, possibly even to zero. For a similar
phenomenon, see Razin, Sadka and Coury (2003).



                                              10
the advantage of carrying out positive FDI flows from country S to country H
at all. In other words, the gap between V + and V − in the selection equation
narrows down. Thus, a positive productivity shock (typically unobserved in
the data) raises the observed FDI flows in the flow equation but, at the same
time, may lower the likelihood of observing positive FDI flows at all. In other
words, the model may generate a negative correlation in the data between
the residuals of the flow and selection equations.
   The productivity level (AS ) in the source country comes into play in the
selection decision, when we consider again the limited supply of entrepreneurs
in the source country. This consideration is particularly relevant for greenfield
FDI. A source-country entrepreneur then faces a discrete choice of whether
to invest either at home or abroad, but not in both. In this case, in order for
her to make greenfield FDI, it no longer suﬃces that V + exceeds V − ; rather
V + must also exceed the value of alternative direct investment at home. The
latter naturally depends on the source-country productivity level, AS , and
we denote it by B(AS ). That is, the selection condition is:


                                  ©                                ª
    V + [AH , CH , wH (AH )] > Max V − [AH , KH
                                              0
                                                , wH (AH )], B(AS ) .       (12)

   Thus, the source-country positive productivity shock aﬀects negatively
the selection decision, but it has no bearing on the flow decision.
   The FDI flow mechanism works as follows. A comparative advantage for
the source country is based on low setup costs of direct investment, relative to
setup costs of domestic investors. This allows foreign investors to bid up for
investment projects in the host country. An exogenous productivity shock
in the host country may aﬀect the decision of the FDI investors whether to

                                       11
invest at all, and how much to invest, in opposite directions. For instance, a
positive productivity shock, ceteris paribus, improves both marginal and total
profitability of new investment. But, it also raises the demand for labor and
consequently wages. The rise in wages, in turn, mitigates the initial rise in
the marginal profitability and in the total profitability of the new investment,
through its adverse eﬀect on variable costs. However, the increase in wage
costs does not completely oﬀset the initial rise in the marginal and total
productivity of new investments. As a result, the positive productivity shock
implies a net rise in the marginal profitability of new investment. This may
not be the case with total profitability. It is adversely aﬀected by the rise in
wages not only through the increase in the variable costs, but also through
the increase in the wage bill associated with setup costs.                Hence, it may
well be the case that a positive productivity shock increases the marginal
productivity and lowers the total profitability of new investments, at the
same time.6



4         Data

We consider several potential explanatory variables of the two-fold decisions
on FDI flows. These variables include standard ”mass” variables (the source
and host population sizes); ”distance” variables (physical distance between
the source and host countries and whether or not the two countries share a
    6
        In Appendix B we extend the model to firm level heterogeneity. A productivity shock
may alter the composition of high vs low productivity firms that are actively invest. Thus,
there is an additional endogenous component to the eﬀect of productivity on FDI.



                                              12
common language); and ”economic” variables (source and host real GDP per
capita, source-host diﬀerences in average years of schooling, and source and
host financial risk rating). We also control for country and time fixed eﬀects.
The dependent variable in all the flow (gravity) equations is the log of the
FDI flows.
    The main variables we employ are: (1) standard country characteris-
tics such as real GDP per-capita, population size, educational attainment
(as measured by average years of schooling), and financial risk rating; (2)
(s, h) source-host characteristics, such as (s, h) FDI flows, geographical dis-
tance, common language (zero-one variable); (3) productivity, i.e., output
per worker as measured by PPP-adjusted real GDP per worker. Table 1
summarizes the data sources. Table 2 describes the list of the 62 countries
in the sample, and indicates for each country, as a source or a host, whether
positive bilateral flows are observed in the sample, at least once. Note that
most source countries do not interact more than with few host countries.
    FDI data are drawn from the International Direct Investment database
(Source OECD), covering the bilateral FDI flows among 62 countries (29
OECD countries and 33 Non-OECD countries) over the period 1987 to 2000.
The Source OECD provides FDI in U.S. dollars and we deflate it by the U.S.
CPI for urban consumers.



5     Empirical Evidence
Our economic approach is based on Razin, Rubinstein and Sadka (2004),
where attention is paid to the problems that arise when FDI flows are


                                      13
”lumpy”: FDI flows are actually observed only when their profitability ex-
ceeds a certain (unobserved) threshold. There are indeed around 62% host-
source pairs for which no FDI flows appear in our data. This probably
indicates that the FDI flows called for by the standard marginal produc-
tivity conditions are not large enough to surpass a certain threshold level,
rather than that the desired flows, in the absence of a threshold, are actually
zero. Therefore, the Heckman selection method is adopted to jointly estimate
the likelihood of surpassing this threshold (the ”selection” equation) and the
magnitude of the FDI flow, provided that the threshold is indeed surpassed
                             7
(the ”flow” equation).
       We jointly estimate the maximum likelihood of the flow (gravity) equation
and the selection equation. We estimate the model under several alternative
assumptions concerning the missing observations on non OECD FDI out-
flows to non OECD countries: we ignore these observations and alternatively
we treat them as “zeros”.8 We also use two alternatives for the data smooth-
ing: (1) unfiltered annual data, and (2) two-year averages. In addition, we
present the estimation with and without instrumenting the potentially en-
dogenous output per worker variable. The estimation results are presented
in Tables 3-7.
   7
       The traditional Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) methods treat the no-flow observations
as either literally indicating zero flows, and assign a value of zero for the FDI in these
observations, or discard these observations altogether. In both cases the OLS estimates
are biased.
   8
     The Source OECD dataset reports FDI outflows from OECD countries to OECD
and non OECD countries, as well as FDI outflows from non OECD countries to OECD
countries. However, it does not report FDI outflows from non OECD to non OECD
countries.


                                             14
       Table 3 presents the estimation of the equations for bilateral FDI flow and
selection (ignoring missing observations on non OECD to non OECD out-
flows, and using annual data).The eﬀect of the education variable, namely the
source-host diﬀerence in education levels, on the extensive margin (selection)
is significant and negative, but not so on the intensive margin (flow), across
diﬀerent alternative versions of the productivity variable. Host-country fi-
nancial risk ratings is important in all models; but we find no evidence for the
importance of the source on bilateral FDI flows, neither on the intensive or
extensive margins.9 Host GDP per capita is important in the intensive mar-
gin only. As expected, and consistent with previous ”gravity” literature, we
find that common language raises, and distance reduces the volume of FDI
flows. Host population size has a significant coeﬃcient in the flow equation
but not in the selection equation. Source population size is insignificant in
either equation. The existence of past FDI relations is positive and signif-
icant in the selection equation, as it may help to reduce the setup costs of
establishing a new FDI flow. Most importantly as a ”smoking gun” for the
existence of fixed costs in the data, we note that:the correlation between the
error terms in the flow and the selection equations is negative and significant.

       We turn now to the variables at the focus of the investigation, output per
worker. In Panel A the host output per worker has a positive eﬀect on the
intensive margin and negative eﬀect on the extensive margin. Both coeﬃ-
cients are significant. Source-country output per worker has a negative and
significant eﬀect on the extensive margin, but has no significant eﬀect on the
   9
       The financial risk rating ranges from 0 to 100, with higher index implying lower
financial risk.


                                           15
intensive margin. In Panel B, with the productivity variables instrumented
by capital per worker and education attainment, the host output per worker
still significantly aﬀects the extensive margin but is now insignificant in the
flow equation. The source instrumented output per worker negatively aﬀects
both the intensive and the extensive margins. The past FDI dummy is used
as an exclusion restriction variable. The positive coeﬃcient is interpreted
as an indication for a lower threshold barrier for pairs of countries that had
positive FDI flows in the past.
       In Table 4 we present the estimation of the equation for bilateral FDI flow
and selection (ignoring missing observations on non OECD to non OECD
outflows, and 2 year averages to smooth the data). In Table 5 we present
the estimation of the equations for bilateral FDI flows and selection (treating
missing observations on non OECD to non OECD outflows as ”zeros” ). In
Table 6, likewise, we present the estimation of the equations for bilateral
FDI flow and selection (treating missing observations on non OECD to non
OECD outflows as ”zeros”, and smoothed data ). Results are broadly similar
to Table 3, and provide evidence consistent with the key hypotheses about
the conflicting eﬀects of productivity changes.10
       Note that the relationship in the selection equation between the prob-
ability (P ) of making a new FDI and the explanatory variables (including
productivity) is not linear. It is rather given by
  10
       Table 7 describes the auxiliary equation from which we derive the instrumented output
per worker variable.




                                              16
                                     Z H
                                   α+βprod

                    P (prodH ) =             (2π)−1/2 exp(−y 2 /2)dy,              (13)
                                     −∞

where α represents the eﬀect of all the other explanatory variables (held
fixed at their sample averages), including country and time fixed eﬀects,
and β is the coeﬃcient of prodH (output per worker in host country) in
the selection equation. Note also that the estimate of β is negative and
statistically significant. The marginal eﬀect of prodH on P is


              ∂P/∂prodH = β(2π)−1/2 exp[−(α + βprodH )2 /2] < 0.11                 (14)

      Moreover, the expected value of FDI flow is

           E [F DI] = P (prodH ) exp(δ + γprodH ) + (1 − P (prodH )) · 0           (15)

where δ represents the eﬀect of all the other explanatory variables (held
fixed at their sample averages), and γ is the coeﬃcient of prodH in the flow
equation. Note that we use exp(δ + γprodH ) for the observed FDI flow in
that our dependent variable in the flow equation is the log of FDI. Therefore,
the marginal eﬀect of prodH on expected bilateral FDI flows, normalized by
exp(δ + γprodH )P (prodH ), is:


                    1             dE [F DI]      dP (prodH )
                                            =                  +γ                  (16)
        exp(δ + γprodH )P (prodH ) dprodH     P (prodH )dprodH
                                 dP (prodH )
      The first component,    P (prodH )dprodH
                                               ,   is negative, while the second compo-
nent, γ, is positive (see Panel A in Table 3). The net eﬀect depends on which
 11
      To complete the picture, note also that P (prod) has an inflection point at prod =
−α/β.

                                             17
component is the dominant force. Figure 1 depicts this normalized marginal
eﬀect for the U.S. as a source country, with all variables except prodH fixed
at their sample average (based on Panel A in Table 3). Figure 1 clearly shows
that as productivity increases, its marginal impact decreases nonlinearly.12
Expected FDI flows decline in the level of host country productivity .That
is, holding constant US productivity as a source country, the eﬀect of an in-
crease in the host country productivity depends crucially on the initial value
of the productivity parameter.



6       Conclusion
The paper is motivated by the well-known fact that most of FDI occurs
between a handful of countries. That is, bilateral FDI flows between most
countries is in fact zero. The theoretical model highlights a possible channel
through which zeroes might be common in the data. The FDI flow mechanism
works as follows. A comparative advantage for the source country is based
on low setup costs of direct investment, relative to setup costs of domestic
investors. This allows foreign investors to bid up for investment projects in
the host country. An exogenous productivity shock in the host country may
aﬀect the decision of the FDI investors whether to invest at all, and how
much to invest, in opposite directions. For instance, a positive productiv-
ity shock, ceteris paribus, improves both marginal and total profitability of
new investment. But, it also raises the demand for labor and consequently
wages. The rise in wages, in turn, mitigates the initial rise in the marginal
 12
      In our data sample, output per worker in host countries ranges from 2.45 to 86.6.



                                            18
profitability and in the total profitability of the new investment, through its
adverse eﬀect on variable costs. However, the increase in wage costs does
not completely oﬀset the initial rise in the marginal and total productivity
of new investments. As a result, the positive productivity shock implies a
net rise in the marginal profitability of new investment. This may not be the
case with total profitability. It is adversely aﬀected by the rise in wages not
only through the increase in the variable costs, but also through the increase
in the wage bill associated with setup costs. Hence, it may well be the case
that a positive productivity shock increases the marginal productivity and
lowers the total profitability of new investments, at the same time.
   The concrete prediction that we take to the data is about the conflicting
eﬀects of productivity changes on FDI flows: A positive productivity shock in
the host country typically increases the volume of the desired FDI flows to the
host country, through the standard marginal profitability eﬀect. But, at the
same time, the same shock may lower the likelihood of making any new FDI
flows by the source country, through a total profitability eﬀect, derived from
the a general-equilibrium increase in wages and other input prices. Using a
sample of 62 OECD and Non-OECD countries, over the period 1987-2000, we
provide supporting evidence for the existence of such eﬀects of productivity
changes on bilateral FDI flow and the selection equations. That is, the
empirical findings is that productivity would aﬀect the aggregate flows of
FDI in one way and the likelihood of positive FDI flows in another.
   Finally, we mention a potential caveat. The predictions from the model
with fixed costs are predictions related to investment in capacity, but the
FDI flow data captures financial flows associated with such investment. A


                                      19
fraction of FDI investment is often financed in an aﬃliate’s host country,
coming from host country sources. To the extent that this fraction is not
correlated with the productivity shocks, the empirical predictions though
are not biased.




References
 [1] Amiti, Mary (1998), ”Inter-Industry Trade in Manufactures: Does
    Country Size Matter?”, Journal of International Economics.

 [2] Broner, Fernando, A., Guido Lorenzoni, and Sergio L. Schmukler (2003),
    ”Why Do Emerging Markets Borrow Short Term?” Princeton University,
    http://www.princeton.edu/~guido/shortterm.pdf, July.

 [3] Caballero, Ricardo and Eduardo Engel (1999), ”Explaining Invest-
    ment Dynamics in US Manufacturing: A Generalized (S;s) Approach,”
    Econometrica, July, 741-82.

 [4] __________________ (2000), ”Lumpy Adjustment and Ag-
    gregate Investment Equations: A ”Simple” Approach Relying on Cash
    Flow ”Information,” mimeo.

 [5] Carr, David L., Markusen, James R. and Keith E. Maskus (2001), “Esti-
    mating the Knowledge-Capital Model of the Multinational Enterprise,”
    American-Economic-Review. 91(3): 693-708.

 [6] Cecchini, Paolo (1988), The European Challenge 1992: The Ben-
    efits of a Single Market, ”The Cecchhini Report”, Wilwood House.

                                    20
 [7] Eaton, Jonathan, and Akiko Tamura (1994), ”Bi-lateralism and Region-
    alism in Japanese and U.S. Trade and Direct Foreign Investment,” The
    Journal of The Japanese and International Economies, Vol. 8,
    pp.478-510.

 [8] Eichengreen, Barry, and Douglas Irwin, (1998), ”The Role of History in
    Bilateral Trade Flows,” in Jeﬀrey Frankel (ed.), The Regionalization
    of the World Economy, (Chicago and London: University of Chicago
    Press).

 [9] Ghironi, Fabio and Marc J. Melitz (2004), ”International Trade and
    Macroeconomic Dynamics with Heterogenous Firms,” NBER Working
    Paper 10540.

[10] Heckman, James, J. (1979), “Sample Selection Bias as a Specification
    Error”, Econometrica 42: 153-168.

[11] Helpman, Elhanan, Mark Melitz, and Steve Yeaple (2004), ”Exports vs
    FDI with Heterogeneous Firms,” American Economic Review, 94
    (1):

[12] Helpman, Elhanan, Mark Melitz, and Yona Rubinstein. (2004), “Trad-
    ing Partners and Trading Volumes,” Harvard University, 2004.

[13] Kyriazidou, Ekaterini (1996), “Estimation of a Panel Data Sample Se-
    lection Model,” Econometrica 65 (6): 1335-1364.

[14] Loungani, Prakash, Ashoka Mody, and Assaf Razin (2002), “The Global
    Disconnect: The Role of Transactional Distance and Scale Economies


                                    21
    in Gravity Equations,” Scottish Journal of Political Economy, 49
    (5): 526-543.

[15] Lucas, Robert E. (1990), ”Why Doesn’t Capital Flow from Rich to
    Poor Countries?”, American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings,
    80(2), 92-96.

[16] Melitz, Marc, J. (2003), ”The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Real-
    locations and Aggregate Industry Productivity,” Econometrica, 71(6),
    pp. 1695-1725.

[17] Obstfeld, Maurice and Alan M. Taylor (2003), “Globalization and Cap-
    ital Markets,” in Bordo, Michael D., Alan M. Taylor, and Jeﬀrey G.
    Williamson (editors), Globalization in Historical Perspective, University
    of Chicago Press.

[18] Razin, Assaf, Efraim Sadka, and Tarek Coury (2003), ”Trade Open-
    ness, Investment Instability, and Terms-of-Trade Volatility,” Journal
    of International Economics, 59 (2):       .

[19] Razin, Assaf, Yona Rubinstein, and Efraim Sadka (2003),         ”Which
    Countries Export FDI, and How Much?”, NBER Working Paper No.
    10145, December.

[20] Santos Silva, J. M. C., and Tenreyro Silvana (2003), ”Gravity-defying
    trade,” Working Papers 03-1, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.

[21] Smanzyska, Beata K. and Shang-Jin Wei (2001), ”Corruption and Cross-
    Border Investment,” NBER Working Paper 8465.


                                    22
[22] Stopler, Wolfgang and Paul A. Samuelson (1941), ”Protection and Real
    Wages,” The Review of Economic Studies, 9: 56-73.

[23] Tinbergen, Jan (1962), The World Economy.: Suggestions for an
    International Economic Policy. New York, NY: Twentieth Century
    Fund.

[24] Tobin, J. (1958), ”Estimation of Relationships for Limited Dependent
    Variables”, Econometrica 26, 24-36.

[25] Zhang, Kevin Honglin and Markusen, James R. “Vertical Multinationals
    and Host- Country Characteristics.” Journal of Development Eco-
    nomics, August 1999, 59 (2), pp.




                                   23
6.0.1   Appendix A: Partial Equilibrium Eﬀect of A Productivity
        Shock on FDI

For a fixed wage rate wH , it follows from equation (8), for the case of positive
FDI flows, that
                           ∂(F DI)   ∂V + ∂K +
                                   =     +     .                            (A1)
                            ∂AH      ∂AH   ∂AH
Using the envelope theorem, it follows from equation (1) that
                             ∂V +   F (K, L)
                                  =          > 0.                           (A2)
                             ∂AH     1+r
   Total diﬀerentiation of equations (2) and (3) with respect to AH (while
still maintaining wH constant) yields:
                      ∂K +    −FK FLL + FL FKL
                           =                2
                                                 >0                         (A3)
                      ∂AH    AH (FKK FLL − FKL )
and
                      ∂L+   −FL FKK + FK FKL
                          =                2
                                                > 0,                        (A4)
                      ∂A    AH (FKK FLL − FKL )
In equations (A3) and (A4) we assume that capital and labor are substitute
to each other in the production function, namely that FKL > 0. (Recall also
                2
that FKK FLL − FKL > 0, FKK < 0, and FLL < 0, by the concavity of F .)
Equations (A1) - (A3) imply that ∂(F DI)/∂AH > 0.
   Thus, for a given wH , an increase in AH raises FDI, and K + and V + .
   However, when new investment is made, equation (A4) implies that a rise
in AH increases the demand for labor. When no new investment is made, it
follows from equation (4), for a given wH , that
                             ∂L−     FL
                                 =−      > 0.
                             ∂AH    AFLL
Thus, the demand for labor rises in this case as well.

                                       24
6.1    Appendix B: Firm-Level Heterogeneity

Consider a pair of countries, "host" and "source", in a world of free capital
mobility which fixes the world rate of interest, denoted by r. We will now
describe the host country, whose economic variables will be subscripted by
"H". The description of the source country is similar with a subscript "S".
Variables with neither H nor S subscript are identical for the two countries.
There is a representative industry whose product serves both for consumption
and investment. For simplicity suppose that existing firms will last for two
periods. In the first period there exists a continuum of NH firms which diﬀer
from each other by a productivity index ε. We refer to a firm which has a
productivity index of ε as an ε−firm. The cumulative distribution function
of ε is denoted by G(.), with a density function g(.).
   We assume for simplicity that the initial net capital stock of each firm is
                           0
the same and denote it by KH . If an ε−firm invests I in the first period, it
                                   0
augments its capital stock to K = KH + I, and its gross output in the second
period will be AH F (K, L)(1 + ε), where L is the labor input (in eﬀective
units) and AH is a country (H) - specific productivity parameter. Note that
ε is firm-specific, whereas AH is country-specific.
   We assume that there exists a fixed setup cost of investment, CH , which
is the same for all firms (that is, independent of ε). We assume that, due to
some (suppressed) fixed factor, F is strictly concave, exhibiting diminishing
returns to scale in K and L. Note that the average cost curve of the firm is U-
shaped, so that perfect competition, which we assume, can prevail. Consider
                                                                   0
an ε-firm which does invest in the first period an amount I = K − KH in


                                      25
order to augment its stock of capital to K. Its present value becomes:


                                             ½                                               ¾
    +               0                            AH F (K, L)(1 + ε) − wL + K         0
V       (AH , CH , KH , ε, wH )   = max                                      − (K − KH + CH ) ,
                                    (K,L)                    1+r
                                                                                  ((B1))
where we assume for notational simplicity that capital does not depreciate.
        The demands of such a firm for K and L are denoted by K + (AH , ε, wH )
and L+ (AH , ε, wH ). They are given by the marginal productivity conditions:


                                    AH FK (K, L)(1 + ε) = r,                          ((B2))

and


                                   AH FL (K, L)(1 + ε) = wH ,                         ((B3))

where FK and FL denote the partial derivatives of F with respect to K and
L, respectively. We assume that ε is bounded away from -1 by some ε > −1,
so that K + (AH , ε, wH ) > KH
                             O
                               for all ε.
        Note, however, that an ε-firm may chose not to invest at all [that is, to
                                         O
stick to its existing stock of capital (KH )] and avoid the lumpy setup cost
CH . Naturally, a firm with a low ε may not find it worthwhile to incur the
setup cost CH . In this case, its present value is:


                                         ½          0                       0
                                                                                ¾
        −          0                         AH F (KH , L)(1 + ε) − wH L + KH
    V       (AH , KH , ε, wH )   = max                                              . ((B4))
                                   L                       1+r

The labor demand of such firm, denoted by L− (AH , KH
                                                    O
                                                      , ε, wH ), is defined
by:


                                                    26
                                           O
                                   AH FL (KH , L)(1 + ε) = wH .                            ((B5))

     It is straightforward to show that (∂V + /∂ε) − (∂V − /∂ε) > 0 (see Appen-
dix 2B). Therefore, there exists a cutoﬀ level of ε, denoted by ε0 , such that an
ε-firm will make a new investment, if ε > ε0 . This cutoﬀ level of ε depends
              0                                                   0
on AH , CH , KH , and wH . We write the cutoﬀ ε as ε0 (AH , CH , KH , wH ). It is
defined implicitly by:


                  V + (AH , CH , KH
                                  0
                                    , ε0 , wH ) = V − (AH , KH
                                                             0
                                                               , ε0 , wH ).                ((B6))

     We assume that labor is confined within national borders. Denoting the
country’s endowment of labor in eﬀective units by L̃0H , we have the following
labor market-clearing equation:

                  0 ,w )
     ε0 (AH ,CH ,KH
            Z         H                                                 Zε̄
                             −          0
NH                         L     (AH , KH , ε, wH )g(ε)dε +NH                         L+ (AH , ε, wH )g(ε)dε = L̃0H ,
             ε                                                               0 ,w )
                                                                ε0 (AH ,CH ,KH   H

                                                                                           ((B7))
where ε̄ is the upper productivity level. Dividing the latter equation through
by NH , yields:

ε0 (AH ,C    0
        ZH ,KH ,wH )                                         Zε̄
                       −          0
                   L       (AH , KH , ε, wH )g(ε)dε+                       L+ (AH , ε, wH )g(ε)dε = L0H ,
        ε                                                         0 ,w )
                                                     ε0 (AH ,CH ,KH   H

                                                                                           ((B8))
where L0H ≡ L̃0H /NH is the eﬀective labor per firm.
     Note that so similar market-clearing equation is specified for capital, be-
cause we assume that capital is freely mobile internationally, and its rate of

                                                27
return is equalized internationally. The same description with the subscript
"S" replacing "H" holds for the source country.
       Note that diﬀerences in labor abundance between the two countries are
manifested in the wage diﬀerences. To see this, suppose that the two countries
are identical, except that eﬀective labor per firm is more abundant in the host
country than in the source country, that is: L0H > L0S . If wages were equal in
the two countries, then eﬀective labor demand per firm were equal and the
market-clearing condition [equation (B.8)] could not hold for both countries.
Because of the diminishing marginal product of labor, it follows that the
wage in the relatively labor-abundant country is lower than in the relatively
labor-scarce country, that is: wH < wS 13 . Thus, equal returns to capital
(through capital mobility coexist with unequal wages, as in Lucas (1990)14 .
       One may think of FDI as the investment of source-country entrepreneurs
in the acquisition of host-country firms. Suppose that the source-country
entrepreneurs are endowed with some "intangible" capital, or known-how,
stemming from their specialization or expertise in the industry at hand. We
model this comparative advantage by assuming that the setup cost of in-
vestment in the host country, when investment is done by source-country
                                       ∗
entrepreneurs (FDI investors) is only CH , which is below CH (the setup cost
of investment when carried out by the host country direct investors). One
  13
       The equilibrium wage gap implies that the host country employs more workers per
firm than the source country. Thus, even though the productivity distribution across firms
is assumed equal, the source country is eﬀectively more productive in equilibrium.
   14
      See also Amiti (1998) who studies the eﬀect of agglomeration on cross-regional wage
diﬀerences. See also Melitz (2003) for the role of fixed costs in intra-industry reallocations
in reaction to industry-specific productivity shocks.



                                             28
              ∗
may think of CH as the research and development cost of a new product
line which is carried out by a parent firm in the source country. This cost
advantage implies that the foreign investors can bid up the direct investors
of the host country in the purchase of the investing firms in the host country.
                                                               ∗    0
Each such firms [that is, each firm whose ε is above ε0 (AH , CH , KH , wH )] is
purchased at its market value, which is V + (AH , CH
                                                   ∗    0
                                                     , KH , ε, wH ). This essen-
tially assumes that competition among the foreign direct investors shift all
the gains from their lower setup cost to the host-country original owners of
the firm. The new owners also invest an amount K + (AH , ε, wH ) − KH
                                                                    0
                                                                      in
the firm. Thus, the amount of foreign direct investment made in an ε−firm
(where ε > ε0 ) is:



           ∗    0
F DI(AH , CH , KH , ε, wH ) = V + (AH , CH
                                         ∗    0
                                           , KH , ε, wH ) + K + (AH , ε, wH ) − KH
                                                                                 0
                                                                                   .
                                                                                  ((B9))
                                                ∗
This specification assumes that the setup cost CH is incurred in the source
country and does not therefore constitute a part of the definition of FDI.
                                  ∗
It conforms with the notion that CH represents, for instance, R&D of a new
product line carried out by the parent firm in the source country.15 Aggregate
FDI is given by
  15                         ∗
       Whether we interpret CH as being carried out in the source country or in the host
country, and accordingly whether we exclude it or include it in the definition of FDI does
not alter our qualitative results.




                                            29
                                              Zε̄
            ∗    0                                                     ∗    0
 F DI(AH , CH , KH , wH ) =                                 F DI(AH , CH , KH , ε, wH )g(ε)dε
                                              ∗ ,K 0 ,w )
                                     ε0 (AH ,CH   H    H

                                                                                      ((B10))
       Suppose first that wH is fixed. Note that it follows from equation (B.1)
that ∂V + /∂KH
             0                                                    0
               = 1, by the envelope theorem. Therefore, ∂(F DI)/∂KH = 0,
by equation (B1). Thus, the amount of FDI in a firm whose ε is above ε0
                                               0
does not depend on the initial capital stock, KH : an increase of $ 1 in the
initial stock of capital of such a firm increases the value of the firm by 1$,
but decreases the required new investment by the same amount, so that FDI
does not change16 . However, the aggregate amount of FDI diminishes, when
                               0
the initial stock of capital (KH ) rises. This is because fewer firms will make
new investment and be purchased by foreign direct investors, that is, the
                      0
cutoﬀ ε0 rises, when KH rises. To see this, diﬀerentiate equation (B10) with
            0
respect to KH to get :


            ∂F DI               ∗    0                    ∂ε0
                0
                  = −F DI(AH , CH , KH , ε0 , wH )g(ε0 )    0
                                                              < 0,                    ((B11))
             ∂KH                                         ∂KH
             ∂ε0
because     ∂KH0   > 0.
       Similarly, it follows from equation (B11) that:


               µ          ¶
  ∂F DI            ∂V +                                    ∗    0                      ∂ε0
     ∗
        =             ∗
                              [G(ε) − G(ε0 )] − F DI(AH , CH , KH , ε0 , wH )g(ε0 )      ∗
                                                                                           .
   ∂CH             ∂CH                                                                ∂CH
                                                                                      ((B12))
  16
       This is because, in the absence of a marginal adjustment cost of investment, the
marginal Tobin’s q is identically equal to one.

                                                    30
                ∂V +                                         ∂ε0
Note that       ∂CH∗   = −1, by equation (B1), and that     ∂CH∗   > 0. Hence, it follows
        ∂F DI
that       ∗
         ∂CH
                < 0.
       It also follows from equation (B10) that


        ·                    ¸
∂F DI     F (K + , L+ ) ∂K +                              ∗    0                   ∂ε0
      =                +       [G(ε) − G(ε0 )]−F DI(AH , CH , KH , ε0 , wH )g(ε0 )     > 0,
 ∂AH         1+r         ∂AH                                                       ∂AH
                                                                    ((B13))
             ∂K +              ∂ε0
because      ∂AH
                    > 0 and   ∂AH
                                     < 0.
       Thus, a lower level of the initial stock of capital in the host country
attracts more foreign direct investment. Similarly, a lower level of the setup
cost of investment in the host country for the FDI investors from the source
country promotes more FDI17 . Also, a higher country-specific productivity
factor in the host country promotes more FDI. These conclusions were drawn
under the assumption that the wage (wH ) in the host country is fixed. When
                             0          ∗
it is not fixed, then lower KH and /or CH attract more FDI and push the
wage rate upward, thereby mitigating the initial increase in FDI, but not
eliminating it altogether.
       Observe that FDI flows constitute only a fraction of the international
capital transactions between the host and source countries. In a globalized
world capital market, where the world rate of interest is given to our pair
of countries, domestic saving and domestic investment are not equal to each
other and FDI is not equal to either saving or investment.
       So far, FDI took the form of mergers or acquisitions of existing firms.
  17
       Interestingly, a decline in the setup cost aﬀects the average recorded productivity,
because the cutoﬀ ε changes. The new spectrum of investing firms is accordingly adjusted.
A similar endogenous-productivity mechanism features in Ghironi and Melitz (2004).



                                             31
Consider now the possibility of establishing a new firm (that is, a greenfield
FDI, where K 0 = 0). Suppose that the newcomer entrepreneur does not
know in advance the productivity factor (ε) of the potential firm. The en-
trepreneur therefore takes G(.) as the cumulative probability distribution
of the productivity factor of the new firm. However, we assume that ε is
revealed to the entrepreneur, before she decides whether or not to make new
investment. The expected value of the new firm is therefore:

                              Zε
                                      ©                   ª
           V (A, C, w, r) =        Max V + (A, C, ε, w), 0 g(ε)dε.      ((B14))
                              ε

Note that if K 0 is equal to zero, only the firms with an ε high enough to
justify a greenfield investment have a positive value. This explains equation
(B.14).
   Now suppose that greenfield entrepreneurship is in limited supply and
capacity. An entrepreneur in a source country (and there is a limited number
of them) may have to decide whether to establish a new firm at home (the
source country) or abroad (the host country), but not in both. Her decision is
naturally determined by where V(.), as defined in equation (B14), is higher.
She will invest in the host country rather than in the source country if, and
only if,


                                ∗
                       V (AH , CH , wH ) > V (AS , CS∗ , wS ).          ((B15))

Naturally, the lower wage rate in the host country works as a pull factor for
that country, that is, it works in the direction of satisfying condition (B.15).
Thus, the lower wage rate in the host country attracts greenfield FDI. On the


                                           32
other hand, if the total factor productivity in the source country (namely,
AS ) is higher than its counterpart in the host country (namely, AH ), this
discourages FDI. Assuming that the wage diﬀerential dominates the total
factor productivity diﬀerential, the host country attracts greenfield FDI from
the source country.
   Assuming that newcomer entrepreneurs evolve gradually over time and
that technology spillover equates total factor productivity, eventually this
process may end up with full factor price equalization. Naturally, the capital-
                     e
labor ratios and L ≡ L/N are equalized in such long-run steady state. This
all happens even though labor is not internationally mobile. The establish-
ment of new firms in the global economy may be an engine for FDI flows by
multinationals.
   Our two-country model, which generates capital flows from the source to
the host country, can be extended in a straightforward manner to explain
two-way FDI flows. By assuming more than one industry, the extension
allows two-way flows between two rich countries, when each country has a
setup cost advantage in a diﬀerent industry.




                                      33
Table 1: DATA SOURCE

Variables:                            Source:
FDI Flows                             International Direct Investment Database (OECD)
GDP                                   World Economic Indicators
Population                            World Economic Indicators
Number of Workers                     World Economic Indicators
Distance                              Andrew Rose's website: www.haas.berkeley.edu/~arose
Common Language                       Andrew Rose's website: www.haas.berkeley.edu/~arose
Education Attainment                  Barro-Lee Dataset, http://www.nber.org/pub/barro.lee/
ICRG Index of Financial Risk Rating   PRS Group
Capital Stock                         Francesco Caselli’s website: http://personal.lse.ac.uk/casellif




                                            34
Table 2: FREQUENCY OF SOURCE-HOST INTERACTIONS BY COUNTRIES


Country             Source   Host   Country                Source   Host
Algeria             0.02     0.04   Korea                  0.45     0.31
Argentina           0.16     0.37   Kuwait                 0.04     0.00
Australia           0.24     0.32   Libya                  0.02     0.02
Austria             0.42     0.19   Malaysia               0.17     0.32
Belgium             0.00     0.00   Mexico                 0.05     0.38
Brazil              0.18     0.37   Morocco                0.07     0.17
Bulgaria            0.06     0.19   Netherlands            0.52     0.34
Canada              0.22     0.23   Netherlands Antilles   0.07     0.03
Chile               0.07     0.32   New Zealand            0.16     0.19
China               0.24     0.40   Norway                 0.28     0.19
Chinese Taipei      0.24     0.29   Panama                 0.06     0.06
Colombia            0.08     0.18   Philippines            0.10     0.31
Costa Rica          0.03     0.02   Poland                 0.12     0.30
Czech Republic      0.06     0.16   Portugal               0.25     0.30
Czechoslovakia      0.02     0.02   Romania                0.07     0.20
Denmark             0.36     0.23   Russia                 0.15     0.27
Egypt               0.06     0.21   Saudi Arabia           0.07     0.06
Finland             0.38     0.18   Singapore              0.29     0.37
France              0.75     0.62   Slovak Republic        0.02     0.08
Germany             0.65     0.47   Slovenia               0.05     0.12
Greece              0.07     0.17   South Africa           0.15     0.24
Hong Kong (China)   0.34     0.37   Spain                  0.49     0.47
Hungary             0.08     0.20   Sweden                 0.42     0.28
Iceland             0.14     0.09   Switzerland            0.46     0.22
India               0.15     0.36   Thailand               0.10     0.35
Indonesia           0.12     0.30   Turkey                 0.10     0.20
Iran                0.10     0.07   Ukraine                0.05     0.13
Ireland             0.20     0.24   United Arab Emirates   0.03     0.04
Israel              0.24     0.22   United Kingdom         0.60     0.41
Italy               0.52     0.36   United States          0.63     0.47
Japan               0.64     0.32   Venezuela              0.13     0.21




                                    35
Table 3: Bilateral FDI Flows and Selection Equations
(Observations on Non-OECD to Non-OECD FDI are excluded)

                                                                                  Panel A                        Panel B
                                                                         Flow                 Selection     Flow      Selection
Host-Output per worker                                                   0.037                  -0.026
                                                                       (0.012)**              (0.010)**
Host-Instrumented output per worker                                                                         -0.020      -0.038
                                                                                                           (0.016)    (0.012)**
Source-Output per worker                                                  0.002                 -0.025
                                                                         (0.014)              (0.009)**
Source-Instrumented output per worker                                                                       -0.078     -0.023
                                                                                                          (0.016)**    (0.013)

GDP per capita - host^                                                     1.373                 0.345        2.192      0.163
                                                                       (0.345)**                (0.250)   (0.289)**     (0.218)
GDP per capita - source^                                                   1.839                 0.609        2.181      0.326
                                                                       (0.431)**               (0.276)*   (0.339)**     (0.226)
Difference between schooling (source – host)                               0.038                -0.097        0.058     -0.106
                                                                         (0.042)              (0.032)**     (0.044)   (0.034)**
Common language                                                            0.728                 0.323        0.727      0.321
                                                                       (0.066)**              (0.055)**   (0.066)**   (0.055)**
Distance (in Logs)                                                       -0.982                 -0.534       -0.984      -0.535
                                                                       (0.027)**              (0.030)**   (0.027)**   (0.030)**
Population-host^                                                         -1.536                 -0.483      -1.687      -0.303
                                                                        (0.771)*                (0.613)    (0.773)*     (0.606)
Population-source^                                                        -1.332                 0.708      -1.411       1.014
                                                                         (0.912)                (0.649)     (0.909)     (0.642)
Financial risk rating - source                                             0.003                 0.001       -0.001       0.002
                                                                         (0.007)                (0.005)     (0.007)     (0.005)
Financial risk rating - host                                               0.018                 0.013        0.011      0.011
                                                                       (0.006)**              (0.005)**     (0.006)    (0.005)*
FDI flows from i to j a year ago ( =1 if yes)                                                    1.599                   1.602
                                                                                              (0.038)**               (0.038)**
Correlation (Ui,j, Vi,j)                                                 -0.064                            -0.059
                                                                        (0.028)*                          (0.028)*
Inverse Mills ratio                                                      -0.092                            -0.084
                                                                        (0.041)*                          (0.040)*
Observations                                                             17656
Censored observations                                                    10906
Uncensored observations                                                   6750

Note: ^ in logs; Country and time fixed effects are included; Robust standard errors in parentheses;
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%



                                                                       36
Table 4: Bilateral FDI Flows and Selection Equations
(Observations on Non-OECD to Non-OECD FDI are excluded;
Two-year smoothing)

                                                                             Panel A                            Panel B
                                                                       Flow         Selection            Flow         Selection
Host-Output per worker                                                 0.032         -0.004
                                                                     (0.015)**       (0.012)
Host-Instrumented output per worker                                                                     -0.032         -0.021
                                                                                                        (0.020)        (0.018)
Source-Output per worker                                               -0.007                -0.018
                                                                      (0.016)               (0.012)
Source-Instrumented output per worker                                                                    -0.101        -0.015
                                                                                                       (0.020)**       (0.018)

GDP per capita - host^                                                 1.371                 0.216       2.234           0.260
                                                                     (0.473)**              (0.367)    (0.380)**        (0.307)
GDP per capita - source^                                               1.595                 0.291       1.771           0.041
                                                                     (0.509)**              (0.404)    (0.396)**        (0.321)
Difference between schooling (source – host)                            0.024               -0.081        0.045         -0.084
                                                                      (0.053)               (0.044)     (0.055)         (0.046)
Common language                                                        0.778                 0.299       0.779           0.298
                                                                     (0.081)**            (0.072)**    (0.081)**      (0.072)**
Distance (in Logs)                                                     -1.042               -0.591       -1.046          -0.592
                                                                     (0.034)**            (0.042)**    (0.034)**      (0.042)**
Population-host^                                                       -0.830               -1.721       -0.750         -1.729
                                                                      (0.944)              (0.858)*     (0.948)        (0.853)*
Population-source^                                                     0.375                -0.588       0.516          -0.359
                                                                      (1.096)               (0.847)     (1.097)         (0.850)
Financial risk rating - source                                         -0.009                -0.006      -0.015          -0.005
                                                                      (0.009)               (0.007)     (0.009)         (0.007)
Financial risk rating - host                                            0.013                0.014       0.004           0.012
                                                                      (0.008)              (0.007)*     (0.008)         (0.007)
FDI flows from i to j a year ago ( =1 if yes)                                                1.405                       1.406
                                                                                          (0.050)**                   (0.050)**
Correlation (Ui,j, Vi,j)                                              -0.061                            -0.056
                                                                      (0.034)                           (0.034)
Inverse Mills ratio                                                   -0.085                            -0.079
                                                                      (0.048)                           (0.047)
Observations                                                           9689
Censored observations                                                  5410
Uncensored observations                                                4279

Note: ^ in logs; Country and time fixed effects are included; Robust standard errors in parentheses;
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                                      37
Table 5: Bilateral FDI Flows and Selection Equations
(Observations on Non-OECD to Non-OECD FDI are included)

                                                                               Panel A                        Panel B
                                                                         Flow         Selection           Flow     Selection
Host-Output per worker                                                   0.037          -0.026
                                                                       (0.012)**      (0.009)**
Host-Instrumented output per worker                                                                      -0.019       -0.040
                                                                                                         (0.016)    (0.012)**
Source-Output per worker                                                  0.001               -0.023
                                                                         (0.014)            (0.009)**
Source-Instrumented output per worker                                                                     -0.078     -0.025
                                                                                                        (0.016)**   (0.012)*

GDP per capita - host^                                                    1.374                0.277       2.193       0.126
                                                                       (0.345)**              (0.228)   (0.289)**    (0.204)
GDP per capita - source^                                                  1.845                0.527       2.185       0.312
                                                                       (0.431)**             (0.257)*   (0.339)**    (0.214)
Difference between schooling (source – host)                              0.037               -0.091       0.058      -0.098
                                                                         (0.042)            (0.031)**     (0.044)   (0.033)**
Common language                                                           0.730                0.294       0.729       0.291
                                                                       (0.066)**            (0.051)**   (0.066)**   (0.051)**
Distance (in Logs)                                                       -0.986                -0.385      -0.988     -0.387
                                                                       (0.027)**            (0.023)**   (0.027)**   (0.024)**
Population-host^                                                         -1.549               -0.733      -1.698      -0.512
                                                                        (0.771)*              (0.558)    (0.773)*    (0.554)
Population-source^                                                       -1.316                0.385      -1.395       0.709
                                                                         (0.912)              (0.599)     (0.909)    (0.595)
Financial risk rating - source                                            0.003                 0.000      -0.001      0.000
                                                                         (0.007)              (0.005)     (0.007)    (0.005)
Financial risk rating - host                                              0.018                0.009       0.011       0.008
                                                                       (0.006)**              (0.005)     (0.006)    (0.005)
FDI flows from i to j a year ago ( =1 if yes)                                                  1.691                   1.694
                                                                                            (0.037)**               (0.037)**
Correlation (Ui,j, Vi,j)                                                 -0.058                          -0.052
                                                                        (0.027)*                         (0.027)
Inverse Mills ratio                                                      -0.083                          -0.075
                                                                        (0.039)*                         (0.039)
Observations                                                             21406
Censored observations                                                    14656
Uncensored observations                                                   6750

Note: ^ in logs; Country and time fixed effects are included; Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                                      38
Table 6: Bilateral FDI Flows and Selection Equations
(Observations on Non-OECD to Non-OECD FDI are included;
 Two-year smoothing)

                                                                             Panel A                            Panel B
                                                                      Flow          Selection            Flow         Selection
Host-Output per worker                                                0.032          -0.004
                                                                    (0.015)**        (0.012)
Host-Instrumented output per worker                                                                     -0.032         -0.018
                                                                                                        (0.020)        (0.017)
Source-Output per worker                                               -0.007                 -0.014
                                                                      (0.016)                (0.011)
Source-Instrumented output per worker                                                                    -0.101        -0.018
                                                                                                       (0.020)**       (0.017)

GDP per capita - host^                                                1.369                   0.103      2.233          0.155
                                                                    (0.473)**                (0.329)   (0.380)**       (0.285)
GDP per capita - source^                                              1.602                   0.194      1.773          0.062
                                                                    (0.509)**                (0.371)   (0.396)**       (0.301)
Difference between schooling (source – host)                          0.024                   -0.069      0.045         -0.069
                                                                     (0.053)                 (0.041)    (0.055)        (0.044)
Common language                                                       0.781                   0.257      0.781          0.256
                                                                    (0.081)**              (0.066)**   (0.081)**      (0.066)**
Distance (in Logs)                                                    -1.047                  -0.398     -1.050         -0.399
                                                                    (0.034)**              (0.031)**   (0.034)**      (0.031)**
Population-host^                                                      -0.851                 -2.409      -0.767         -2.354
                                                                     (0.940)               (0.781)**    (0.944)       (0.784)**
Population-source^                                                    0.385                  -0.791      0.527          -0.566
                                                                     (1.096)                 (0.776)    (1.096)        (0.786)
Financial risk rating - source                                        -0.009                  -0.007     -0.015         -0.007
                                                                     (0.009)                 (0.007)    (0.009)        (0.007)
Financial risk rating - host                                           0.013                  0.014      0.004          0.012
                                                                     (0.008)                (0.006)*    (0.008)        (0.007)
FDI flows from i to j a year ago ( =1 if yes)                                                 1.517                     1.518
                                                                                           (0.049)**                  (0.049)**
Correlation (Ui,j, Vi,j)                                              -0.050                            -0.045
                                                                      (0.033)                           (0.033)
Inverse Mills ratio                                                   -0.071                            -0.063
                                                                      (0.047)                           (0.046)
Observations                                                           11828
Censored observations                                                  7549
Uncensored observations                                                4279

Note: ^ in logs; Country and time fixed effects are included; Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                                      39
Table 7: The Instrumented Productivity Equation

Capital over labor ratio                                 2.33
                                                       (0.09)**

Years of schooling                                       0.66
                                                       (0.19)**

Observations                                             879

R-squared                                               0.99

Note: Country and time fixed effects are included;
Standard errors in parentheses; ** significant at 1%




                                                         40
                              Figure 1: The Marginal Effect of Productivity Shock on Expected Bilateral FDI Flow

                   0.04



                  0.035


                   0.03


                  0.025
Marginal Effect




                   0.02



                  0.015


                   0.01


                  0.005


                     0
                          0     10            20           30             40           50            60            70   80

                                                                 Productivity S hock




                                                                     41
