Employment Dynamics and Business Relocation:
New Evidence from the National Establishment Time Series
David Neumark, Junfu Zhang, and Brandon Wall*
November 2005

Abstract
We analyze and assess new evidence on employment dynamics from a new data source – the
National Establishment Time Series (NETS). The NETS offers advantages over existing data sources for
studying employment dynamics, including tracking business establishment relocations that can contribute
to job creation or destruction on a regional level. Our primary purpose in this paper is to assess the
reliability of the NETS data along a number of dimensions, and we conclude that it is a reliable data
source although not without limitations. We also illustrate the usefulness of the NETS data by reporting,
for California, a full decomposition of employment change into its six constituent processes, including
job creation and destruction stemming from business relocation, which has figured prominently in policy
debates but on which there has been no systematic evidence.

____________________

*

The authors are, respectively, Senior Fellow, Research Fellow, and Research Associate, Public Policy Institute of
California. Neumark is also Research Associate at the NBER and Research Fellow at IZA. We are grateful to Don
Walls and seminar participants at PPIC, the NBER Summer Institute, and the 4th Annual IZA/SOLE Transatlantic
Meetings of Labor Economists for helpful comments. Any views expressed are those of the authors alone, and not
of the Public Policy Institute of California.

1. Introduction
Employment growth is a major goal of economic policy at both the national and regional levels.
Changes in employment are driven by job creation and job destruction, which in turn are made up of six
dynamic processes including the birth, death, growth, contraction, and relocation of business
establishments. This “demographic” characterization of business establishment and employment
dynamics emphasizes that employment change in an economy is the net result of six influences – three
that create jobs (births, expansion, and in-migration) and three that destroy jobs (deaths, contractions, and
out-migration). Ultimately, we need to understand all six of these dynamic processes to characterize
employment change in an economy, and to identify the job creation and destruction processes on which it
might be most productive for policymakers to focus in encouraging employment growth.1 Moreover, the
fact that employment change is the net result of potentially large gross changes – for example, overall
expansion of jobs at existing establishments and overall contraction of jobs at other existing
establishments – suggests that what often appear as relatively moderate overall changes in employment
over time may mask potentially volatile gross job flows. This implies that relatively small changes in any
of the gross flows can lead to sharp changes in net job growth.
But tracking a large population of business establishments across time and space, including
births, deaths, and relocations, is difficult and costly, and thus data have not been available with which to
fully capture the underlying processes of employment dynamics. Primarily for this reason, although the
importance of understanding the job creation-destruction process has long been widely recognized (e.g.,
Schumpeter, 1942, Chapter 7), systematic empirical research on this topic did not start until quite recently
as researchers began to develop appropriate data sources. But this research has continued to face
significant limitations imposed by the data.
In this paper we help introduce a new data source – the National Establishment Time Series
(NETS) – which we believe is the first data set that permits a full decomposition of the sources of
____________________

1

Strictly speaking, whenever we refer to “employment” measured at the establishment level, we should refer to
“jobs,” because workers can have jobs with more than one employer. But since “job change” usually conveys a
different meaning than “employment change,” we usually refer to employment instead.

1

employment change in regions of the U.S. economy, and which offers other advantages relative to
existing data sources. Our primary emphasis is on assessing the reliability of the NETS data along
numerous dimensions. We provide this detailed assessment because the NETS data should prove useful
to researchers in many fields, but it is a new data source of unknown quality, and we know that there are
inherent difficulties in tracking business establishments – especially new establishments and those that
relocate. In general, we conclude that the NETS is a reliable data source although not without limitations,
and we provide some guidance on its use. We also illustrate the usefulness of the NETS by using data for
the entire state of California to fully decompose employment change into its six constituent processes,
documenting the importance of each in contributing to employment change and its volatility. Because a
principal advantage of the NETS data is the tracking of business establishment relocations, we focus on
the role of relocation in employment dynamics. This analysis contributes hard evidence to a policy
debate over business relocation that has been entirely speculative and reliant upon anecdotal evidence.
2. The NETS Database
2.1 Overview
The NETS database is a new longitudinal file based on recent D&B data. It is a long-term project
of Walls & Associates in conjunction with Dun and Bradstreet (D&B). We currently have access to an
extract of this data set that covers all business establishments that were ever located in California between
1989 and 2002, and their respective parent headquarters (regardless of location).2,3
The version of the NETS database that we use begins with 14 cross-sectional files of the full Data
Universal Numbering System (DUNS) Marketing Information (DMI) file for each year from 1990
through 2003, each of which covers the previous year. From here on, we refer to the year covered by the
data, i.e., 1989-2002 for the full sample period. The primary purpose of D&B’s data collection effort is to
____________________

2

An observation in the NETS data is an “establishment.” An establishment is a business or industrial unit at a
single physical location that produces or distributes goods or performs services, for example, a single store or
factory. Many firms own or control more than one establishment, and those establishments may be located in
different geographic areas and may be engaged in different industries. We will sometimes refer to an establishment
as a “business,” reserving the word “firm” to refer to what may be collections of many establishments. While the
NETS database is based on information collected at the establishment level, it also uses the Data Universal
Numbering System (DUNS) to indicate the relationships among establishments in multi-establishment firms.
3
Data are available for the entire country, but cost precluded purchasing the entire file.

2

provide information on businesses to the business community, in order to enhance their decision-making
by constructing a set of “predictive indicators” (e.g., the D&B Rating and PayDex scores), and for
marketing purposes. The DMI file for each year is constructed from an ongoing effort to capture each
business establishment in the United States in each year (including nonprofits and the public sector). The
DMI file is based on a multi-layered process incorporating many data sources.
D&B strives to identify and assemble information on all business establishments, through a
massive data collection effort, including over 100 million telephone calls from four calling centers each
year, as well as obtaining information from legal and court filings, newspapers and electronic news
services, public utilities, all U.S. Secretaries of State, government registries and licensing data, payment
and collections information, company filings and news reports, and the U.S. Postal Service.4 Particular
efforts are devoted to identifying the births and deaths of establishments. For every establishment
identified, D&B assigns a DUNS number as a means of tracking the establishment. It should be pointed
out that since around 1990, the DUNS has become the standard means of tracking businesses, having
been adopted by many government agencies in the United States and internationally.5
Although the goal of D&B is not to collect and organize data for scholarly research, it does have
an incentive to ensure the accuracy of its data, because inaccuracies would hurt D&B’s business and
might even result in lawsuits. D&B has established a sophisticated quality control system and engages in
extensive quality and consistency checks.6 Thus, the data in each cross-section should provide high
quality “snapshots” of business establishments.
Walls & Associates entered into a collaboration with D&B with a very different purpose –
namely, to provide a dynamic view of the U.S. economy using the data from the D&B archives (Walls &
Associates, 2003). This requires linking the D&B cross-sections into a longitudinal file that tracks every
establishment from its birth, through any physical moves it may make, capturing any changes of
ownership, and recording the establishment’s death if it occurs. This is a multi-stage process, the most
____________________

4

See http://mddi.dnb.com/mddi/story.aspx (viewed on April 28, 2005). The information from the U.S. Postal
Service includes the National Change of Address database of all changes of address in the United States.
5
See, for example, http://www.dnb.co.in/whoduns.htm (viewed on May 11, 2005).
6
See http://www.dnb.com/us/about/db_database/dnbinfoquality.html (viewed on April 28, 2005).

3

important steps of which include merging the data files, imputing data when data are not reported,7
eliminating duplicate records, merging records on establishments for which the DUNS number changes
(which happens occasionally) yet which appear to cover the same establishment, and identifying
establishment relocations.
The resulting NETS database includes the following variables that are of particular importance to
this research: current business name; current establishment location (zip codes including the 4-digit
extension); FIPS county codes in each year; type of location (single location, headquarters, branch) in
each year; employment in each year; Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) codes at the 8-digit level in
each year; and, if the establishment has ever moved, the year of movement, origin zip code, origin city,
origin state, destination zip code, destination city, and destination state.8
One highly desirable feature of the NETS database is that it covers essentially all establishments.
This reflects the fact that it is designed to capture the universe rather than a sample of establishments.
Over the sample period of 1989-2002, the database includes information each year on between 1.2 and
1.8 million establishments in California providing about 15 million to 18 million jobs. In total, more than
3.5 million establishments are covered in our extract of the NETS database.
As the preceding discussion indicates, the data construction effort – including both the crosssectional files and the longitudinal linking that tracks establishments over time – is a massive and
complicated one. For this reason, we have undertaken a good deal of investigation to document and
examine the quality of the NETS data in order to assess their reliability, potential limitations, and how
these limitations might affect results of various analyses.
2.2 Classification of relocations, births, and deaths
A central question for using the NETS data to calculate decompositions of employment change
into its constituent processes is how D&B distinguishes whether an establishment at a new location
previously existed elsewhere – and hence will be labeled a relocation in the longitudinal file – or instead
____________________

7

The file indicates when data are imputed.
Full names and addresses for each establishment in each year are also available, but were not included in our
extract because this additional information adds considerably to the cost.
8

4

is a new establishment. Clearly the correct classification of relocations is critically important in
estimating the contributions of births, deaths, and business relocation to job creation and destruction.
In thinking about classifying relocations, a key point is the centrality of the DUNS number to
D&B’s data system. It is the DUNS number, after all, that allows D&B to attach information on credit
histories and marketing databases, which is what its clients value. Consequently, DUNS numbers are
unique, and D&B never recycles numbers. If an establishment closes, its DUNS number goes into an
“out of business or inactive” file, where it remains permanently unless that business reopens. Each time
D&B updates establishment information, it attempts to contact the establishment based on the previous
location information on the establishment. Moves can be indicated in a number of ways. Frequently
there is a forwarding address or telephone number, or continuing email contact that allows D&B to
identify a new location. (In addition, business establishments sometimes notify D&B of their move.)
Most important, any establishment that cannot be contacted at the previous year’s address or telephone
number also goes into the “out of business or inactive” file, and before any “new” establishment can be
given a DUNS number, it must be checked against this file, and if there are indications of a match,
follow-up investigation is undertaken. For example, if an establishment belonging to a multi-unit firm
cannot be found, D&B contacts the headquarters to determine whether a relocation has occurred. In any
case in which D&B finds that the establishment previously existed elsewhere, it assigns its existing
DUNS number. Finally, if a new establishment is identified whose characteristics do not match those of
an existing establishment, D&B contacts the establishment to verify its start date, and assigns a new
DUNS number. With these procedures, the longitudinal file should correctly identify relocations of
establishments and distinguish them from births of new establishments (and deaths of others), although of
course one cannot rule out the possibility of occasional errors of a move being classified as a death in one
location and a birth in another, which would lead to an undercount of relocating establishments.9 As a
consequence, in our assessment of the NETS data we focus in part on accurate identification of relocating
establishments.
____________________

9

Most of the information in this paragraph was supplied by Don Walls and confirmed by him with D&B (personal
communications, May and July, 2005).

5

An establishment relocation in the NETS data is identified by street address and zip code changes
from one year to another. Both establishments that moved out of California and establishments that
moved into California are included in the database, so we are able to track cross-state relocation.
However, there are some limits to what this form of relocation can tell us about the dynamics of
employment change, as other types of changes in employment might be viewed as sharing features of
establishment relocation, or reflecting the same forces that drive relocation. First, if a California company
sets up an establishment in another state, that establishment does not show up in our data set. That is, we
can study establishments that “move out” but not those that “branch out.” The latter should not be
regarded as equivalent to the former because branching out does not necessarily occur at the cost of
creating an additional establishment within the state. Second, the NETS database only tracks physical
establishment relocation. There are several other types of relocation that it does not capture by design.
For instance, it does not allow us to determine when specific jobs or positions are shifted between two
discrete locations of the same firm. This type of relocation, which also constitutes a relocation of jobs
between establishments, will be observed in our data set as employment expansion at one establishment
and contraction at another. Also, relocations that involve the consolidation of activities at two or more
locations into a single location will often be missed, and will be reflected in one establishment growing
and another closing. Despite these caveats, the NETS database enables empirical research that represents
a significant step towards understanding the role of business relocation in job creation and destruction,
especially given that the policy debate frequently refers to physical relocations of business establishments.
3. Data Sources for Studying Employment Dynamics
The NETS is not the first data set with which researchers can study employment dynamics, nor is
this the first project to attempt to study this question using data from D&B. However, other data sources
present important limitations in studying employment dynamics, and previous work using earlier D&B
files has been criticized. In this section we review some of this past research and alternative data sources.

6

3.1 Early Dun & Bradstreet data
The original work on job creation and destruction was done by Birch (1979, 1981, and 1987) and
Allaman and Birch (1975), relying on data collected by D&B. A brief review of the earlier research
evaluating these data is helpful in framing some of the questions we consider in studying the NETS,
although clearly the more recent data have to be assessed anew, given dramatic changes in information
technology.10
Davis, et al. (1996) raise two main criticisms of the D&B data used by Birch and Allaman. First,
the D&B data appear to overstate total employment as measured by the Bureau of Labor Statistics or the
Census. Note, though, that the two main measures of overall employment in the U.S. economy – the
Current Population Survey (CPS) household survey and the Current Employment Statistics (CES) payroll
survey – also frequently have large and persistent discrepancies and often show quite different trends.11
There are well-understood explanations of some of the differences between these two surveys, such as the
payroll survey excluding the self-employed. The point, however, is that the measurement of employment
is complex, and treating one measurement as 100% correct, and another that differs as obviously wrong,
is overly simplistic. Below, we discuss differences in alternative measures of employment levels using
the CPS, the CES, and the NETS, to try to shed additional light on these measurement issues.
Second, Davis, et al., discuss evidence indicating that the D&B data files used by Birch tracked
new businesses poorly, failing to identify over 95% of new businesses identified from other sources
(Birley, 1984; Aldrich, et al., 1989).12 These findings should be interpreted cautiously. Birley’s study is
____________________

10

The most significant claim emanating from Birch’s research was that small firms are the most important source of
job creation in the U.S. economy, a claim re-examined by a large body of research (see, for example, Leonard, 1987;
Kirchhoff and Phillips, 1988; Fumagalli and Mussati, 1993; Baldwin and Picot, 1995; Davis, et al., 1996; Broersma
and Gautier, 1997; and Davidsson, et al., 1998). The second conclusion of Birch and Allaman’s work – which is
more relevant to some of the empirical work presented in this paper – is that, looking at the four Census regions,
business relocation plays a minor role in employment change. While in- and out-migration would be expected to
play a larger role for more disaggregated regions (such as states), this conclusion foreshadows some of our findings
on the importance of business relocation in California. But given changes in both the economy and in data
collection, there is clearly a need for updated evidence on this question, especially because current policy debates (at
least in California, which we have studied) place great emphasis on business relocation but rely solely on anecdotal
evidence.
11
See, e.g., U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2004).
12
In contrast, Bednarzik (2000) claims – although he does not provide evidence – that the D&B data overstate
openings and closings.

7

based on a comparison of new businesses captured in the ES-202 data, the D&B data, and telephone
directories, restricted to St. Joseph County, Indiana.13 She begins with new businesses identified in the
ES-202 data, and then takes the subset of these also found in the telephone directories (77% of the total).
She finds, however, that the D&B files only capture 12% of the new businesses identified from the ES202 data.14
Aldrich, et al. (1989) compare ES-202 data, the D&B data, and an enumeration method based on
a physical census and phonebooks. They find that the enumeration method appears to work considerably
better, in the sense that it captures far more new businesses than either of the other methods. But in
contrast to Birley’s results, the D&B data and the ES-202 data have about the same overlap with the
enumeration data, each capturing 1/3 of the cases captured by the enumeration method. But the
enumeration method captured far more new businesses – 77% of the union of sets of new businesses
captured by at least one method, versus 38% for the D&B data and 43% for the ES-202 data. Both papers
note that, at the time, the D&B data included only businesses for which D&B had completed a credit
check, or mainly those businesses that sought a credit rating. This could explain the low capture of new
businesses. However, the findings of Aldrich, et al., indicate that the ES-202 data are roughly equally
problematic, in contrast to Birley’s conclusion. Specifically, of those new businesses identified by the
enumeration method, only 10% were found in the D&B data, and 14% in the ES-202 data. Also, 42% of
businesses identified as new in the ES-202 file were found in the D&B file, a much higher number than
Birley reported (Aldrich, et al., 1989, pp. 377-378). Interestingly, Aldrich, et al., attribute this to
“substantial improvements in the [D&B] coverage since Birley’s research was completed” (1989, p. 378),
highlighting the importance of assessing the NETS database anew, given improvements in information
technology.
____________________

13

This identification is based on businesses showing up in one of the information sources in one year but not the
previous year.
14
Both Aldrich, et al. (1989, p. 372) and Leonard (1987, p. 142) note that the ES-202 data have trouble
distinguishing births from changes in ownership or in legal corporate structure, because in each case a new ES-202
number is issued. It is not entirely clear how this affects Birley’s conclusions, given the scanning she did of
telephone directories as well. The more recent work by Spletzer (2000) appears to have solved this problem with
the ES-202 data.

8

The U.S. Small Business Administration used the D&B data from the late 1970s and early 1980s
to create the United States Establishment and Enterprise (USEEM) file, which linked establishments
cross-sectionally (with parent firms) and over time. Research assessing this file points to some coding
and related errors common to most data sets, problems with coverage of single owner-operator
establishments in a few sectors, and overall higher counts of employment in small establishments
compared to Census data because D&B count owners/managers and partners in their employment totals.
Overall, though, the research concludes that the coverage of the file was quite accurate and timely
(MacDonald, 1985, p. 180).
Audretsch (1995) provides some further analysis of the quality of the USEEM, comparing
employment change for the United States as a whole with similar measurements from the Bureau of
Labor Statistics (the BLS’s payroll survey) and from County Business Patterns, as well as employment
growth by establishment size based on the BLS data. He reports a high degree of correspondence
between the different data sources, but also some differences, in particular for manufacturing. He also
compares the size distribution of establishments in the USEEM and the U.S. Department of Commerce’s
“Enterprise Statistics” for 1982, and for this period finds that the USEEM undercounts small
establishments, and undercounts employment at smaller establishments. This may mirror some of the
coverage issues discussed above.
3.2 Other data sources
Other data sources subsequently developed and used in more general research on employment
dynamics include the Census of Manufactures (CM) (Dunne, et al., 1989a and 1989b) and the
Longitudinal Research Database (LRD) (Davis and Haltiwanger, 1992; Davis, et al., 1996), which like the
CM is restricted to manufacturing, and Unemployment Insurance (UI) data (Leonard, 1987; Spletzer,
2000). A principal advantage of the UI data is that they cover employers in all sectors and all size
categories, with the exception of business establishments that do not have employees – which figure in

9

the ensuing analysis of the NETS.15 However, these data sets are not useful for capturing physical
relocations of business establishments. This is especially true for tracking relocations across state lines in
UI data, where – because the UI data come from separate state systems – there is no way to distinguish,
for example, a new establishment from one that moved from another state.
Another data source created by the Census Bureau – the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD) –
is an LRD-like database covering all industries (Jarmin and Miranda, 2002), derived from the Standard
Statistical Establishment List (SSEL), a register of all U.S. businesses and establishments.16 The LBD
has coverage that parallels the ES-202 data. In principle, the LBD permits the study of business
relocation, since there is an establishment-level identifier that stays with the establishment, and the SSEL
contains information on the location of each establishment in each year. As discussed by Jarmin and
Miranda, for the estimation of sources of gross job flows there are serious concerns with separating true
births and deaths from spurious ones generated by broken linkages of establishments over time, a problem
also noted with the LRD. They engage in a number of procedures, including matching on names and
addresses, to minimize the spurious births and deaths, but some problems remain. This is also slightly
problematic because matching on addresses, when linkages are broken for other reasons, implies that
moves will be treated as births for some establishments, but not for others; in no case, though, has
existing work classified business relocations using the LBD.17 To the best of our knowledge, the LBD

____________________

15

Spletzer introduces a new longitudinal database developed by the BLS – referred to as the BLS longitudinal
database, or LDB – which makes use of the ES-202 data to study employment dynamics. A significant advance in
the LDB is the ability to capture data at the establishment level via what are called “Multiple Worksite Reports” for
reporting UI data. This had been a problem in earlier work with UI data, and had led to criticism of using this data
source by Davis, et al. (1996). The BLS has used the linked ES-202 records to create a data series called Business
Employment Dynamics (BED), which reports on aggregate findings from the LDB. The BED tracks gross job flows
(creation and destruction) at the national level as well as disaggregated by industry.
16
The SSEL is also known as the Business Register. An earlier, shorter longitudinal database constructed in the
same way as the LBD is the Business Information Tracking Series (BITS), also created at the Census Bureau, and
sponsored by the Small Business Administration (Robb, 1999).
17
Jarmin and Miranda (2002) also point to some other problems with the LBD. Two are relevant to comparisons
with the NETS data. Some problems stem from missing data in earlier years that make it harder to match
establishments and thus lead to overstating births and deaths. Another problem is that “data quality may be poor for
establishments with few observations in the LBD” (p. 18), in part because newer establishments are less likely to
have been surveyed by the Census Bureau. Below, we discuss similar problems with measuring employment in the
NETS in the early years of firms’ existence.

10

has hardly been used in any research; the only study we have found is by Foster (2003), on establishment
and employment dynamics in Appalachia.
The newest longitudinal data set on establishments that permits the measurement of gross job
flows is the Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics (LEHD) program, housed at the U.S. Census
Bureau (U.S. Census Bureau, 2002). The LEHD is also based on ES-202 data, but goes beyond the
existing data sources in tracking the individual workers in these establishments, which it does by
accessing their social security numbers. By matching with other data sources, this permits a great many
important questions about worker mobility, careers, wage variation within and across firms, etc., to be
addressed with a richness that has not previously been possible, although one limitation is that the
worker-level data are matched by firm, not establishment. However, with regard to studying business
establishment dynamics that do not focus on individual workers, the LEHD offers essentially the same
thing as other data sets based on the ES-202 data.18
3.3 Advantages of the NETS
There are a few key advantages to the NETS data. First, from the perspective of fully
characterizing employment change, the NETS captures business relocation. Unlike the other data sources
described above, the NETS database tracks business address changes and identifies business moves over
time within the entire country. As discussed below, this is important because business retention and
attraction issues are often at the center of policy debates at the state (and local) level.
In addition, the NETS offers significant advantages in actually carrying out research on
employment dynamics (or other topics). Access to the alternative data sources described in this section is
highly restricted because of confidentiality reasons, and hence requires a long and complex process of
application and approval. As a practical matter, this has deterred many researchers from pursuing
research with these data, and has clearly made it difficult to do research in a timely manner. In addition,
again because of confidentiality, researchers working with these data sources are restricted in the
geographic detail to which they can disaggregate in describing results. And this confidentiality extends to
____________________

18

Benedetto, et al. (2004) explore exploiting the LEHD to improve tracking of entry and exit of firms as well as
administrative changes by following clusters of matched workers.

11

studying and certainly extends to identifying particular companies. With the NETS data, in contrast, none
of these problems arise. The data are accessible and there are not confidentiality restrictions imposed on
users.19
4. Assessment of NETS Database
We use three strategies to assess the reliability of the NETS data. First, we compare the NETS
data with alternative data sources that are publicly available to assess the accuracy of measurements of
employment levels and changes. Second, we search business relocation cases reported in the media and
check whether they are captured by the NETS data. And third, we use phonebooks and company web
sites to try to identify business establishment births and assess the accuracy with which the NETS tracks
such births.
In all cases, the reader is reminded that there are complexities involved in each of these
measurement exercises, and it is not clear that any one particular data source is the “gold standard.”
Thus, our analysis does not focus solely on whether the NETS “measures up” to these other data sources,
but instead discusses the strengths and weaknesses of each and the degree of correspondence between
them. There is a lot more to learn about these measurement differences, and we suspect that the potential
advantages of the NETS will spur further assessments that build on those we carry out here.
It is important to note that there was a dramatic change in the data collecting process at D&B in
1991. In particular, on July 25, 1991, a federal court ruling allowed regional Bells to sell information
they collected (United States v. Western Elec. Co., 767 F. Supp. 308 (D.D.C., 1991)). In 1992, therefore,
D&B started to use yellow pages to identify business units, which greatly expanded its database. This
resulted in a significant surge in the number of establishments and jobs in the NETS data in that year,
which we expect to have seriously mitigated earlier problems with coverage by the D&B data. Consistent
with this, as we show below, the D&B data now detect more very small establishments than do other data
sources. From this point on, we will drop the 1989-1991 data and focus on the 1992-2002 sample period.
____________________

19

The NETS data are not freely available, and are not inexpensive. For example, a two-year license for the
California file we use in this paper costs $15,000. But the time plus money costs appear quite favorable, compared
to using the alternative data sources.

12

4.1. Measurement of employment levels
One approach to assessing the NETS database is to compare its estimates of employment levels
and changes with similar estimates from other sources. The data products that can be used for these
comparisons are the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW), the Current Employment
Statistics (payroll) survey (CES), and the Size of Business data (SOB). The QCEW and SOB are based
on ES-202 data. Consequently, these two sources exclude the self-employed, proprietors, domestic
workers, unpaid family members, and some other groups. The CES covers all nonfarm payrolls. These
data sets only provide aggregate statistics at various geographic, industry, or establishment size levels,
and thus it is only at these levels that we can compare the data sources.20
We begin by comparing employment level measurements in the NETS to those in the QCEW and
the CES. We use 1997-2000 for the comparison with QCEW data because earlier years were not readily
available, and subsequent years use the North American Industrial Classification System (NAICS) instead
of SIC codes, and hence cannot be directly compared. We use the full sample period for the CES
comparison. For both sources, we do this at the most disaggregated level at which QCEW data are
publicly available for all counties – by county and 1-digit SIC industry.21 Figure 1 plots the data for the
alternative measurements of employment by county and industry from the NETS and the QCEW. If the
measurements agreed exactly, then they would all lie on a 45-degree line, which is drawn in the figure. It
is clear from visual examination of the figure, as well as the very high computed correlation of 0.994, that
employment levels in these two data sources correspond very closely. On the other hand, the points
actually lie on a line that is flatter than the 45-degree line, implying higher employment levels in the
NETS.22 We return to this issue below. We constructed a similar figure for comparing employment

____________________

20

The publication of employment/establishment data is sometimes withheld in order to protect the identity of
cooperating employers. For example, QCEW is suppressed if there are fewer than three establishments in a cell, or
if a single employer makes up more than 80% of the employment in that cell.
21
Data at finer levels of industry disaggregation are often suppressed at the county level for reasons of
confidentiality.
22
The points that are farthest off the line, at high employment levels, are for service-related industries in Los
Angeles. However, these points actually lie quite close to a regression line through the data.

13

measurements in the NETS with those in the CES data. It reveals a similar pattern, and also a high
correlation (0.948).
To assess the quality of employment measurements in the NETS by establishment size, we also
examined the correspondence between employment as measured by the NETS and the SOB; for this latter
source employment can be measured by industry and size of establishment (as well as county, of course)
as can also be done in the NETS database. As Figure 2 reveals, here the data correspond less well, and
the correlation falls to 0.817. Looking at employment by establishment size shows that the greater
discrepancies reflect the fact that the NETS database has much higher coverage of small establishments
than does the SOB.
To see this more clearly, Figure 3 compares NETS and SOB employment data for 2002. In 2002,
the NETS database reports 184% more employment in establishments with 1-4 employees than does the
SOB, and 29% greater employment in establishments with 5-9 employees. But for every other business
size category the NETS and SOB employment levels are within 10% of one another, and often much
closer. This apparently greater coverage of employment in small establishments (1-9 employees)
accounts for the higher employment measured in the NETS relative to the QCEW or CES. We cannot
address this issue as directly as we can with the SOB data, because the QCEW and CES data are not
available by establishment size. However, there are many fewer QCEW establishments than NETS
establishments.23 And whereas NETS total employment is 17-22% greater than QCEW total
employment, establishments covered in NETS are 38-63% more numerous than establishments covered in
QCEW, implying that small establishments are under-represented in the QCEW data.
Part of the disparity in employment and the number of establishments indicated by the SOB and
NETS data sets for small establishments might be driven by the fact that business owners are typically
excluded from coverage under the ES-202 unemployment insurance system (although they are permitted

____________________

23

Unfortunately, CES does not include a series for the number of establishments. Therefore, a similar comparison
of average establishment size is impossible. Because CES is periodically benchmarked to UI universe counts, we
would not expect that results would be much different.

14

to pay UI taxes and be covered).24 This could be quite important for the smaller establishments in which
single owners can represent a sizable share of total employment. So the comparison is more informative
if we remove one employee from each establishment covered in the NETS database, and then reassign
NETS establishments to size categories based on the adjusted employment levels. As shown in Figure 4,
with these adjustments the discrepancies for the smaller establishments (0-4 and 5-9 employees) shrink
considerably, suggesting that the inclusion of business owners in the NETS data accounts for a sizable
share of the difference in employment at small establishments in the NETS and the SOB data.25 This
procedure reduces the overall employment discrepancy from 17.1% to 5.0%.
With respect to comparisons of employment counts for the other establishment size categories, a
complication is introduced because, as documented below, there is a good deal of rounding of
employment levels in the NETS – as it turns out, to the employment levels that are the left-hand “edges”
of the size categories into which the SOB data are classified (10, 20, 50, 100, 250, 500, and 1000 – but
not 5). Consequently, when we eliminate one employee and reassign establishments to size categories
based on the adjusted employment level, we get underrepresentation of NETS establishments in the
higher SOB category of 1000+, with potentially offsetting overrepresentation and underrepresentation in
the lower categories (compare Figures 3 and 4). Because of these concerns we should not expect our
adjustments to yield a perfect match under any circumstances. However, we also found that the numbers
from the NETS after subtracting one employee but without reassignment to size categories, and the
numbers with reassignment as well, generally bracket the SOB numbers (except for the smallest
establishments), indicating that the NETS data are relatively accurate. Nonetheless, as discussed in the
next section, the rounding does have implications for the measurement of employment change.
Finally, in Table 1 we attempt to account for differences between the NETS database and the
SOB data described above by examining employment data for 1994-2002. The first two rows of the table
____________________

24

This same point was noted earlier in work by MacDonald (1985).
In addition, apparently in the NETS data separate lines of business (industry) at the same physical site are
sometimes reported as separate establishments, which would tend to create a higher count of establishments of
smaller sizes. However, this seems unlikely to be important for very small establishments that are unlikely to
operate in more than one industry. Also, note that this should not play a role in the measurement of employment
levels, unless there is double counting.
25

15

indicate the total employment levels reported in the NETS and the SOB report, respectively, for each
year. Since SOB data only include individuals earning wages that are covered by unemployment
insurance, several categories of workers that are reported in the NETS, most notably the self-employed
and independent contractors, are excluded from the SOB by statute.
To estimate the number of individuals who are either self-employed or independent contractors,
we use data reported in the Contingent Work Supplement (CWS) to the Current Population Survey (CPS)
in years 1995, 1997, 1999 and 2001. In 1995, for example, we see that 13,047,314 individuals were
reported on payrolls in California, and that 2,093,767 Californians were self-employed or working as
independent contractors. In the fifth row of the table, we combine these two figures to arrive at an
approximate level of household employment in California. Thus, in 1995, there were 15,141,081
individuals reported on payrolls, self-employed, or working as independent contractors.
As we see in row 8 of the table, our approximation of household employment in California falls
short of the level of employment reported in the NETS database for each of the years we examined. It is
instructive to note that while the NETS over-reports household employment in comparison to our
approximation in row 5 of the table, this approximation itself overstates household employment when
compared to the CPS employment figures for each year, as shown in the last row of the table. For
example, in 1995 the NETS overestimates our approximation of household employment by 1,100,075,
while at the same time, this approximation overstates CPS employment by 1,101,233. The differences
between the NETS and the SOB+SE/IC series may be partly explained by some self-employed or
independent contractors having multiple businesses – all of which should show up in the NETS, but not in
the SE/IC series, where an individual is counted only once. On the other hand, this cannot account for the
CPS versus SOB+SE/IC difference.
We carried out a similar comparison using alternative estimates of the self-employed provided by
the Census’ Nonemployer Statistics. Estimates using this method correspond better in most years than
when using the SE/IC series, as shown in row 9 of the table. This method likely explains more of the gap
between the NETS and SOB data because it allows self-employed individuals to report multiple
16

businesses, as does the NETS database. Overall, these calculations suggest that the NETS estimate of
employment (more accurately, the number of jobs) is higher than other sources because it uses a more
comprehensive approach. Despite the remaining discrepancies – and note that there are discrepancies
among any pair of data sets one chooses to compare – the NETS data appear to measure employment
levels relatively accurately.
4.2 Measurement of employment change
Next, we turn to measurements of employment change. We first begin by documenting, in
Figures 5 and 6, the extent of rounding of employment in the NETS data. These figures show that for
both smaller and larger establishments the distribution of the number of employees is disproportionately
concentrated on numbers that are divisible by 5, 10, 100, and so on. For example, in 2000, 63.4% of
establishments with 10 to 100 employees reported employment that was a multiple of 5 or 10, and 40.3%
of establishments with 100 or more employees reported employment that was a multiple of 50 or 100.
While employment rounding may bias some of our estimations, it is not a particularly serious
problem for the measurement of employment levels if we believe that employment numbers are rounded
to the closest “salient numbers.” In that case, our aggregate levels are unlikely to be biased appreciably,
because some people round their numbers up and others round them down, and the establishment-level
measurements may contain measurement error that is largely random (although non-classical). It does,
however, mean that employment change is “sticky,” and that our estimates likely underreport the
frequency with which establishments change their levels of employment, thereby underestimating the
degree of employment change caused by establishment expansion and contraction.
Another potential source of stickiness in the measurement of employment change in the NETS is
imputed data. During 1993-2002, between 55 and 73% of each year’s employment figures are actual
data.26 The remaining establishment records are imputed – either by D&B or by Walls & Associates –
with the latter occurring when the D&B imputations were suspect, and attempting to improve on the
____________________

26

A very small share of these – 1 to 2% – are reported by D&B as “bottom of range” rather than actual data, and
seem to indicate cases where the responded provided a range for employment rather than a single number.
However, judging by the variation in these observations, they behave like actual data and are treated as such in this
discussion.

17

imputation by using time-series information on the establishment instead of only cross-sectional
information. Imputed data are far less common for older establishments. Moreover, once actual
employment data are provided for an establishment, they are very likely to be provided in all subsequent
years. Both of these regularities indicate that imputation is a feature of establishments’ earliest
appearances in the database.
This is illustrated in Figure 7, which plots the distributions, for each number of possible years in
the data set, of the number of years with actual data. The larger the circle, the greater the share of
observations at that point (the area is proportional to the share at each point on the horizontal axis). To
fix ideas, if there were no imputed data then all of the mass would be along the 45-degree line, with large
circles along this line. What we see, instead, is that establishments that are tracked for a relatively short
period of time exhibit a bimodal distribution, with either no years with actual data or all years with actual
data. But establishments that are tracked in the data set for a longer period are much less likely to have no
years without actual employment data, and conversely have relatively more years with actual data; and
the mode is to have actual data for all years.
Together, rounding and imputation of employment data results in infrequent year-to-year changes
in employment. Table 2 illustrates this with regard to imputation, showing the incidence of employment
change by type of employment data. As we would expect, it is far lower for imputed data. And overall,
7.6% and 16.3% of existing establishments reported a change in the number of employees in 1993 and
2002, respectively, and 19.6% and 14.1% of workers were at establishments that reported a change in the
number employed in those years – numbers that we suspect are low.
The implication of these measurement problems is that the NETS data compare less favorably
with other data sources when we look at employment changes, rather than employment levels, especially
for high-frequency (short-term) changes. As shown in Figure 8, the correspondence between NETS and
QCEW yearly first-difference employment changes by industry and county is not very strong, with a
correlation of only 0.528. However, if we look at employment changes over periods of at least a few

18

years, this problem is substantially mitigated; for example, the correlation rises to 0.864 for changes over
three-year intervals (Figure 9).
This greater correspondence of employment changes over longer intervals is consistent with what
we would expect based on the findings noted above regarding rounding and imputation. With rounding,
the data will likely more accurately measure employment changes over a longer period, because rounding
results in small changes being ignored but larger changes being measured. Similarly, we saw that
imputation tends to be a feature of establishments’ first appearance in the data set, whereas over time
actual data are more likely to be reported and hence employment changes better measured. The
implication of these findings is that the NETS database should not be used for measuring very short-term
employment changes, but is more useful for measuring employment changes over periods of a few years
or more. This does present a tradeoff, however, as an inability to focus on short-term changes inhibits our
ability to observe high-frequency changes in job creation and destruction, such as over the business cycle.
We also note that making the unit of analysis for employment change longer affects what proportion of
employment change we attribute to job creation and destruction versus establishment expansion and
contraction, and to a much lesser extent relocation, a point to which we return below.
4.3 Tracking business relocations
A unique feature of the NETS data set is its ability to track establishment relocations. There are
no other comprehensive data sets with which to compare measurements of geographic movement of
establishments over time to such information in the NETS. Instead, we used Lexis-Nexis to conduct
newspaper searches of business relocations involving California establishments, and conducted a detailed
comparison of evidence on relocation in the NETS database to evidence found in these searches. Our
search was not meant to be exhaustive; it is only intended to obtain a replicable sample of press coverage
of specific business relocations.
We limited our search to the Los Angeles Times and the Kiplinger California Letter. The Los
Angeles Times has the largest circulation of any California newspaper and the Kiplinger California Letter
is a concise bi-monthly business newsletter that has a section specifically reserved for business relocation
19

reports. As expected, the Los Angeles Times has a regional bias in that it focuses on business moves in
Southern California, especially the Los Angeles region. Business relocations in other regions are reported
only if they are high-profile or reflect a move between the Los Angeles region and the rest of the state.
The Kiplinger California Letter provides more balanced coverage of business moves in different regions
in the state.
Using a carefully-designed search algorithm,27 we focused on 1,067 newspaper articles from the
Los Angeles Times (1996-2000), from which we were able to identify 576 references to specific instances
of business relocation, covering 452 unique relocation events. Of these, 237 business relocations were
confirmed as valid moves by the NETS database. For the reported relocations not confirmed in the
NETS, we undertook thorough efforts to independently verify whether there was in fact a relocation. It
turns out to be very difficult to use other information sources to locate the establishments whose
relocations are reported in the media but for which there is not an obvious match in the NETS. Ideally we
would contact the establishment directly and confirm that the reported relocation occurred. However, this
becomes very difficult when establishments (or often, businesses) can be acquired by other firms or for
other reasons currently do business under a different name, or no longer exist. Naturally, these problems
are more severe in trying to verify reports of relocation that are relatively old. Nonetheless, when
possible we contacted the establishments directly. We also searched for company information using
Hoovers.com28 and Lexis-Nexis Company Information Search – web-based resources that track business
addresses and would reveal new addresses for businesses that changed location.

____________________

27

We experimented with several search terms. Our final choice of search term – “ATL2(RELOCAT!) AND
BUSINESS AND (MOVE OR MOVING OR MOVED) AND (SECTION("BUSINESS") OR
SECTION("METRO"))” – was guided by a desire to exclude irrelevant articles, which we assessed through repeated
searches and screening of articles. A detailed appendix describing how we arrived at this search term is available
from the authors.
28
Hoovers.com utilizes the same raw data provided by the DMI file as the NETS database. However, the search
mechanism is very flexible, sometimes making it easier to locate establishments that could not be found through
company keyword searches in the NETS database.

20

Of the 215 relocations not found in the NETS, 47 were confirmed as “invalid” moves.29 Of the
remaining 168 reports of relocation that we could not locate in the NETS database, we were able to
independently verify that 18 relocations indeed occurred. And not one of the 18 was a cross-state move.
Despite our best efforts using the methods described above, we were unable to confirm the remaining 150
reports of relocation from the Lexis-Nexis. And at least 91% of these businesses (136 out of 150) are
captured by the NETS database with no relocation indicated. Furthermore, 92 (68%) of these
establishments were still in existence through 2002, although we were only tracking relocations that were
reported between 1996 and 2000. If these establishments had relocated, but not been tracked properly as
relocations by NETS, then these establishments would have reported closing years close to the date of the
relocation.
Thus, in total, 58.5% (237/{452 − 47}) of the valid business relocations that we identified from
the Los Angeles Times could be found in our NETS data set. This rate of confirmation varies
dramatically depending on the distance over which the relocation occurred. We are able to confirm only
27% (21/77) of within-city moves, whereas we are able to confirm 70% (177/252) of between-city,
within-state moves, and 74% (37/50) of cross-state moves. It is neither surprising nor worrisome that the
NETS detects only a relatively small share of within-city moves, because short-distance moves are much
less significant for the scope of research for which this database is most useful. In fact, many within-city
moves occur over such short distances that they could not be identified within the NETS database. For
instance, several contacted establishments said that the moves had occurred, as indicated in the newspaper
article, but the new location was adjacent to or “across the street” from the previous location. The NETS
is designed to only report “significant moves,” which are defined as moves where both the street address
and zip code information change; this criterion was chosen to avoid mistaking the changing boundaries of
zip codes for actual moves.

____________________

29

Five moves turned out to be consolidations of businesses because the establishment at the destination already
existed before the move; 17 cases were planned moves but did not occur later; 12 of the establishments at
“destination” were new branches instead of relocated businesses; and 13 moves involved establishments such as
schools and nonprofits that are not the focus of our research.

21

Our search for reports of business relocation in the Kiplinger California Letter (1996-2001)
revealed similar results. Of the 79 incidents of relocation we identified in this search, 12 were found to be
misreports of establishment relocation. Of the remaining 67 media observations of relocation, 35 (55%)
were confirmed in the NETS database. In addition, 3 cases were confirmed in Hoovers.com, but occurred
too recently to be found in NETS, and 29 cases could neither be confirmed nor denied.
We do not expect every relocation to appear in Lexis-Nexis, but we do expect all real relocations
that are covered in the media to also appear in the NETS. Given the difficulty of checking whether
reported cases actually occurred, it is impossible to quantify exactly what share of real relocation is
captured in the NETS. But for moves crossing city or state boundaries, we estimate that the share is well
over 75% and probably closer to 100%, based on the fact that most of the cases not captured by NETS
cannot be independently confirmed as real relocations. Thus, we conclude that the NETS database does
quite a good job of tracking business relocations, with a very low rate of false negatives, although our
analysis probably pertains more to larger establishments that would be reported in the media. However,
in contemplating the empirical results on establishment relocation discussed later in this paper, one might
want to adjust upward modestly the job creation and destruction attributed to relocation.
4.4 Capture of new business establishments
Given the concern from earlier research regarding the ability of the D&B data to track new
establishments, and the potential importance of establishment births in job creation, it is also important to
assess how well the NETS tracks new business establishments. We do not have access to ES-202 data
with which measurement of new establishments can be compared. We therefore first attempted to
compare the NETS data to new establishments identified from phonebooks, following the earlier work by
Birley (1984). Specifically, we selected a random sample of establishments from the 1999-2001 San
Francisco Pacific Bell Business White Pages, and identified businesses that are initially not in the

22

phonebook, but then show up in a later year, as a means of identifying an alternative list of new
establishments, drawing a sample of 58 openings.30
Of these 58 openings, 52 (90%) of the establishments could be identified in the NETS database.
Many listings were difficult to match because companies often do business under multiple names, and
because of differences in spelling or abbreviations. Thus, this matching required that we also try to match
using company name keyword search, phone number reverse lookup, address information, or alternate
company names provided by workers whom we contacted at the particular establishment. While many of
the NETS opening dates corresponded well with those indicated by the phonebook listings, many did not.
Given the disagreements, we attempted to obtain each business establishment’s opening year directly
from the company, or through their website. We were able to obtain approximate start date information
from 33 of these 52 establishments. This comparison revealed that many of the opening years that were
indicated by changes in phonebook listings were inaccurate, with the phonebook method necessarily
assigning these openings to 2000 or 2001, but the actual openings spread over a long span of years. In
contrast, the NETS data match opening dates much more accurately, as indicated in Figure 10.31 And for
those establishments that could not be reached directly, the NETS and phonebooks start dates were
generally in agreement, because many of these were young establishments that failed subsequently, so
there was not much scope for the start dates to differ.32
____________________

30

We randomly chose to start with listings beginning with “B.” There should be no relation between the name of
the business and the likelihood of its inclusion in the NETS database. Preliminary investigation suggested that
business establishments that use initials in their name (such as “B & G auto rental”) may change names from year to
year, so we instead began drawing our sample with telephone listings that started with “Ba.” We chose enough
observations to get approximately 60 new establishments, which required 313 listings that appeared in the
phonebook at least once between 1999 and 2001. We excluded 35 records from the analysis because businesses
from outside the area code presumably have to pay to be listed in the business white pages, meaning that the
appearance or disappearance of such businesses would often occur for reasons unrelated to opening (or closing).
These records indicate 58 openings (and 61 closings). There were also three records for which the listing appeared
in 1999, was absent in 2000, and reappeared in 2001 with the same name and phone number. This is one indication
– more are described below – that the phonebooks do not provide an accurate means of tracking openings and
closings.
31
Even if the NETS data were completely accurate, we would not expect an exact correspondence with the start
dates obtained from our efforts to contact businesses directly. In our phone calls, we often talked to employees who
had limited tenure and did not know the founding date, in which case we were only able to obtain information that
provided a lower bound for the number of years that a particular establishment had been in business.
32
As another check on the NETS data, we also attempted to locate NETS records for business establishments that
were listed in the San Francisco phonebook for all three years. If NETS records indicate opening or closing years

23

Given the inaccuracies in openings based on the appearance of businesses in the phonebook, we
wanted to check another source for data on establishment openings.33 To do this, we carried out a similar
exercise for California biotech companies listed in the BioAbility database of U.S. biotech companies.34
Because we are assessing how well the NETS captures births, we first chose companies that this database
indicated were founded in our sample period for the NETS data (1992-2002), of which there are 300. To
be more certain that we had the founding dates correct, we checked the BioAbility founding dates against
company websites, retaining only the 161 cases for which the website also reported a founding date. Of
these 161 cases, in 89% (142) the websites reported founding dates that corresponded exactly with the
start year listed in the BioAbility database. If they did not match, we used the date from the company
website, presuming that this was more accurate.
We then checked these founding dates against the appearance of these companies in the NETS to
determine how well the NETS captures births. Only 8 of these 161 companies could not be located in the
NETS database, and 6 of these 8 were founded in 2001 or 2002. Hoovers.com listed a company record
and DUNS number for all 6 of these records, indicating either that they were established too late to be
included in our extract of the NETS database or that they were picked up by D&B with a modest delay
after their establishment. Of the remaining 153 records, 75% (114) of the start dates listed in the NETS
corresponded exactly with the company start dates reported on the web site, 88% (135) fell within one
year, and 92% (141) of them fell within two years. The correspondence between the two data sources is
graphed in Figure 11. The correlation between NETS start dates and company website reported start
within 1999-2001, then we might be concerned that NETS is inaccurately reporting the timing or incidence of
openings or closings. We randomly chose 72 of the 156 records in the phonebooks in all three years, and we were
able to locate 66 (92%) in the NETS database, which represents a slightly higher percentage than those that we
could identify from the earlier subset of phonebook-inferred openings. Of these records, according to the NETS
data all but 6 continued to exist through 2002 and only one record indicated a closing by 2001, indicating a close
correspondence between the NETS and phonebook data for continuing establishments.
33
For the same reason, coupled with the difficulty of verifying information directly with businesses that have closed,
we deemed the phonebook method inappropriate for assessing the ability of the NETS data to identify establishment
closings.
34
This is a database of more than 2,000 U.S. biotech companies (based on a relatively narrow definition of biotech)
maintained by BioAbility, a biotech consulting firm. Information comes from various sources including press
releases, web pages, annual reports, SEC reports, and direct contacts with company officials. In this data source,
most of the companies are single-establishment firms. In the case of multi-establishment firms, the database refers
to their headquarters. So we can think of the data as covering a set of establishments. See
http://www.bioability.com/us_biotech_companies.htm (viewed on September 14, 2005).

24

dates was 0.87. Our two checks, then, indicate that the NETS tracks establishment births quite accurately,
adding to the overall evidence of the reliability of the NETS data.
5. Employment Dynamics and Business Relocation in California
5.1 The policy debate over business relocation
We illustrate the usefulness of the NETS data by addressing a substantive question regarding
business establishment dynamics that figures prominently in policy debates, and for which the NETS
database is uniquely suited. Specifically, business relocation is often cited as a source of job loss,
especially at regional and state levels. While job loss due to business relocation is rarely precisely
measured, it is often invoked in the rhetoric of policy debate and political campaigns. For example, when
Kimberley-Clark moved its headquarters from Wisconsin to Texas in 1985, it sparked heavy criticism of
Wisconsin’s business climate, contributing to the governor losing his job in the following election
(Dresang, 2002). Similarly, local governments work to attract companies to relocate to their jurisdictions
(Klier and Testa, 2002). For example, in 2001, when Boeing announced that its headquarters would leave
Seattle, cities like Chicago, Dallas, and Denver engaged in fierce competition to recruit the company.35
During the past decade, the debate over business relocation has been particularly prominent in
policy discussions in California (see Neumark, et al., 2005). Claims regarding the importance of business
relocation that have arisen in this debate, however, have rarely relied on empirical evidence of relocation
behavior. Rather, they generally rely on surveys that elicit subjective assessments from employers (e.g.,
California Business Roundtable and Bain & Company, 2004). One study tries to measure actual
relocation activity, based on data on manufacturing plants from the Los Angeles Department of Water and
Power and several large utility companies in Southern California (Bules & Associates, 1992). But this
study – like most of the public debate – focuses only on businesses leaving the state, as if traffic moves in
only one direction.
Moreover, the debate is often framed as if relocation is the key determinant of employment
change and hence a barometer of the “business climate.” Yet the formation of new business
____________________

35

See, for example, http://www.conway.com/ssinsider/incentive/ti0106.htm (viewed on May 2, 2005).

25

establishments, the death of existing ones, and employment changes at continuing establishments, also
affect employment change. Thus, the debate over business relocation ignores five of the six components
of employment change (births, deaths, expansions, contractions, and in-migration), focusing only on the
loss of jobs from establishments that move out of the state. Of course, each of these sources of job
creation and destruction is potentially important in determining employment change, and it is misleading
to focus on only one of these – and even then, without good evidence. The NETS data can obviously fill
in many of the gaps in understanding the importance of business relocation (in both directions) in
employment change, and more generally in identifying which processes – births, deaths, expansions,
contractions, moves in, and moves out – drive employment change.
5.2 Evidence from the NETS
This section presents our findings from the NETS data regarding business relocation in California
and employment dynamics more generally. In each case, we state our key result, and then provide some
detailed discussion.
1) California generally loses establishments and jobs due to business relocation, but the impact is
negligible
As Table 3 shows, in every year during the 1992-2002 sample period, some establishments left
California, taking jobs away; at the same time, others moved into California, bringing jobs to the state.
Measured by either the number of business establishments or the number of jobs, California experienced a
net loss owing to relocation in every year. However, compared with the size of its overall economy,
California’s net loss from relocation has to be considered negligible. In terms of number of
establishments lost to other states, the worst years are 1993 and 1994. In each of these years, California
lost about 750 establishments to other states, which amounted to 0.05% of the total number of
establishments in California. The job numbers tell a similar story. In terms of job loss from relocation,
1994 and 1997 represent the worst years. In these years business relocation cost 0.1% of California jobs.
Another way to see that these job change numbers are negligible is to compare them to ongoing
employment changes that the state experiences. For example, from July 1990 to January 1993, 6.1% of
26

California jobs disappeared, while from December 1997 to December 2000, employment in California
grew by 8.2%.36 These comparisons suggest that whether during an upturn or a downturn, business
relocation simply does not play a major role in employment change.
2) Establishments are much more likely to move locally than across state boundaries
While establishment moves are quite common, most of these moves are within state. Out of
255,838 cases of establishment relocation originating in California during 1993-2002, 246,283 (or 96.3%)
were moves within California. While cross-state moves draw a lot of attention, they are rare. In fact,
35.4% of all the moves originating in California occurred within a city and 78.5% of the moves did not go
beyond the county boundary.37 As a result, the impact of relocation on employment on the local level,
while still modest, is more pronounced than its effect on state employment. In 1993, though less than
0.01% establishments moved out of California, 0.4% of establishments moved outside their own county,
and 1.2% of establishments moved beyond their own city. The employment changes associated with
these moves represented 0.1%, 0.6%, and 1.5% of total California employment, respectively.
3) Employment growth is primarily driven by expansion, contraction, births, and deaths
Table 4 presents decompositions of employment growth over three-year periods during 19922002. For each period, in the top panel we show California employment in the starting year, in the ending
year, the overall net change, and then the number of jobs created or eliminated by each process of
employment dynamics. The bottom panel shows the decomposition of employment change. In principle,
we can decompose annual employment changes in the same way. But as noted earlier, year-to-year
employment changes are not as reliable in the NETS data because of rounding and imputation.
Table 4 shows that in every three-year period the expansion of existing establishments always
creates more jobs than are lost through the contraction of existing establishments. This is perhaps not
surprising, because at any time we expect that the surviving business establishments tend to be those that
are growing rather than shrinking. The net effects of births and deaths of establishments on overall
____________________

36

See http://www.calmis.cahwnet.gov/file/lfhist/cal$shlf.xls (viewed on May 3, 2005).
As discussed in the previous section, within-city moves may be undercounted in the NETS, in which case these
percentages would be even higher.
37

27

employment change are positive in some years and negative in others. This tends to reflect the business
cycle. In boom years many new establishments are created, and at the same time existing establishments
are less likely to go out of business. As a result, jobs created by new establishments outnumber jobs
eliminated by establishments that close in such years. Conversely, during slower economic times
business formation is lower and more businesses tend to close, result in a net loss of jobs because new
businesses do not suffice to cover the loss of those that die. For example, during 1995-1998,
establishment deaths in California cut 454,000 jobs more than the number of jobs created through
establishment births. But during the next three years, from 1998-2001, business establishment births and
deaths resulted in a net gain of 848,000 new jobs.
The table also provides a comparison of the contribution of relocation to employment change
with the contributions of other sources of employment change. The bottom rows of Table 4 indicate just
how small the role of business relocation is. As the last row shows, the employment loss from relocation
ranges from about 6,000 to 44,000, averaging around 20,000 per year. But the employment changes from
the expansion-contraction processes and the birth-death processes are much greater, often by a factor of
20 or more. In other words, employment changes in California are primarily driven by expansioncontraction and birth-death processes, rather than by relocation.
The relative importance of different sources of employment change is illustrated more clearly in
Figure 12. The two panels display the sources of job creation and destruction, respectively, in each threeyear period during 1992-2002. The top panel shows that in each period the birth of new business
establishments is the major source of job creation, while the expansion of existing establishments is also
important. The number of jobs created by business establishments that moved to California is trivial
compared to the number of jobs created by the other two sources. Likewise, the bottom panel shows that
the death of establishments is the major factor in job destruction. Contraction at existing establishments
is also substantial but less important. Finally, business relocation out of California again contributes only
minimally. But recall that, on net, it is expansion minus contraction that generally yields the largest share
of employment growth, and is always positive.
28

The decomposition of the sources of employment change is informative about the potential for
each of the underlying processes to lead to more dramatic variation in employment. Given that births and
deaths contribute large gross flows into and out of employment, a quite modest change in the balance
between births and deaths could lead to large shifts in net employment growth. In contrast, the very low
gross job flows associated with relocation imply that even if the rate of mobility out of the state doubled,
and establishments completely ceased to move into the state, there would be little impact on net
employment change.
4) Decompositions of the sources of employment change are sensitive to the interval over which the
change is measured, but regardless, the contribution of business establishment relocation is negligible
There is a potential caveat to the results reported in Table 4 and Figure 12. The magnitude of
gross job creation and destruction, as well as its decomposition, is dependent on the interval length. First,
as the interval gets shorter (for example, one year versus two, or a quarter versus a year), we might expect
the gross flows to become larger because more employment changes due to temporary fluctuations are
captured, although the opposite could occur (for example, as the interval length approaches zero).
Second, the longer the interval chosen, the greater the contribution of births and deaths to gross flows. To
see this most simply, note that all establishments in existence during a period are born and die during that
period as the period gets infinitely long. Recall that we concluded that the NETS was not as reliable
when looking at employment changes over shorter time intervals. Nonetheless, Table 5 illustrates that
changes in the interval length (from one to ten years) do not affect the relative ranking of the contribution
of each process of employment change to either job creation or job destruction, nor do they change the
conclusion that the contribution of relocation is minimal.
This issue is also relevant when we compare employment change decompositions to what we get
from other data sets, although because other data sets do not have information on business relocation, we
have not focused on such comparisons. Results from ES-202 data (for the earlier 1990-1994 period) are

29

available at frequencies of one, two, and three years, for West Virginia (Spletzer, 2000).38 As shown in
Table 6, for the ES-202 data for West Virginia about 40% of gross job creation is attributed to births,
compared with nearly 60% in the NETS, and the corresponding numbers for the contribution of deaths to
job destruction are 41% and 66%. Part of the explanation for the smaller shares of job creation and
destruction attributed to expansion and contraction in the NETS may stem from the “stickiness” in
employment change, discussed earlier, resulting from rounding and imputation of employment in the
NETS. Of course the data sources cover two very different states in periods with little overlap, which
may also help account for the differences. Note, though, that as we extend the interval to two and to three
years, the discrepancies between these two data sources lessen, although some differences remain. The
better match as we move to the three-year interval is consistent with our earlier conclusions that
employment change measures in the NETS become more accurate as the window lengthens.
6. Conclusions
We assess and present findings from a newly constructed longitudinal database covering business
establishments – the National Establishment Time Series, or NETS. The NETS database is particularly
well-suited to studying the underlying dynamics of employment change, specifically the processes of
business establishment expansion and contraction, births and deaths, and relocations. As such, it builds
on earlier research on this topic using the Longitudinal Research Database to study manufacturing, and
numerous other data products based on the ES-202 data to study all sectors of the private economy.
However, the NETS has some important advantages, including capturing business relocation, more
complete coverage, and the ability to disaggregate to a fine geographic level, as well as ease of access and
the absence of confidentiality restrictions.
Since the NETS is based on Dun & Bradstreet data – which have been criticized in the past – we
devote a great deal of attention to assessing the quality of the NETS. Overall, we conclude that the NETS
data are quite reliable and in many respects comparable to more frequently used administrative and
Census data. The NETS captures new businesses and start dates quite accurately. Coverage of business
____________________

38

Results from this source as well as the BED and LDB are available on a quarterly basis for the United States as a
whole, but that is a much higher frequency than we can study with the NETS data.

30

moves in the NETS is good, which enables researchers to tackle a source of job creation and destruction
that has been understudied. One limitation is that because data are often initially imputed for new
establishments, and there is considerable rounding of employment, short-term employment changes are
not measured very accurately; we suggest that a minimum interval of three years be used.
Partly as an illustration of the value of the NETS data, and partly out of substantive interest, we
use the data to study employment dynamics in California. We provide overall decompositions of the
sources of employment change in the state, focusing particular attention on the empirical importance of
business relocation into and out of the state, which has figured prominently in policy discussions.
We find that the birth-death and expansion-contraction processes of business establishments are
responsible for nearly all gross job creation and destruction and that cross-state business relocation is
virtually a negligible factor. Cross-state business relocation resulted in a net job loss to California in
every year during the period 1993-2002. However, compared to the size of the California economy, the
net loss from relocation is trivial. These findings imply that a policy focus on business relocation is badly
misdirected, and unlikely – even if successful at attracting new businesses and retaining old ones – to
contribute visibly to job growth. To the extent that policy has any role to play, the evidence suggests that
efforts to foster the formation of new businesses and to help existing businesses survive and grow would
be better placed, unless for some reason relocation behavior is inordinately responsive to policy.

31

References
Aldrich, Howard, Arne Kalleberg, Peter Marsden, and James Cassell, “In Pursuit of Evidence: Sampling
Procedures for Locating New Businesses,” Journal of Business Venturing 4, 1989, 367-386.
Allaman, Peter M., “Simulating Population and Employment Change for U.S. Metropolitan and Rural
Areas,” Proceedings of the 10th Conference on Winter Simulation – Volume 2, 1978, 461-470.
Allaman, Peter M and David L. Birch, “Components of Employment Change for States by Industry
Group, 1970-1972,” Working Paper No. 5, Joint Center for Urban Studies of MIT and Harvard
University, 1975.
Audretsch, David B., Innovation and Industry Evolution, The MIT Press, Cambridge, 1995.
Baldwin, John and Garnett Picot, “Employment Generation by Small Producers in the Canadian
Manufacturing Sector,” Small Business Economics 7, 1995, 317-331.
Benedetto, Gary, John Haltiwanger, Julia Lane, and Kevin McKinney, “Using Worker Flows to Measure
Firm Dynamics,” unpublished manuscript, University of Maryland, 2004.
Birch, David L., “The Job Generation Process,” unpublished report prepared by the MIT Program on
Neighborhood and Regional Change for the Economic Development Administration, U.S.
Department of Commerce, Washington, D.C., 1979.
Birch, David L., “Who Creates Jobs?” The Public Interest 65, 1981, 3-14.
Birch, David L., Job Creation in America: How Our Smallest Companies Put the Most People to Work,
Free Press, New York, 1987.
Birley, Sue, “Finding the New Firms,” Proceedings of the Academy of Management Meetings 47, 1984,
64-68.
Broersma, Lourens and Pieter Gautier, “Job Creation and Job Destruction by Small Firms: An Empirical
Investigation for the Dutch Manufacturing Sector,” Small Business Economics 9, 1997, 211-224.
Bules & Associates, “California Industry Migration Study,” prepared for Los Angeles Department of
Water and Power, PG&E, Sand Diego Gas and Electric Company, Southern California Edison
Company, and Southern California Gas Company, San Francisco, California, October 1992.
California Business Roundtable and Bain & Company, “California Competitiveness Project,” February
2004.
Davidsson, Per, Leif Lindmark, and Christer Olofsson, “The Extent of Overestimation of Small Firm Job
Creation – An Empirical Analysis of the Regression Bias,” Small Business Economics 11, 1998, 87100.
Davis, Steven J., and John Haltiwanger, “Gross Job Creation, Gross Job Destruction, and Employment
Reallocation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, 1992, 819-863.
Davis, Steven J., John C. Haltiwanger, and Scott Schuh, Job Creation and Destruction, The MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, 1996.
Dresang, Joel, “Firm’s Relocation Unseated a Governor,” in Milwaukee Journal Sentinel on October 13,
2002, available online at http://www.jsonline.com/bym/news/oct02/87385.asp (viewed June 1,
2005).
Dunne, Timothy, Mark Roberts, and Larry Samuelson, “Plant Turnover and Gross Employment Flows in
the U.S. Manufacturing sector,” Journal of Labor Economics 7, 1989a, 48-71.
Dunne, Timothy, Mark Roberts, and Larry Samuelson, “The Growth and Failures of U.S. Manufacturing
Plants,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 104, 1989b, 671-698.

32

Foster, Lucia, “The Appalachian Economy, Establishment and Employment Dynamics, 1982-1997:
Evidence from the Longitudinal Business Database,” unpublished manuscript, Center for Economic
Studies, U.S. Bureau of the Census, 2003.
Fumagalli, Andrea and Giuliano Mussati, “Italian Industrial Dynamics from the 1970s to the 1980s: Some
Reflections on Entrepreneurial Activity,” Entrepreneurship and Regional Development 5, 1993, 2537.
Jarmin, Ron S., and Javier Miranda, “The Longitudinal Business Database,” unpublished manuscript,
Center for Economic Studies, U.S. Census Bureau, Suitland, Maryland, 2002.
Kirchhoff, Bruce and Bruce Phillips, “The Effect of Firm Formation and Growth on Job Creation in the
United States,” Journal of Business Venturing 3, 1988, 261-272.
Klier, Thomas and William Testa, “Location Trends of Large Company Headquarters during the 1990s,”
Economic Perspectives, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, 2002, 12-26.
Leonard, Jonathan S., “In the Wrong Places at the Wrong Time: The Extent of Frictional and Structural
Unemployment,” in Kevin Lang and Jonathan S. Leonard (eds.), Unemployment and the Structure of
Labor Markets, Blackwell, New York, 1987, 141-163.
MacDonald, James M., “Dun & Bradstreet Business Microdata: Research Applications, and the Detection
and Correction of Errors,” Journal of Economic and Social Measurement 13, 1985, 173-185.
Neumark, David, Junfu Zhang, and Brandon Wall. “Are Businesses Fleeing the State? Interstate Business
Relocation and Employment Change in California,” California Economic Policy 1(4), 2005.
Robb, Alicia, “New Data for Dynamic Analysis: The Business Information Tracking Series (BITS),”
unpublished manuscript, U.S. Small Business Administration, Washington, D.C., 1999.
Schumpeter, Joseph A., Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy, Harper & Row, New York, 1942.
Spletzer, James R., “The Contribution of Establishment Births and Deaths to Employment Growth,”
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 18, 2000, 113-126.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Employment from the BLS Household and Payroll Surveys: Summary
of Recent Trends,” available online at http://www.bls.gov/cps/ces_cps_trends.pdf (viewed
September 21, 2005).
U.S. Census Bureau, “The Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics Program: Employment
Dynamics Estimates Project Versions 2.2 and 2.3,” Suitland, MD, 2002.
Walls & Associates, “NETS: National Establishment Time-Series Database,” Oakland, California, 2003.

33

0

QCEW employment (thousands)
500
1,000
1,500

2,000

Figure 1: NETS and QCEW Employment by County and Industry (1997-2000)

0

500

1,000
1,500
NETS employment (thousands)

2,000

0

SOB employment (thousands)
500
1,000

1,500

Figure 2: NETS and SOB Employment by Industry and Size Category (1994-2002)

0

500
1,000
NETS employment (thousands)

34

1,500

SOB employment (thousands)

1000+

500-999

250-499

100-249

50-99

20-49

10-19

5-9

0-4

0

1,000

2,000

3,000

Figure 3: NETS and SOB Employment by Size Category (2002)

NETS employment (thousands)

SOB employment (thousands)

35

1000+

500-999

250-499

100-249

50-99

20-49

10-19

5-9

0-4

0

500

1,000

1,500

2,000

2,500

Figure 4: NETS and SOB Employment by Size Category (2002),
Subtracting One Employee from Each Establishment, and Reassigning to New
Establishment Size Categories

NETS employment (thousands)

0

.05

Fraction

.1

.15

Figure 5: Histogram of NETS Establishment Sizes, 10-100 Employees (2000)

10

20

30
40
50
60
70
80
Size of establishment (# of employees)

90

100

0

.02

Fraction
.04
.06

.08

.1

Figure 6: Histogram of NETS Establishment Sizes, 101-500 Employees (2000)

100

200
300
400
Size of establishment (# of employees)

36

500

0

Years with actual data on employment
5
10

15

Figure 7: Distribution of Incidence of Actual Employment Data in NETS

0

5

10
Years in NETS dataset

15

Areas of symbols are proportional to the share of observations in
the category graphed along the horizontal axis.

37

-50

QCEW employment (thousands)
0
50

100

Figure 8: QCEW/NETS Employment Changes, by Industry and County,
One-Year Changes (1997-1998, 1998-1999, 1999-2000)

-50

0
50
NETS employment (thousands)

100

-50

QCEW employment (thousands)
0
50
100

150

Figure 9: QCEW/NETS Employment Changes, by Industry and County,
Three-Year Changes (1997-2000)

0

50
100
NETS employment (thousands)

38

150

Figure 10: Establishment Openings by Year, Company-Reported vs.
NETS-Reported

2000

Company-reported

1975
1950
1925
1900
1875
1850
1850

1875

1900

1925

1950

1975

2000

NETS-reported

Figure covers establishments identified as opening in 2001 or 2002 from
phonebooks, and identified in the NETS.
Figure 11: Biotech Establishment Openings by Year, Reported on Company Website vs.
NETS-Reported

2002
Website-reported

2000
1998
1996
1994
1992
1990
1988
1986
1986

1991

1996

2001

NETS-reported

Areas of symbols are proportional to the number of observations with the
same dates in both data sources.

39

Figure 12: Job Creation and Destruction
(a) Sources of Job Creation
6,000

Created (thousands)

5,000

Average over period
0.9%

4,000
36.7%

3,000
2,000
62.4%

1,000
0
1992-1995 1993-1996 1994-1997 1995-1998 1996-1999 1997-2000 1998-2001 1999-2002
Move in
Birth
Expansion

(b) Sources of Job Destruction
6,000

Eliminated (thousands)

5,000

Average over period
1.6%

4,000

26.9%

3,000
2,000
1,000

71.4%

0
1992-1995 1993-1996 1994-1997 1995-1998 1996-1999 1997-2000 1998-2001 1999-2002
Move out
Death
Contraction

40

Table 1: NETS and SOB Employment (1994-2002)
1994
16,371,012
12,696,157

1. NETS
2. Size of Business (SOB)1
3. Self-employed /
independent contractor
(SE/IC)2
2,084,696
4. Non-employer
Establishments (NEE)3
-5. Size of Business + selfemployed / independent
contractor (SOB+SE/IC)
14,780,853
6. Size of Business + NonEmployer Establishments
-7. Current Population Survey
(CPS)
13,979,022

1995
16,241,156
13,047,314

1996
16,314,659
13,312,913

1997
16,546,553
13,739,592

1998
16,512,479
14,257,229

1999
16,864,781
14,642,495

2000
17,666,262
15,144,896

2001
18,149,748
14,997,165

2002
17,527,918
14,967,297

2,093,767

2,008,958

2,083,693

1,851,667

1,893,306

1,877,283

1,899,806

1,895,814

--

--

1,936,556

1,971,388

2,050,809

2,103,178

2,149,145

2,252,375

15,141,081

15,321,871

15,823,285

16,108,896

16,535,801

17,022,179

16,896,971

16,863,111

--

--

15,676,148

16,228,617

16,693,304

17,248,074

17,146,310

17,219,672

14,039,848

14,261,005

14,791,531

15,180,850

15,522,223

16,056,438

16,249,075

16,214,933

8. [NETS – (SOB+SE/IC)]
1,590,159
1,100,075
992,788
723,268
403,583
328,980
644,083
1,252,777
664,807
9. [NETS – (SOB+NEE)]
---870,405
283,862
171,477
418,188
1,003,438
308,246
10. [CPS – (SOB+SE/IC)]
-801,831
-1,101,233
-1,060,866
-1,031,754
-928,046
-1,013,578
-965,741
-647,896
-648,178
1
California Size of Business employment data includes individuals earnings that are covered by unemployment insurance for the pay period that includes
September 12th, regardless of the type of payroll. The self-employed and independent contractors, as well as several other worker categories, are excluded
from unemployment insurance coverage (California Unemployment Insurance Code, Chapter 3, Article 2, Section 656).
2
The number of self-employed and independent contractors is calculated by multiplying the weighted proportion of individuals reported in these categories in the
February Contingent Work Supplement (CWS) to the Current Population Survey by the annual average of household employment in California. The CWS was
compiled in 1995, 1997, 1999, and 2001. In this table, the 1995 CWS is used to calculate the level of self-employment and independent contractors in 1994 and
1995; the 1997 CWS is used for 1996 and 1997; the 1999 CWS is used for 1998 and 1999; and the 2001 CWS is used for 2000, 2001, and 2002.
3
Number of establishments and sales or receipts of businesses without paid employees that are subject to federal income tax. Most nonemployers are selfemployed individuals operating very small unincorporated businesses, which may or may not be the owner’s principal source of income. Data for nonemployer
businesses are obtained from the annual business tax forms filed with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and reported under the Census Bureau’s annual
Nonemployer Statistics.

41

Table 2: Share with Employment Changes from Previous Year, by Employment Imputation
Type (1993-2002)
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002

Actual Figure
11.74%
8.01%
11.23%
13.05%
12.23%
11.85%
11.56%
8.24%
9.29%
8.36%

D&B Estimate
0.02%
0.02%
0.02%
0.02%
0.01%
0.00%
0.01%
0.01%
5.74%
29.14%

Walls Estimate
1.62%
2.00%
2.56%
3.17%
4.30%
4.65%
4.56%
2.82%
9.41%
0.01%

Table 3: Business Relocation and Its Effect on Employment in California, 1992-2002

1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
Year
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002

Moved in
612
534
519
489
504
545
582
802
752
731
Moved in
13,853
8,977
14,136
13,158
11,073
15,098
18,893
15,589
18,586
12,656

A. By number of establishments
Total number of
Moved out
Net effect
establishments
1,364
-752
1,532,256
1,285
-751
1,515,142
1,104
-585
1,497,623
835
-346
1,521,247
763
-259
1,518,940
676
-131
1,492,105
669
-87
1,461,135
828
-26
1,519,325
1,032
-280
1,644,230
999
-268
1,814,938
B. By number of jobs
Total number of
Moved out
Net effect
jobs
27,094
-13,241
16,266,713
25,452
-16,475
16,371,012
28,224
-14,088
16,241,156
18,352
-5,194
16,314,659
28,209
-17,136
16,546,553
16,709
-1,611
16,512,479
23,437
-4,544
16,864,781
16,994
-1,405
17,666,262
23,916
-5,330
18,149,748
16,551
-3,895
17,527,918

42

Net loss as %
of total
0.049%
0.050%
0.039%
0.023%
0.017%
0.009%
0.006%
0.002%
0.017%
0.015%
Net loss as %
of total
0.081%
0.101%
0.087%
0.032%
0.104%
0.010%
0.027%
0.008%
0.029%
0.022%

Table 4: Decomposition of Employment Growth in California
A. Employment change
Starting employment
Ending employment
Change
Job creation:
Expansion
Birth
Move in
Job destruction:
Contraction
Death
Move out
B. Employment change
decomposition
Employment change =
(expansion-contraction)
+ (birth-death)
+ (move in-move out)

1992-1995

1993-1996

1994-1997

1995-1998

1996-1999

1997-2000

1998-2001

1999-2002

16,394,151
16,241,156
-152,995

16,266,713
16,314,659
47,946

16,371,012
16,546,553
175,541

16,241,156
16,512,479
271,323

16,314,659
16,864,781
550,122

16,546,553
17,666,262
1,119,709

16,512,479
18,149,748
1,637,269

16,864,781
17,527,918
663,137

1,134,603
2,641,169
34,327

1,220,681
2,915,369
37,993

1,480,284
2,716,969
41,994

1,742,557
2,456,024
37,355

1,874,193
2,317,230
46,076

1,933,519
2,776,719
49,515

1,934,525
3,488,940
45,268

1,862,952
3,092,281
42,277

1,102,839
2,781,915
78,340

965,717
3,086,093
74,287

1,030,221
2,965,193
68,292

994,987
2,909,694
59,932

973,018
2,648,325
66,034

901,333
2,682,980
55,731

1,134,032
2,640,929
56,503

1,410,608
2,870,695
53,070

-152,995
31,764
-140,746
-44,013

47,946
254,964
-170,724
-36,294

175,541
450,063
-248,224
-26,298

271,323
747,570
-453,670
-22,577

550,122
901,175
-331,095
-19,958

1,119,709
1,032,186
93,739
-6,216

1,637,269
800,493
848,011
-11,235

663,137
452,344
221,586
-10,793

43

Table 5: Employment Change Decomposition (1992-2002),
Various Interval Lengths of Observation
3 years
1 year
2 years
5 years
10 years
35.6%
Expansion
39.3%
37.9%
33.5%
26.7%
Birth
59.8%
61.2%
63.5%
65.5%
72.2%
0.9%
In-migration
0.8%
0.9%
1.0%
1.1%
13,514,768
Gross creation
17,096,718
15,847,399
13,000,185
10,160,780
27.5%
Contraction
32.1%
29.7%
25.3%
20.7%
70.9%
Death
66.4%
68.8%
73.1%
77.5%
1.7%
Out-migration
1.4%
1.5%
1.6%
1.9%
11,759,171
Gross destruction
15,962,951
14,713,632
11,866,418
9,027,013
1,755,597
Net change
1,133,767
1,133,767
1,133,767
1,133,767
For three-year intervals the analysis is limited to 1992-2001, which can be divided into period of 3
years length.
Table 6: Comparisons with ES-202 Data for West Virginia
NETS, CA, ES-202, WV,
1992-2002
1990-1994
1 year
1 year

NETS, CA,
1992-2002
2 years

ES-202, WV,
1990-1994
2 years

Share of job creation
60.2%
Expansion
39.3%
37.9%
51.1%
39.8%
Birth
59.8%
61.2%
48.9%
N.A.
In-migration
0.8%
0.9%
N.A.
Share of job destruction
59.4%
Contraction
32.1%
29.7%
47.3%
40.6%
Death
66.4%
68.8%
52.6%
N.A.
Out-migration
1.4%
1.5%
N.A.
The estimates for West Virginia using the ES-202 data are from Spletzer (2000).

44

NETS, CA, ES-202, WV,
1992-2001
1990-1994
3 years
3 years
35.6%
63.5%
0.9%

44.2%
55.8%
N.A.

27.5%
70.9%
1.7%

39.8%
60.2%
N.A.

