                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                GLOBALIZATION AND INFLATION-
                                     OUTPUT TRADEOFFS

                                               Assaf Razin
                                            Prakash Loungani

                                          Working Paper 11641
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11641


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2005




We thank Robert King, Philip Lane, Chris Pissarides, Andrew Scott, and Ken West for useful comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Assaf Razin and Prakash Loungani. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Globalization and Inflation-Output Tradeoffs
Assaf Razin and Prakash Loungani
NBER Working Paper No. 11641
September 2005
JEL No. E3, F3

                                             ABSTRACT




With capital account liberalization the representative household is able to smooth fluctuations in
consumption, and thus becomes relatively insensitive to fluctuations in the output gap. With trade
liberalization the economy tends to specialize in production but not in consumption. The correlation
between fluctuations in the output gap and aggregate consumption is therefore weakened by trade
openness; hence presumably a smaller weight on the output gap in the utility-based loss function,
compared to the closed economy situations. In the context of a New Keynesian open economy
macro model we analyze the effect of openness on the utility-based quadratic loss function to
validate these propositions. The analysis demonstrates how capital account and trade account
liberalizations help reduce inefficiencies associated with the fluctuations in the output gap, relative
to inefficiencies associated with the fluctuations in inflation. It also provides a re- interpretation of
evidence on the effect of openness on the inflation-output tradeoff.
A key implication of the theory is that globalization forces could induce monetary authorities to put
a greater emphasis on reducing the inflation rate than on narrowing the output gaps. We provide a
re- interpretation of the evidence on the effect of openness on the sacrifice ratio which support the
prediction of the theory.


Assaf Razin                                             Prakash Loungani
Eitan Berglas School of Economics                       International Monetary Fund
Tel Aviv University                                     700 19th Street NW
Tel Aviv 69978                                          Washington, DC 20431
ISRAEL                                                  ploungani@imf.org
and NBER
razin@post.tau.ac.il
                                           -1-




                    Globalization and Inflation-Output Tradeoffs1
                                              by


       Assaf Razin                                        Prakash loungani


   Tel Aviv University                                            IMF
   and Cornell University
   razin@post.tau.ac.il                                    ploungani@imf.org


                                       September 2005


                                           Abstract


       With capital account liberalization the representative household is able to smooth

fluctuations in consumption, and thus becomes relatively insensitive to fluctuations in the

output gap. With trade liberalization the economy tends to specialize in production but not in

consumption. The correlation between fluctuations in the output gap and aggregate

consumption is therefore weakened by trade openness; hence presumably a smaller weight on

the output gap in the utility-based loss function, compared to the closed economy situations.

In the context of a New Keynesian open economy macro model we analyze the effect of

openness on the utility-based quadratic loss function to validate these propositions. The

analysis demonstrates how capital account and trade account liberalizations help reduce
                                             -2-




inefficiencies associated with the fluctuations in the output gap, relative to inefficiencies

associated with the fluctuations in inflation. It also provides a re- interpretation of evidence

on the effect of openness on the inflation-output tradeoff.

       A key implication of the theory is that globalization forces could induce monetary

authorities to put a greater emphasis on reducing the inflation rate than on narrowing the

output gaps. We provide a re- interpretation of the evidence on the effect of openness on the

sacrifice ratio which support the prediction of the theory.




                                       I. INTRODUCTION



Global inflation dropped from 30 percent a year to about 4 percent a year in the 1990s. At the

same time massive globalization process has swept emerging markets in Latin America,

European transition economies, and the East Asian emerging economies. The establishment

in 1992 of the single market, and the formation of the single currency area in 1999 in Europe,

are landmarks of globalization that also took place in this period. Thus, globalization and

disinflation seem to go hand in hand. Indeed, Ken Rogoff (2003, 2004), who was among the

first to observe the linkage between globalization and disinflation, elaborates on some

favorable factors that have been helping to drive down global inflation in the 1990s. A




1
    We thank Robert King, Philip Lane, Chris Pissarides, Andrew Scott, and Ken West
    for useful comments.
                                             -3-




hypothesis, which he put forth, is that the “globalization—interacting with deregulation and

privatization—has played a strong supporting role in the past decade’s disinflation”. 2



Empirical investigation of the effect of openness on the output-inflation tradeoff begins with

Romer (1993), who based his interpretation of the cross-country evidence on the Barro-

Gordon inflation-biased paradigm. Romer (1993, 1998), and Lane (1997) show that inflation

and trade liberalization are negatively, and significantly, correlated in large (flexible

exchange rate) OECD economies. Chen, Imbs and Scott (2004) investigate empirically the

competitive effects of increased international trade in goods and services on prices,

productivity and markups. Using disaggregated data for EU manufacturing over the period

1988-2000 they find that increased openness exerts a negative and significant impact on

sectors prices. Increased openness lowers prices by reducing markups and by raising

productivity. Their results suggest that the increase in the trade volume could account for as

much as a quarter of European disinflation over the sample period.

This paper explores the effects of globalization (opening of a country to trade in goods, and

liberalization of its international capital markets) on the inefficiencies associated with

fluctuations in the output gap and the inflation rate in a sticky price, new Keynesian, model.

The analysis shows how globalization alters the relative weights applied to the output gap

and inflation in a utility-based loss function. The utility based loss function is derived in a

new Keynesian set up. The mechanism at play , not yet addressed in the existing literature,


2
    See Appendix 1 for a description of globalization trends in monetary policy and
    openness in the last two decades.
                                                 -4-




features the consumption-smoothing properties of capital market integration, and the de-

linking of the commodity composition of consumption from the commodity composition of

domestic output that characterize specialization under goods market integration. It turns out

that these features of openness help reduce inefficiencies associated with output gap

fluctuations, relative inflation fluctuations.

We also provide a new way of interpreting the evidence of the effect of openness on the

sacrifice ratio. In addition, we illustrate the implication with evidence on the effect of

globalization on the sacrifice ratio that lead to changes in the utility-based loss function.

A key implication is that globalization forces could induce monetary authorities, guided in

their policies by the welfare criterion of a representative household, putting a greater

emphasis on reducing the inflation rate than on narrowing the output gaps.



The organization of the paper is as follows. Section II describes the model. Section III

provides a derivation of the closed-economy utility-based loss function from the

conventional expected utility of the representative household. Sections IV and V extend the

derivation of the utility-based loss function to open economies. Section VI reviews existing

evidence on the effect of openness on the output-inflation tradeoffs. Section VII provides

fresh evidence on the effect of globalization on the output-inflation tradeoffs. Section VIII

concludes.
                                             -5-




                               II. ANALYTICAL FRAMEWORK

The analytical framework draws on the new Keynesian macroeconomics literature. The main

features of the model are:

(1) A representative household whose utility is defined over consumption and leisure, as in

the standard micro-based welfare analysis.

(2) Domestic economy produces a continuum of varieties; decisions of

the   representative   household    are   governed   by   Dixit-Stiglitz

preferences over varieties (generating fixed elasticities); Purchasing

power parity condition prevails; and foreign firms’ prices are

exogenous.

(3) A proportion of producers set domestic currency denominated

prices one period in advance; the proportion of all the rest of the

domestic producers set flexibly the domestic currency denominated

prices, so that markets clear for these goods.

(4)   A quadratic loss function, which depends on the output gap and

inflation surprise is derived from a standard welfare criterion of a

representative individual, which depends on consumption and work

effort.
                                                                        -6-




                                                                     III. THE MODEL

Assume that the welfare criterion, from which a quadratic utility-based loss function is to be

derived, is standard expected utility of a representative household, given by:

     ∞
E          β tU t ,
    t =0


Where,
                                      n
U t = u (C t ; ξ t ) −                     w(ht ( j ); ξ t )dj   .
                                      0


Aggregate consumption, Ct is an index of differentiated products:
                                           θ
           1              θ −1            θ −1
Ct =           ct ( j )    θ
                                 dj              .
           0




Labor supply for product variety j is denoted by ht ( j ) . The production function of variety j

is given by At f (ht ( j )) . The vector ( At , ξ t ) represents productivity and preference

shocks. The u (Ct ; ξ t ) - function is concave in C, so that the consumer wants to smooth

consumption fluctuations. The w(ht ( j ); ξ t ) –function is convex in h, so that the consumer

prefers equality in the supply of labor for different varieties to dispersion in the labor supply.

The number of varieties produced at home is n < 1 and the number of varieties consumed at

home is equal to one. (In a closed economy, n = 1.)

Aggregate domestic output is specified as

                                       θ
           n              θ −1        θ −1
Yt =           yt ( j )    θ
                                 dj              ,
           0
                                           -7-




If the economy is open to trade in goods, the number of domestically produced varieties is

less than the number of domestically consumed varieties. Thus, the commodity composition

of the consumption basket is different than the commodity composition of the output basket.

As a result, the correlations between fluctuations in output and consumption, which is perfect

in the case of a closed economy, are less than perfect if the economy is opened to trade in

goods. As standard, when the economy is financially open output fluctuations are inter-

temporally separated from consumption fluctuations due to the consumption-smoothing

property of international capital flows. Therefore the two types of openness de-link output

fluctuations from consumption fluctuations; the later are the object of welfare evaluations,

but not the former.



III.1 Price Setting


Firms behave monopolistically in the goods markets, and, at the same time,

monopsonistically in the labor market (because producer j as the sole demander for labor of

type-j and household supply of type-j labor is perfectively competitive). A fraction γ of the

monopolistically competitive firms sets their prices flexibly at p1t, supplying y1t; whereas the

remaining fraction 1 - γ sets their prices one period in advance (in period t – 1) at p2t,

supplying y2t. In the former case, the price is marked up above the marginal cost, s, by the

factor

           θ
 µ=             >1 ,
         θ −1
So that,
                                                                                    -8-




 p1t
     − µs(kt , y1t , Yt ; ξ t , At ) = 0.
 Pt



In the later case, p2t is set so as to maximize expected discounted profit


            1
Et                       ( p2t y 2t − wt ht )            =        Et −1
                                                                             1
                                                                                    [                       (
                                                                                    Yt Ptθ p12−t θ − wt f −1 Yt Ptθ p2θt   )] ,
         1 + it −1                                                        1 + it −1




Which yields a price-setting rule for p2t is as follows.


Et −1
           1                p
                  Yt Ptθ −1 2t − µs( y2t ,Yt ,ξt , At ) = 0
                                                              .
        1 + it −1           Pt

The notation it −1 stands for lagged nominal rate of interest. 3



3
    In the special case of perfect certainty, this is nothing but the standard equation describing

price as a mark-up over marginal cost. With uncertainty, it can be interpreted as a weighted

average of price mark-ups over marginal cost. This expected value is equal to zero. With

preset pricing, the price is determined by expectations of next period demand and costs, but

the firm is committed to supply according to the actual realizations of demands and costs.

That is, realization of the shocks will affect actual output, with negative shocks leading to

excess capacity and positive shocks to over-capacity. The model predicts that the mark-ups

of the producers who pre-set their prices will be counter-cyclical. Negative demand shocks

will induce the flex-price firms to adjust their prices downward, attracting demand away

from, and thus lowering the marginal costs and jacking up the price mark-ups of the fixed-

price firms.
                                           -9-




Figure 1 describes equilibrium in one such market.        The downward-sloping, marginal-

productivity curve is the demand for labor. Supply of labor, Sh, is implicitly determined by

the utility-maximizing condition for h. The upward-sloping marginal factor cost curve is the

marginal cost change from the producer point of view. It lies above the supply curve because,

in order to elicit more hours of work, the producer has to offer a higher wage not only to that

(marginal) hour but also to all the (infra-marginal) existing hours. Equilibrium employment

occurs at a point where the marginal factor costs is equal to the marginal productivity.

Equilibrium wage is given by B, with the worker’s real wage marked down below her

marginal product by the distance AB.4




4
         Full employment obtains because workers are offered a wage according to their
supply schedule. This is why the aggregate supply curve will be stated in terms of excess
capacity (product market version) rather than unemployment (labor market version). In fact,
the model can also accommodate unemployment by introducing a labor union, which has
monopoly power to bargain on behalf of the workers with the monopsonistic firms over the
equilibrium wage. In such case, the equilibrium wage will lie somewhere between Sh and M
Ph, and unemployment can arise – so that the labor market version of the Phillips curve can
be derived as well. To simplify the analysis, we assume in this paper that the workers are
wage-takers. In the limiting case where the producers behave perfectly competitive in the
labor market, the real wage becomes equal to the marginal productivity of labor and the
marginal cost of labor curve is not sensitive to output changes. Thus, with a constant mark-
up, θ the aggregate supply curve becomes flat, i.e., no relation exists between inflation and
    θ −1
excess capacity.
                                                         - 10 -




                Figure 1: The Labor Market
      W/P               Equilibrium
                                         Marginal Factor Cost
                                                                          Labor Supply
                                  A
     Mark
     Down                          B
                                                                  Marginal Productivity
                                                                  Times
                                                                  Marginal Revenue
                                                                                h




III.2 Transformed Utility Function


To derive the quadratic loss function from a standard welfare criterion of a representative

household we follow Woodford (2003).5 We first transform the labor disutility function

                                        1
toν ( yt ( j )) ≡ w( f −1 ( y t ( j )      ) . We employ the production function, y t ( j ) = At f (ht ( j )) and
                                        At

transform the utility function, as follows.



                            1
U t = u (C t ; ξ t )) − ν ( y t ( j ); ξ t , At )dj .
                           0


The transformed the real marginal costs is given by:



5
    See a closed economy derivation in Appendix II.
                                                                   - 11 -




s ( y ( j ), Y ; ξ , A) = v y ( y ( j ); ξ , A) / u c (Y ; ξ ) ,



Where, v y and uc denote the marginal disutility of labor and the marginal utility of

consumption, respectively. The elasticity of v y ( y ( j ); ξ , A) with respect to y is denoted by

      Y v yy (Y )
ω=                   .
        v y (Y )

The elasticity of real marginal cost s with respect to Y is denoted by

              Cu cc
 σ −1 = −           >0;
               uc

                                                                                                     1
where, all the elasticities are evaluated at a no-shock steady state C t = C , Yt = Y , β =              ,
                                                                                                    1+ r
and r is the world rate of interest.




III.3 Output Gap


We specify the conventional concept of the output gap by
        ∧      ∧ N
xt = Y t − Y t .
Where, a “hat” denotes a proportional deviation from steady state, and a superscript N

                                                                       ∧
indicates flexible price equilibrium. That is, Y t is equal to deviations of actual output from

                                          ∧ N
its steady state level and               Y t is equal to deviations of potential output from its steady state

level. Potential output is defined as the level of output the economy would produce if all

prices and wages are fully flexible.

Yet, another concept of output gap has to do with the monopolistic-competition distortion.
                                                      - 12 -




In a shock-free steady state, the level of output, Y , is implicitly given by:
                                               1
s (C , Y ;0,1) = v y (Y ;0,1) / u c (C ;0) =
                                               µ,


As is standard in the Dixit-Stiglitz setup, the mark up is defined in terms of the cross-variety
                                           θ
elasticity of substitution, µ =                . However, the efficient (zero mark up) output in the
                                       θ −1
shock-free steady state, Y * , is implicitly given by:


s (C*, Y *;0,1) = 1 .


The other output gap concept is defined by the ratio of the flexible price (steady state)
monopolistic-competition output and the efficient (steady state) output, given by Y /Y * . A
log-approximation of the ratio yields:
                                       1
x* = log(Y / Y *) = −(ω + σ −1 )           .
                                       µ
Thus, the monopolistic output gap in logs, x * , is an increasing function of the markup,

with a zero bound (reached in the limiting case where the mark up shrinks to zero.



                        IV. GLOBALIZATION AND EFFICIENCY OF EQUILIBRIUM


As is well known, the economy tends to specialize in production and to diversify in
consumption as it opens up. This means the number of domestically produced varieties is
equal to n, less than the number of domestically consumed varieties which is equal to one,
when the economy trade goods in the international markets. Consequently, the commodity
composition of the consumption basket and the composition of the output basket, that were
identical in a closed economy, would diverge when international trade opens up. As a result,
the correlation between fluctuations in output and consumption, which is equal to one in the
case of a closed economy, falls short of one if the economy is opened to international trade in
                                               - 13 -




goods. When the economy becomes also financially open, domestic consumption spending
and domestic output typically diverge for a separate reason. That is household would smooth
aggregate consumption through international borrowing and lending. In so doing the
aggregate output path diverges from the aggregate consumption path. . The upshot is that in
both cases of openness, albeit for different reasons, the correlation between the fluctuations
in the output gap and the fluctuations in aggregate consumption are reduced. Because
consumer welfare depends on consumption, not on output, the weight of the output gap in the
loss function falls with trade and capital openness. In what follows we formalize this
intuition.



IV.1. Capital Mobility and Goods' Mobility


If capital is perfectly mobile, then the domestic agent has a costless access to the

international financial market. As a consequence, household can smooth consumption

similarly in the rigid price and flexible price cases6:


                                               Cˆ t = Cˆ tN .

Thus when the capital market is open perfect consumption smoothing is achieved; the

equilibrium proportional deviations of consumption from a common steady state are identical

in the fixed-price and flexible-price cases.

If goods are perfectly mobile the number of product varieties is reduced from the closed-

trade number of one to n.

The approximate utility-based loss function for open-capital and open- trade regimes is:

6
  Recall that we assume that the subjective discount factor is equal to the world market
discount factor; hence perfect consumption smoothing with zero growth of consumption in
the steady state.
                                                  - 14 -




                             1 γ       nϖ
Lt = (π t − Et −1π t ) 2 +                  ( xt − x*) 2 + exogenousterm
                             θ 1 − γ 1 + ϖθ

                      1
x* = (ω + σ −1 ) −1
                      µ

.

. To provide intuition we note that inefficiencies of the new Keynesian economy could be

grouped into two types:

(i) Because according to the original welfare criterion consumption fluctuations are welfare

reducing, output gap fluctuations in the derived loss function are also welfare reducing.

(ii) It is efficient that the allocation of the supply of labor across product varieties is the same,

because varieties have the same technologies and preferences concerning varieties are

symmetric. Cross variety output dispersion is therefore welfare reducing. An increase in

unanticipated inflation rates, given that some prices are set in advance, would raise output

dispersion. Hence, unanticipated inflation is welfare reducing.



    We note that the relative weight that is placed upon the output gap term, in terms of

quadratic deviations of the inflation rate, is also equal to the slope of the aggregate supply

(the sacrifice ratio), times the inverse of the cross-variety elasticity of substitution, which is

proportional to the mark up of the flexible price firms.
                                                       - 15 -




Naturally, the quadratic approximation to the utility function is derived from some

optimizing equilibrium conditions. The efficiency-sensitive preferences, and optimizing

conditions, underlying the loss function are embedded with the equality between the

marginal rate of substitution between the inflation and output gap to the marginal rate of

transformation between inflation and output gap (derived from the aggregate supply

relationship). A utility-based loss function would naturally reflect some of constraints on

optimizations that are associated from the aggregate supply relationship. This means that

there is a direct relationship between the sacrifice ratio (the inverse of the slope of the

aggregate supply schedule) and the relative weight of the output gap term in the loss

function. The associated aggregate supply relationship (see Razin and Yuen (2002) is:



                      γ     nω ˆ h ˆ N        (1 − n)ω ˆ f ˆ N     1− n 1
π t − E t −1π t =                (Yt − Yt ) +         (Yt − Yt ) +         eˆt − E t −1 eˆt ;
                    1 − γ 1 + ωθ               1 + ωθ               n 1− γ




The term ê is a proportional deviation of the real exchange rate from its corresponding

steady state level, and Yˆt f is a proportional deviation of the rest-of-the-world output from its

corresponding steady state level. Because n denotes the number of domestically produced

goods, 1-n denotes the number of imported goods. .
                                                       - 16 -




IV.2. Closed Capital Account but Open Trade Account


If the domestic economy does not participate in the international financial market, then there

is no possibility of consumption smoothing. That is, Cˆ t = Yˆt ; Cˆ tN = Yˆt N . Open trade account

implies n<1.

The approximate utility-based loss function is given by7:

                           1 γ n ω + σ −1
 Lt = (π t − E t −1π t ) +  2
                                          ( x t − x*) 2 + exogenoust erm
                           θ 1 − γ 1 + ωθ
.

IV.3. The Closed Economy


Under trade and financial autarky, all the goods in the domestic consumption index are

produced domestically, which means that n = 1, because commodity composition of the

output and the consumption baskets are the same, and Cˆ t = Yˆt ; Cˆ tN = Yˆt N . This is because

consumption spending must equal output in the fixed price and the flexible price economies.

The approximate utility-based loss function is given by:

                                1 γ ω + σ −1
Lt = (π t − Et −1π t ) 2 +                     ( xt − x*) 2 + exogenousterm 8
                                θ 1 − γ 1 + ωθ

7
          In this case, the aggregate-supply curve is:

                     γ    nω + σ − 1 ˆ h ˆ N     (1 − n)ω ˆ f ˆ N     1− n 1
π t − E t −1π t =                   (Yt − Yt ) +         (Yt − Yt ) +         eˆt − E t −1 eˆt .
                    1 − γ 1 + ωθ                  1 + ωθ               n 1− γ

8
    The aggregate supply schedule is: π t − E t −1π t = γ             ω + σ −1 ˆ h ˆ N .
                                                                              (Yt − Yt )
                                                                1 − γ 1 + ωθ
                                                 - 17 -




                     V. COMPARING WEIGHTS IN THE LOSS FUNCTION


The relative output-gap weight (the unexpected-inflation weight is normalized to one) in each

one of the openness scenarios is given by:



            1       γnω
(i) ψ 1 =                             (Perfect International Capital and Goods Mobility)
            θ (1 − γ )(1 + θω )



              1 γ (nω + σ −1 )
(ii) ψ 2 =                            (Closed Capital Account and Open Trade)
              θ (1 − γ )(1 + θω )



                1 γ (ω + σ −1 )
(iii) ψ 3 =                           (Fully Closed economy)
                θ (1 − γ )(1 + θω )



One can verify that ψ 1 < ψ 2 < ψ 3 .9


9
    Note we implicitly assume that the price-setting fractions (γ ,1 − γ ) across the different
openness scenarios are the same; empirically this assumption can be relaxed. Also, the open
economy steady state elasticities are assumed to be equal to the closed economy steady state
elasticities. There is however no theory that can explain the fixed-flexible pricing structure
for a closed economy; or one that can rationalize how the pricing structure changes in the
presence of globalization. Thus we also do not know how globalization affects the structure
of price setting behavior by firms. The globalization proposition we just proved is therefore
conditional on exogenous determination of the price-setting fractions (γ ,1 − γ ) across the
different openness scenarios.
                                            - 18 -




This means that successive rounds of opening of the current and capital accounts reduce the
output-gap weight in the utility-based loss function. This result has consumption-smoothing
and trade-specialization intuition that we presented in the previous subsection.


A simple one-period optimization problem of the central bank can serve to illustrate our
findings. Assume that the central bank minimizes the level of the utility-based quadratic loss
function, subject to the aggregate supply constraint. The first order condition implies:
                       1
  (π t − Et −1π t ) = − ( SR )( xt − x*)
                     θ
                                                                            γnω
Where, SR denotes the sacrifice ratio; for example, SR is equal to                      in the case
                                                                      (1 − γ )(1 + θω )

of perfect international mobility of capital and goods.



That is, for any given level of the output gap, the inflation rate is lower as the SR gets larger.

This optimizing monetary rule implies that the central bank would become more aggressive

with respect to inflation, as the economy opens up to trade in goods and flows of capital.



        VI. GLOBALIZATION AND THE SACRIFICE RATIO: EMPIRICAL LITERATURE



Romer (1993) finds a negative relationship between trade openness and anticipated inflation.

Loungani, Razin, and Yuen (2001) find a positive relationship between trade and capital

account openness. Using Ball'
                            s sacrifice ratio estimates in a cross-country analysis, and trade

openness measures (based on import-output ratios) Temple (2002) finds weak relationship

between trade openness and the sacrifice ratio. However, the use of non-instrumented import-
                                           - 19 -




output ratio as openness measures in the regressions raises acute issues of endogeneity.

Indeed, Daniels, Nourzad, and Vanhoose (2005), augment the cross-country data of Temple

(2002) with a measure of central bank independence, which allows them to account for the

interaction between the central bank independence and his measure of trade openness. Their

empirical results indicate that once this interaction is taken into account, there is a positive

and statistically significant relationship between trade openness and the sacrifice ratio. The

evidence has been interpreted in the existing literature in terms of the slope of the Phillips

curve, but we can reinterpret this evidence also differently. The de-facto output-inflation

tradeoff characterizes the relative weight in the loss function which the policy maker put on

inflation. This consideration enables us to use the estimated general-equilibrium sacrifice

ratio as an indicator for the de-facto weight of the output gap in the unobserved utility-based

loss function.



VII.     Evidence on Inflation-Output Ratio and Openness

In this section we provide an additional piece of evidence for the effect of openness on the

de-facto weight of the output gap in the unobserved utility-based loss function. Because the

                                                                                        1
relative weight of the output gap term in the utility-based loss function is equal to       times
                                                                                        θ

the sacrifice ratio, a key empirical assumption that we make in order to connect the analysis

                                                               1
to the utility based loss function is that the parameter           is uncorrelated, across the
                                                               θ

disinflation episodes, with the measures of openness.
                                            - 20 -




Sacrifice ratios and their determinants

Our regressions focus on explaining the determinants of sacrifice ratios as measured by Ball.

He starts out by identifying disinflations, episodes in which the trend inflation rate fell

substantially. Ball identifies 65 disinflation episodes in 19 OECD countries, over the period

1960 to 1987. For each of these episodes he calculates the associated sacrifice ratio. The

denominator of the sacrifice ratio is the change in trend inflation over an episode. The

numerator is the sum of output losses, the deviations between output and its trend (“full

employment”) level.

       We also take from Ball the data on the determinants of the sacrifice ratios such as the

initial level of inflation, the change in inflation over the course of the episode and the length

of the disinflation episode.

Restrictions on trade and capital Accounts

Measuring the degree of openness of trade and capital accounts is always a heroic task.

Since 1950, the IMF has issued an annual publication, which tries to describe the controls

that its member countries have in place on various current account capital account

transactions. However, as Cooper (1999, p. 111) notes, these descriptions are very imperfect

measures of the extent of restrictions, particularly in the case of the capital account:

    “… Restrictions on international capital transactions … come in infinite variety.

    Therefore an accurate portrayal requires knowledge not only of the laws and

    regulations in place, but also of how they are implemented—which often requires

    much official discretion—and of how easily they are circumvented, either legally or

    illegally. The IMF reports the presence of restrictions, but not their intensity or their

    impact.”
                                            - 21 -




    Quinn (1997) takes the basic IMF qualitative descriptions on the presence of restrictions

and translates them into a quantitative measure of restrictions using certain coding rules. This

translation provides a measure of the intensity of restrictions on current account transactions

on a (0, 8) scale and restrictions on capital account transactions on a (0, 4) scale; in both

cases, a higher number indicates fewer restrictions. We use the Quinn measures, labeled

CURRENT and CAPITAL, respectively, as our measures of restrictions. We also use the

sum of the two measures, as an overall measure of the degree of restrictions on the openness

of the economy; this measure is labeled OPEN. The econometrics advantage of using rule-

based openness dummies over trade flows (e.g., the import to output ratios) and capital flows

in the regression analysis has to with the endogeneity of the latter measures and the absence

of good instruments.



    For each disinflation episode identified by Ball, we use as an independent variable the

current account and capital account restrictions that were in place the year before the start of

the episode. This at least makes the restrictions pre-determined with respect to the sacrifice

ratios, though of course not necessarily exogenous.



       Regressions

The sources of data on the sacrifice ratio is Ball (1993, 1994); and the source of data on the

restrictions on trade in goods and capital account transactions is Quinn (1997).
                                             - 22 -




        The first column of Table 1 reports a regression of the sacrifice ratio on initial

inflation, the length of the episode (measured in quarters) and the change in inflation over the

course of the episode. Not surprisingly, as all the data were taken from Ball’s study, the

results are qualitatively similar and quantitatively virtually identical to regressions reported

in his paper. The key finding is that sacrifice ratios are smaller the quicker is the speed with

which the disinflation is undertaken. The change in inflation also enters with the predicted

sign and is significant (t=1.8, p-value=.076). Initial inflation is insignificant (and has the

wrong sign from the perspective of the theory).

        Now consider the impacts of adding the measures of openness, which are shown in

the next three regressions. Ball’s findings continue to hold. The length of the episode and the

decline in inflation become more significant, while initial inflation remain insignificant. The

measures of openness enter with the positive sign predicted by the theory. The effect of

openness on the sacrifice ratio is statistically significant, as reflected also in the perking up of

the adjusted R-square of the three regressions when compared to the first. The restrictions on

the current account appear statistically more significant than the restrictions on the capital

account. When we enter both CURRENT and CAPITAL in the regression, CURRENT

remained significant but CAPITAL was not. The correlation between the two variables is

almost 0.5; hence, our inability to tease out separate effects is not entirely surprising.
                                         - 23 -




        Table 1: Sacrifice Ratios and Restrictions on Current Account and Capital Account

Independent Variables            (1)                (2)            (3)             (4)

Constant                       -0.001             -0.059          -0.033          -0.058

                              (0.012)             (0.025)        (0.022)         (0.026)

Initial Inflation              0.002              0.003           0.003           0.003

                              (0.002)             (0.002)        (0.002)         (0.002)

Length of Disinflation         0.004              0.004           0.004           0.004

Episode                       (0.001)             (0.001)        (0.001)         (0.001)

Change in Inflation            -0.006             -0.007          -0.006          -0.007

during Episode                (0.003)             (0.003)        (0.003)         (0.003)

CURRENT
                                                  0.008
Index of current account          .                                 .               .
                                                  (0.003)
restrictions

CAPITAL
                                                                  0.010
Index of capital account          .                  .                              .
                                                                 (0.006)
restrictions

OPEN
                                                                                  0.006
Sum of CURRENT and                .                  .              .
                                                                                 (0.002)
CAPITAL



Adjusted R-square               0.16               0.23            0.19            0.23

Number of observations           65                 65             65              65
                                            - 24 -




Note: Numbers in parentheses are standard errors.



Thus, the regressions in Table 1 provide some additional support to the notion that that

relative weight of the inflation in the loss function increases with trade, capital, and overall

openness.10

                                      VIII. CONCLUSION

       This paper brings forth an efficiency argument (supplementing the competition-

discipline argument) for putting heavier weight on inflation, relative to output gap, in a

utility-based loss function, as the economy opens up. The theory provides also a new way to

interpret existing evidence of the empirical relationships between openness and the sacrifice

ratio. The theory is based on a mechanism that has not yet been addressed in the existing

literature of how globalization forces induce monetary authorities, guided in their policies by

the welfare criterion of a representative household, to put greater emphasis on reducing the

inflation rate than on narrowing the output gaps. With capital account liberalization the

representative household is able to smooth fluctuations in consumption, and thus becomes

relatively insensitive to fluctuations in the output gap. With trade liberalization the economy

tends to specialize in production but not in consumption. The correlation between

fluctuations in the output gap and aggregate consumption is therefore weakened by trade



10
  Results are consistent with Loungani, Razin, and Yuen (2001) and Daniels, Nourzad, and
Vanhoose (2005). See also Appendix 1 for indirect evidence on the linkage between
globalization and tightness of monetary policy.
                                            - 25 -




openness; hence a smaller weight on the output gap in the utility-based loss function,

compared to the closed economy situations.

We cite existing evidence on openness and the sacrifice ratio, and provide reinterpretation of

the evidence, in light of the theory. The evidence, although cannot sharply discriminate

between alternative hypotheses, is consistent with the theory prediction that goods and

capital markets openness increases the distortion associated with fluctuations in inflation and

decreases the distortions associated with fluctuations in the output gap.



We observe also that the theory has an important implication for the incentive of a central

bank to deviate from its pre-announced monetary rule (as in the Kydland and Prescott (1977),

Barro and Gordon (1983), and Rogoff (1985)). Globalization lessens such temptation that

leads to inflation bias, because the central banker is less sensitive to output gap fluctuations.
                                            - 26 -




References



Ball, Laurence, 1993, “What Determines the Sacrifice Ratio?” NBER Working Paper No.
        4306, March (reprinted in Mankiw (ed.), Monetary Policy (University of Chicago
        Press, 1994)).

Ball, Laurence, N. Gregory Mankiw and David Romer, “The New Keynesian Economics and
        the Output-Inflation Tradeoff,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 19, 1988, 1-
        65.

Barro, Robert, and David Gordon (1983), “A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy in a Natural
       Rate Model?” The Journal of Political Economy, 91, (4), pp. 589 -610.


Benati, L. (2004), "Evolving post-World War II U.K. economic performance," Journal of
       Money,Credit and Banking, 36, (4), pp. 691-717.


Benigno, Gianluca and Benigno, Pierpaolo (2003), "Price stability in open economies," The
       Review Of Economic Studies, 70, pp 743-764.


Blanchard, Olivier and Francesco Giavazzi (2002), "Current Account in The Euro Area:The
       End of The Horioka-Feldstein Puzzle?", MIT Department of Economics, Working
       Paper No. 03-05.


Chen, Natalie, Jean Imbs, and Andrew Scott, (2004), “Competition, Globalization and the
       Decline of Inflation,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 6495, October.


Cooper, Richard, 1999, “Should Capital Controls be Banished?” Brookings Papers on
      Economic Activity, 89-125.

Daniels, Joseph P., Farrokh Nourzad, and David D. Vanhoose (2005), "Openness, Central
       Bank Independence, and the Sacrifice Ratio," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
       Vol. 37, No. 2 (April), pp. 371-379.

Paoli, Bianca (2004), "Monetary Policy and Welfare in a Small Open Economy," CEP
        Discussion Paper Series No. 639, London School of Economics.

Gali, Jordi and Monacelli, Tommaso (2005), "Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate
        Volatilityin a Small Open Economy," The Review of Economic Studies, 72, pp 707-
        734.
                                           - 27 -




Goodfriend, and Robert G. King, (1997), “The New Neoclassical Synthesis and the Role of
      Monetary Policy,” NBER Macroeconomic Annual 12. By Ben Bernanke, and Julio
      Rotemberg. Cambridge: MIT Press: 231-83.

Kydland, Finn, and Edward Prescott, (1977), “Rules Rather Than Discretion: The
      Inconsistency of Policy Plans,” Journal of Political Economy, 85 (3), pp. 473-491.

Lane, Philip, (1997), “Inflation in Open Economies,”Journal of International
       Economics,” 42, pp. 327-347.

Loungani, Prakash, Assaf Razin , 2002, “Evidence on Sacrifice Ratios and Openness,”
      mimeo. Tel Aviv University.

Loungani, Prakash, Assaf Razin and Chi-Wa Yuen, 2001, “Capital Mobility and the Output-
      Inflation Tradeoff,” Journal of Development Economics 64, 255-74.


Lucas, Robert E, 1973, “Some International Evidence on Output-Inflation Trade-offs,”
       American Economic Review 63 (June), 326-34.

Razin, Assaf, and Chi-Wa Yuen, 2002, “The "New Keynesian" Phillips Curve:
       Closed Economy vs. Open Economy,” Economics Letters, Vol. 75 (May), pp.
       1–9.

Rogoff, Kenneth, 1985, “The Optimal Degree of Commitment to a Monetary Target,”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics, 100, pp. 1169-1190.

Rogoff, Kenneth, 2003, “Disinflation: An Unsung Benefit of Globalization?,”
       Finance and Development, Volume 40, No. 4 (December), pp. 55–56.

Rogoff, Kenneth, 2004, "Globalization and Global Disinflation," in Federal Reserve
       Bank of Kansas City, Monetary Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a
       Changing Economy proceedings of the 2003 Jackson Hole symposium
       sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.

Romer, David, 1998, “A New Assessment of Openness and Inflation: Reply,”
      Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXII (2) May, 649-652.


Romer, David, 1993, “Openness and Inflation: Theory and Evidence,” Quarterly
      Journal of Economics, CVII (4), November, pp. 869-904.
                                          - 28 -




Okun, Arthur, 1978, “Efficient Disinflationary Policies,” American Economic Review, 348-
      52.

Quinn, Dennis, 1997, “The Correlates of Change in International Financial Regulation,”
       American Political Science Review, 91 (September), 531-51.

Sgherri, Silvia, 2002, “A Stylized Model of Monetary Policy,” World Economic
       Outlook, (April), pp. 95–98.

Temple, Jonathan, (2002), "Openess, Inflation, and the Phillips Curve: A Puzzle." Journal of
      Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 34, pp. 450-468.

Woodford, Michael, 2003, “Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary
     Policy” (Princeton University Press).
                                            - 13 -                                  APPENDIX I




                 Appendix I: Globalization and Disinflation--Recent Trends

Sgherri (2002) reports the parameter estimates for a monetary model for the U.S. economy,
both for the high inflation period (1970Q1–1982Q1, hereafter the 1970s) and the subsequent
move to the low inflation (1982Q2 onward) period. Similar results are obtained for other
industrial countries with independent monetary policies included in the sample (Canada,
Germany, and the United Kingdom). The parameter estimates indicate that—since 1982—
policymakers have become significantly more aggressive on inflation, less responsive to the
output gap, and more gradualist in adjusting their policy instruments.
Benati (2004) investigates the changing nature of the Phillips relationship in the United
Kingdom, with a flattening taking place in the 1980s and particularly high degree of stability
since the adoption of inflation targeting. International financial integration and the making of
the single European market are other possible contributing factors.


Trade openness, as measured by a reduction in levels of assistance afforded to domestic
industries through protectionist trade policies have raised: the protectionist policies have
gradually fallen over the past 40 years. The average level of tariffs and the incidence of use
of NTBs in most OECD countries for which data is available reached relatively low levels by
the mid-1990s. Trends in the use of NTBs, as measured by incidence and frequency of use of
NTBs, are shown in Table 1.


Table 1. Pervasiveness of non-tariff barriers

Per cent

                        Frequency ratio (a)            Import coverage ratio (b)

                       1988      1993       1996         1988      1993       1996

United States          25.5      22.9       16.8         16.7      17.0       7.7
European Union         26.6      23.7       19.1         13.2      11.1       6.7
Japan                  13.1      12.2       10.7          8.6       8.1       7.4
Canada                 11.1      11.0       10.4          5.7       4.5       4.0
Norway                 26.6      23.7        4.3         13.8      11.1       3.0
Switzerland            12.9      13.5        7.6         13.2      13.2       9.8
Australia               3.4       0.7        0.7          8.9       0.4       0.6
New Zealand            14.1       0.4        0.8         11.5       0.2       0.2
Mexico                  2.0       2.0       14.6         18.6      17.4       6.9
                                                 - 14 -                                     APPENDIX I




Source: OECD (1998), Trends in market openness
OECD Economic Outlook, June, 1998 .

Controls on cross-border capital flows encompass a diversified set of measures. Typically,
capital controls take two broad forms: (1) “administrative”, involving outright prohibitions;
and (2) “market based that attempt to discourage particular capital movements by making
them more expensive, through taxation. Kaminsky and Schmukler (2001) study the progress
of financial liberalization (reducing policy barriers to the purchase and sale of assets across
national borders) over 1972-99 periods in both the G-7 industrial economies and various
regional sub-groups in the developing world. They prepared a composite index of
liberalization of various segments of financial markets, including the capital accounts,
domestic financial systems, and stock markets. They found that during the period under
review removal of financially repressive measures was slow but continuous globally. They
also concluded that the G-7 industrial economies were the first and the rapidest to liberalize
their financial sectors. The rise in financial flows among industrial countries has enabled the
United States to become both the world’s largest creditor and its largest debtor, while
financial flows to developing countries have remained steady at about 4 percent of the
developing country GDP.


Blanchard and Giavazzi (2002) observe that Both Portugal and Greece, which have been running
large current account deficits, with no effect on their financial ratings. Starting from this observation,
they argue that Portugal and Greece are in fact representative of a broader evolution: Increasing
goods and financial market integration is leading to an increasing decoupling of saving and
investment within the European Union, and even more so within the Euro area. In particular, it is
allowing poorer countries to invest more, save less, and run larger current-account deficits. The
converse holds for the richer countries.
                                                                    - 15 -                                               APPENDIX II




                                 APPENDIX II: Closed Economy Quadratic Loss Function

In a closed economy, a quadratic approximation of the utility function, around the steady
state is given by:


             Yu c                                             ∧
Ut = −            (ω + σ −1 )( xt − x*) 2 + (ω + θ −1 ) var j y t ( j )
              2
∧                     yt ( j )              ∧           ∧n   ∧
y t ( j ) ≡ log(                 ); xt ≡ Y t − Y t ; Y t = log(Yt / Y )
                          Y
                     *
                 Y
x * = log(               )                                                               .                                      (1)
                  Y
         ∧                   ∧                  ∧                   ∧          ∧
var j y t ( j ) = γ [ y t (1) − E j y t ( j )] 2 + (1 − γ )[ y t (2) − E j y t ( j )]2
     ∧                ∧                             ∧
E j y t ( j ) = γ y t (1) + (1 − γ ) y t (2)


                                 ∧                       ∧
 The terms var j y t ( j ) and E j y t ( j )                     denote cross-variety output variance and average

 output, respectively. (A derivation of the quadratic utility is included in Appendix II).




Equation (1) can be rewritten as:
             Y uc                                              ∧
Ut = −            (ω + σ −1 )( x t − x*) 2 + (ω + θ −1 ) var j y t ( j ) .                                                        (2)
              2

Note that the term (ω + σ −1 )( x t − x*) 2 originates from the sub-utility u(Yt ; ξ t )) ;

                                        ∧                                                    1
The term (ω + θ −1 ) var j y t ( j ) originates from the sub-utility                             ν ( yt ( j ); ξ t , At )dj .
                                                                                             0




                         Yt        ∧    ∧
Approximate                 = 1 + Yt + (Yt ) 2 . Then,
                         Y
                                                                       - 16 -                                               APPENDIX II



          ∧                             _
                                                 1          ∧
                                                            ~               1 ∧               ∧
          u(Yt ; ξ t , At ) = u+ uc Y + uξ ξ t +    ucc (Yt ) 2 + ucξ Yξ t + (ξ t , At )'uξξ (ξ t , At )
                                                 2                          2
            _           ∧    1   ∧              ∧       1           ∧            ∧   ∧    1 ∧            ∧
          = u+ uc Y + (Y t + (Y t ) 2 ) + uξ ξ t + (Y ) 2 ucc (Yt ) 2 + ucξ Y ξ t Yt + (ξ t , At )'uξξ (ξ t , At )
                             2                          2                                 2
             ∧        1             2        ∧           2        ∧
          = Yt uc Y + (Y uc + Y ucc ) (Yt ) 2 − Y ucc g t (Yt ) 2
                      2
                   ∧  1              ∧                    ∧
          = Y uc [Yt + (1 − σ −1 ) (Yt ) 2 ] + σ −1 g t (Yt )
                      2
          _                         ∧
          u = u(Y ;0,1); Yt = Yt − Y

                            ∧
                      ucξ ξ t
          gt ≡ −
                      Y ucc

                                                1                                                             ∧
Using v y (Y ;0,1) / u c (Y ;0) =                    we get an approximation for the term: v ( yt ( j ); ξ t )
                                               µ


∧                     _   _       ∧          1          ∧                   ∧
v( y t ( j ); ξ t ) = v + u c Y [ y t ( j ) + (1 + ω )( y t ( j )) 2 − ωq t y t ( j )]
                                             2
                   1   ∧         1             ∧                   ∧
= u c Y [(1 − ) yt ( j ) + (1 + ω )( y t ( j )) 2 − ωqt y t ( j )]
                   µ             2
                                                    ∧
 ∧                    yt ( j )                v yξ ξ t
yt ( j ) = log(                  ); q t ≡ −
                        Y                     Y v yy
      1 ∧
                                                1               ∧      1                 ∧                  ∧                    ∧
          v( y t ( j ); ξ t ) =u c Y [(1 −          ) E j yt ( j ) +     (1 + ω )[ E j ( y t ( j )) 2 + var y t ( j )] − ωqt E j y t ( j )]
      0
                                               µ                       2
     =
                      1   ∧    1          ∧             ∧      1                   ∧
     Y u c [(1 −        ) Y t + (1 + ω )[(Y t ) 2 − ωqt Y t ] + [(θ −1 + ω ) var j y t ( j )]
                      µ        2                               2
                  ∧                 ∧               ∧                         ∧               ∧
     var j y t ( j ) = γ [ y t (1) − E j y t ( j )] 2 + (1 − γ )[ y t (2) − E j y t ( j )] 2
              ∧                 ∧                       ∧
      E j y t ( j ) = γ y t (1) + (1 − γ ) y t (2)
                        ∧                                                ∧                                                                ∧
, where, E j ( yt ( j )) is the mean value of yt ( j ) across all differentiated goods, and var yt ( j )

is the corresponding variance.
                                                      - 17 -                                     APPENDIX II




Finally, going back to U, we get:
              1 ∧ 1                 ∧                           ∧      1                   ∧
U t = Y u c [( ) Y t − (σ −1 + ω )[(Y t ) 2 + (σ −1 g t + ωqt )(Y t ) − [(θ −1 + ω ) var j y t ( j )] =
              µ       2                                                2
    Yuc                                             ∧
−       (σ −1 + ω )( xt − x*) 2 + (θ −1 + ω ) var j y t ( j )
     2
        ∧       ∧n
xt = Y t − Y t
∧n       σ −1 g t + ωqt
Yt =
           σ −1 + ω

            Y                      1
     log(      ) = −(σ −1 + ω ) −1
            Y*                     µ


The familiar Dixit-Stigliz preferences over the differentiated goods (varieties) imply


                                −θ
                     pt ( j )
yt ( j ) = Yt                        .
                       Pt



Log approximation yields:
log y t ( j ) = log Yt − θ (log pt ( j ) − log Pt ) . The derived cross-variety variance is:

var j log y t ( j ) = θ 2 var j log pt ( j ) . We can now substitute these derivations in equation (1) to

get:
            Y uc
Ut = −
             2
                     {                                                    }
                 (ω + σ −1 )( x t − x*) 2 + θ (1 + ωθ ) var j log p t ( j ) .        (1'
                                                                                       )

The approximate utility is seen in equation (2) to be a function of the output gap and price
dispersion across varieties.


       We now exploit the rational-expectation property that
log pt( 2) = Et −1 log pt(1)
                                             .
log Pt = γ log pt(1) + (1 − γ ) log pt( 2)
                                                         - 18 -                              APPENDIX II




These equations imply that:
 π t − Et −1π t = γ [log pt(1) − Et −1 log pt(1) ]
                                                     .
 = γ [log pt(1) − log pt( 2 ) ]
This step, in turn, yields:
var j log pt ( j ) = γ (1 − γ )[log pt(1) − log pt( 2) ] 2
     1− γ                                                    .
=           [π t − Et −1π t ]2
      γ
Substituting this relationship into equation (2) we get the closed economy loss function:
                                 1       σ −1 + ω
                                         γ
Lt = (π t − Et −1π t ) 2 +                        ( xt − x*) 2 + exogenousterm        (3)
                                 θ 1 − γ 1 + θω
                                     1
Where, x * = (ω + σ −1 ) −1              , and the exogenousterm is a function of other variables.11.
                                     µ




      .




11
   In general the terms in the loss function, aside for the output gap and inflation terms, are a
function of the world demand, real exchange rate, etc. We collapse these terms into the
linearterm. See Benigno and Benigno (2003), De Paoli (2004), and Gali and Monacelli
(2005).
