                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               CAPITAL FLOWS AND CONTROLS
                            IN BRAZIL: WHAT HAVE WE LEARNED?

                                              Ilan Goldfajn
                                              André Minella

                                          Working Paper 11640
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11640


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2005




This paper is forthcoming in the NBER book "Capital Controls and Capital Flows in Emerging Economies:
Policies, Practices and Consequences", organized by Sebastian Edwards. We thank Edmar Bacha, Sebastian
Edwards, Tricia Kissinger and the participants in the International Capital Flows Conference and seminar
at IEPE-CdG of Brazil for useful comments, Fernando Rocha and Fernando Lemos of the Balance of
Payments Division of the Central Bank of Brazil (BCB) for valuable explanations of the Balance of Payments
statistics, Jose Maria de Carvalho, Maria do Socorro Reboucas and Luciana de Oliveira of the Exchange and
Foreign Capital Regulation Executive Office (Gence) of the BCB for precious and detailed comments on
capital control issues. We are also grateful to Érica Diniz Oliveira and Eurípedes de Freitas Neto for
excellent assistance with data. The views expressed here are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the Central Bank of Brazil. Goldfajn: Partner, Gavea Investimentos and Pontifical Catholic University
of Rio de Janeiro (PUC-Rio). E-mails: igoldfajn@gaveainvest.com.br and goldfajn@econ.puc-rio.br.
Minella: Research Department, Central Bank of Brazil. E-mail: andre.minella@bcb.gov.br The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

©2005 by Ilan Goldfajn and André Minella. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Capital Flows and Controls in Brazil: What Have We Learned?
Ilan Goldfajn and André Minella
NBER Working Paper No. 11640
September 2005
JEL No. F21, F32, F40

                                           ABSTRACT




This paper analyzes the relationship between capital account liberalization and macroeconomic
volatility using Brazil as a case study. The paper provides several stylized facts regarding the
evolution of capital flows and controls in Brazil in the last three decades. We conclude that,
notwithstanding the financial crises and macroeconomic volatility of the recent past, capital account
liberalization and the floating exchange regime have led to a more resilient economy. Further
liberalization of the capital account is warranted and should be accompanied by a broad range of
reforms to improve and foster stronger institutions.


Ilan Goldfajn
Gávea Investimentos
Rua Dias Ferreira, 190 7th andar
22431-050-Rio de Janeiro-RJ
BRAZIL
igoldfajn@gaveainvest.com.br

André Minella
Research Department
Central Bank of Brazil
SBS-Quadra 3-Bloco B-Edificio Sede- 9th andar
70074-900-Brasília-DF
BRAZIL
andre.minella@bcb.gov.br
1. Introduction


       In the last few years, there has been a revival of the notion that capital controls
may be a necessary evil. The main argument is that, although capital controls may
introduce some economic distortions, excess capital mobility is partially responsible for
financial crises (and macroeconomic instability) in emerging market economies
(Stiglitz, 2002). Capital controls, goes the argument, provide emerging market
economies the means to prevent these unpleasant consequences.              However, recent
papers (e.g., Edwards, 2005) have found no systematic evidence suggesting that
countries with higher capital mobility tend to have a higher incidence of crises.


       Detailed case studies may provide evidence for this debate. The Brazilian case
provides an interesting example. Although Brazil still adopts a complex web of
bureaucratic controls on capital flows, in the last fifteen years it has been more
financially open than other large emerging market economies, in particular China and
India. The analysis of Brazil, a large sub-investment grade emerging market economy,
relatively integrated to the financial world and that has suffered both from financial
crises and macroeconomic volatility, could shed further light on the capital controls
issue. This paper details the experience of Brazil with capital mobility and controls.


       Macroeconomic performance in Brazil has indeed been quite volatile over the
last 30 years. Part of this volatility can be traced to a sequence of financial crises,
sudden stops and a boom-and-bust pattern of current account deficits and capital flows.
Brazil experienced two large cycles of current account deficits, one in the 1970s that
lasted until the debt crisis of the early 1980s and the second in the 1990s, that ended
with an abrupt reversal of the current account deficit after the 2002 electoral crisis.


       Currently, Brazil is running a current account surplus of almost 2% of GDP,
receiving approximately 2% of GDP in net foreign direct investment (FDI) and, for the
first time in decades, reducing its external debt. In this environment, one wonders
whether this performance is the sign of a new trend or the beginning of yet another
cycle that eventually will reverse course. The issue is whether a regime based on a
floating exchange rate, inflation targeting, fiscal responsibility and a relatively more
open financial account induced a structural change? It is difficult to judge at this point.


                                                                                          2
However, the combination of a few factors suggests a new trend. First, the floating
exchange rate regime is providing more incentives for borrowers to better assess risk, in
particular in the non-tradable sector. Second, exports are increasing in a magnitude not
seen before, leading to a record low ratio (still high by international comparison) of
external debt to exports. Third, the larger role of net direct investment in the latest surge
in capital flows is encouraging from a debt accumulation perspective. Nevertheless,
more analysis is needed. From an historical perspective, a relevant question is how does
the current phase compare to the previous adjustment undertaken after the debt crisis of
the 1980s? It is important to look at the past experience in Brazil.


           In the last 15 years Brazil has also started liberalizing its capital account. The
liberalization was a gradual process of establishing new rules on capital inflows and
outflows. The result of the liberalization process was: (i) reduction or elimination of
taxes on foreign capital financial transactions as well as of minimum maturity
requirements on loans; (ii) elimination of quantitative restrictions on investments by
nonresidents in financial and capital markets securities either issued domestically or
abroad; (iii) permission for residents to issue securities abroad, including debt, without
prior approval by the Central Bank; (iv) more freedom for residents to invest in FDI and
portfolio abroad; and finally (v) introduction of currency convertibility initially through
the mechanism of “international transfers in reais,” whereby residents could transfer
their resources abroad through the use of nonresident accounts. Since March 2005 a
more direct procedure is in place.


            In spite of the liberalization the resulting system does not mean unrestricted
freedom or free convertibility.1 Export proceeds still are required to be converted into
domestic currency (“exports surrender”) and there are limits on foreign currency
deposits. Current currency convertibility is based on monetary authority’s rules instead
of laws. Therefore, they can be lifted at any time. In addition, the public opinion still
associates transfers abroad with illicit or antipatriotic practices. Also, notwithstanding
the efforts to consolidate the exchange and capital account rules, the regulation is still
fragmented and involves rules set in different contexts and driven by various
motivations.


1
    The complete set of existing capital controls is presented in appendix A.


                                                                                           3
       A consolidation of the whole regulation in a unified law approved by Congress
is necessary. Reduction in bureaucratic requirements is needed as well. The rules would
become less uncertain and clearer. These changes would facilitate the change in
mentality, originated back in the capital flight period, when transfers abroad were
necessarily associated with illicit or antipatriotic practices.


       The large volatility of capital flows has been one of the main arguments for
those that oppose complete liberalization of capital movements. Since liberalization in
Brazil has occurred in parallel to a period of higher macroeconomic volatility, one could
wonder whether the case of Brazil reinforces the argument. The key points of the paper
do not point in this direction:


       i.       The debt accumulation pattern changed substantially after the
liberalization of the capital account and, especially, after the floating of the currency.
The private sector decreased significantly its issuance of external debt. The reduction in
private debt resulted partly from the abrupt interruption of access during the crises but
also from the floating of the currency, which ended a period of implicit guarantees that
included a fixed parity for borrowers;


       ii.      The profile of external financing has also changed since liberalization
and the floating regime. After a period based on portfolio investment, FDI replaced it as
the main financing source. Since 1998, net direct investment has comprised more than
100% of the net private capital flows. In general, FDI flows tend to be more stable and
less correlated with the other flows. Long-term debt flows worked as a stabilizing factor
during external crises, but behaved pro-cyclically during domestic crises;


       iii.     Net financial flows have, in general, financed current account deficits.
Some differences emerge over time. Net financial flows financed: i) a strong
accumulation of international reserves between 1992 and 1996; ii) a large expansion of
the current account deficit from 1995–1997, representing a growth of both investment
and consumption; and iii) an increase in the current account deficit from 1998–2001,
resulting from a higher deficit in net income from abroad;



                                                                                        4
       iv.     Following capital account liberalization, consumption—its growth rate
and share in GDP—has been more stable than in the 1980s. In comparison to the 1990s
growth episodes, economic growth in 2000–2001 and at the present (2004) took place in
a different context. First, net capital flows have been of a lower magnitude and have
been dominated by FDI. There has been no significant surge of short-term flows or
portfolio investment. Second, the expansions have been accompanied by a more
favorable situation in the trade balance. Third, one could argue that fundamentals
improved with the change in the fiscal policy regime and the adoption of inflation
targeting;


       v.     Sudden stops are more pronounced when the crisis is mostly domestically
driven. Analysis using a vector autoregressive (VAR) estimation indicates that shocks to
the country risk premium (measured by the EMBI) have the clearest effect on
macroeconomic performance. Higher country risk levels induce greater interest rates, a
more depreciated exchange rate, a reduction in capital inflows, and lower output. This
lead us to the importance of building up good fundamentals in the economy.


       These key points lead us to conclude that, notwithstanding the financial crises
and macroeconomic volatility of the recent past, capital account liberalization has led to
a more resilient economy. Therefore, further capital account liberalization should be
considered. Liberalization should be accompanied by a broad range of reforms to
improve and foster stronger institutions—such as approval of de jure central bank
independence (not only de facto)—establish a longer track record of responsible fiscal
policy (under the fiscal responsibility law) and reduce microeconomic inefficiencies and
contractual uncertainties.


       This paper is organized as follows. The next section provides the balance of
payment stylized facts of the last three decades (current account cycles, capital flow
cycles and composition, and debt accumulation). Section 3 describes the evolution of
capital controls in Brazil and evaluates the benefits and costs of further capital account
liberalization. Section 4 examines the volatility of capital flows in general and the
behavior of the flows during financial crises. Section 5 analyzes the relationship
between capital flows and macroeconomic performance in Brazil, evaluating what
capital flows have financed, the recent growth pattern, and whether there is more


                                                                                        5
consumption smoothing. In addition, we conduct some estimations on the determinants
of capital flows and develop a structural VAR to estimate the relationship between
capital flows and macroeconomic performance. The final section presents the main
conclusions.


2. Stylized facts


        Macroeconomic performance in Brazil has been volatile. Part of this volatility
can be traced to the boom-and-bust pattern in the balance of payments. In fact, there
have been long and pronounced cycles of current account deficits that ended abruptly.
Each cycle had its own history: different types of capital flows financed the boom,
sudden stops had different characteristics, and policy behavior was distinct.


        Brazil is currently in a post-adjustment period, running both trade and current
account surpluses. How does the current phase compare to the previous adjustment after
the debt crisis?


        This section provides the stylized facts of the main components of the balance of
payments in the last decades, starting with the current account cycles, but then focusing
on the capital flows, and the accumulation of external debt.


2.1. Current account cycles


        In the last decades, Brazil experienced two large cycles of current account
deficits, one in the 1970s, which lasted until the debt crisis of early eighties, and the
second in the 1990s, punctuated by the crises of the last few years. Figure 1 shows the
behavior of the current account and “private capital account", defined as the capital and
financial accounts minus official-agency-related loans.2 These long periods of current
account deficits were financed by voluntary capital flows. The first period was also a
period of high average GDP growth, but this was not the case in the second period.
Tables 1 and 2 show annual values and period averages for broad categories of the
balance of payments as a percentage of GDP as well as for GDP growth rate.

2
  See Appendix C for a more detailed explanation of the capital flows variables used in the text. The
figures in the text are shown either as percentage of GDP or based on constant 2003 U.S. dollars.


                                                                                                   6
        The behavior of the current account has been, in general, dominated by the
dynamics of the trade balance, whose deficit cycles are financed by large expansions of
capital inflows. Figure 2 depicts the path of the trade balance and income balance (net
remittances abroad of wages, profits, dividends, and interests), which are the main
components of the current account.3


        To analyze the current account performance in a broader macroeconomic
context, internationally as well as domestically, including the effect of policy decisions,
we subdivide the current account performance into five phases since the mid-1970s:


        1974–1982: the second National Development Plan (II PND) and external debt
accumulation. The economy presented large trade deficits from 1974 through 1980—
averaging 1.6% of GDP—as a result of the heavy investments under the II PND and the
two oil price shocks (1973 and 1979). The current account deficit was also exacerbated
by the increase in U.S. interest rates in 1979. The deficits were financed basically by
syndicated loans, in the context of a large expansion of international financial market
liquidity. The external financing and investments under the II PND supported
maintenance of high economic growth—GDP growth average of 7.0% in the 1974–
1980 period—despite the oil crisis. The inflation rate was also increasing, rising from
15.5% in 1973 to 110.2% in 1980 (measured by IGP-DI—General Price Index).
However, external debt reached high unsustainable levels, leading to the 1982 external
debt crisis;


        1983–1994: External debt renegotiation, current account adjustment, and high
inflation. With the interruption of voluntary capital flows, the economy had to generate
trade surpluses to finance the income account deficits. In fact, after the 1981–1983
adjustment—maxi-devaluation           of   the    domestic     currency      and    tightness    of
macroeconomic policy—the economy generated large trade surpluses from 1983
through 1994 (averaging 4.0% of GDP). In 1984, the trade surplus peaked at 6.9% of
GDP. The current account balance stood around zero, except for the deficits at the end
of 1986 and beginning of 1987, as a result of the Cruzado Plan. GDP growth fell

3
  Current account balance ≡ trade balance + balance of services + income balance + current transfers
balance.


                                                                                                  7
significantly, averaging 2.0% from 1983 through 1992, reaching negative values in four
of these years. It was also a period of high inflation, which peaked at 82.4% per month
in March 1990 and 47.4% in June 1994 (measured by IPCA—Broad National
Consumer Price Index). Several stabilization programs tried to curb inflation, but
achieved only temporary success. The end of the high inflation period came with the
Real Plan, launched in July 1994. The process of external debt renegotiation underwent
several phases, eventually concluding with the conversion of the loans into debt
securities under the Brady Plan in April 1994.4 From 1992 through mid-1994, exchange
rate policy, under a managed system, basically aimed to keep constant the purchasing
power of the domestic currency, as we can see in Figure 3, which shows the real
effective exchange rate and the trade balance;


        1995–1998: New cycle of trade deficits, low inflation, and financial crises. The
revival of capital flows to emerging market economies at the beginning of the 1990s,
the regulation changes in the capital account, and the external debt restructuring ended
the external financing restrictions of the 1980s. Moreover, for the first time in more than
three decades, the economy enjoyed a low-inflation environment. In 1995, inflation fell
to 22.4%, and in 1998 reached 1.7%. The stability brought by the Real Plan was also
accompanied by a relatively short economic growth cycle, as depicted in Figure 4. In
the initial months after the launch of the Real Plan, a floating system was adopted,
followed the following year by a crawling band, which increasingly turned into a
crawling peg. Figure 5 shows the steady and low rate of adjustment in the nominal
exchange rate, which led to a substantial appreciation of the real effective rate (Figure
3). As a consequence of the surge in capital inflows, exchange rate overvaluation, and
higher economic growth, large trade deficits emerged from 1995 through 1998 (average
of 0.7% of GDP, which is a value largely underestimated by the increase in dollar-
denominated GDP resulting from the exchange rate overvaluation). The capital inflows
that financed the deficits were predominantly portfolio investment (equity and debt
securities), mainly until 1996–1997, when foreign direct investment started to assume
greater significance. The economy was hit by external financial crises (Mexican, Asian

4
  In 1991, Brazilian government and the creditor private banks committee renegotiated the delayed
interest payments of 1989 and 1990, and, in the following year, agreed on a term sheet that set some
principles for the negotiation. At end-1993, a final agreement was reached, under the guidelines of the
Brady Plan, by which the loans were converted into sovereign bonds, some of them having U.S. Treasury
bonds as collateral. The conversion occurred in April 1994. For an institutional description of the process
of renegotiation, see Cerqueira (2003).


                                                                                                         8
and Russian) and faced the domestic exchange crisis in 1998, which ended with the
collapse of the exchange regime in January 1999;


       1999–2001: Floating exchange system, inflation targeting, sound fiscal policy,
and reversal of trade balance deficits. Economic policy had to deal with the exchange
rate crisis and undertake a substantial change in the fiscal regime. A floating exchange
rate system and an inflation-targeting regime were adopted, and substantial primary
surpluses generated. Public sector primary surplus rose from 0.0% of GDP in 1998 to
3.2% in the following year, reaching 4.4% in 2003. The exchange rate depreciated from
R$/US$ 1.22 in mid-January 1999 to R$/US$ 2.16 at the beginning of March. In June
1999, inflation targets were announced for that year and the following two years. It was
a period of transition in terms of current account adjustment. The trade deficit fell from
0.8% of GDP in 1998 to 0.2% in 1999, turning into a surplus of 0.5% in 2001;


       2002–to the present: Confidence crisis and large current account adjustment.
Throughout 2002, with the electoral uncertainties, the economy faced a confidence
crisis. Country risk premiums and the exchange rate rose sharply. After the transition of
the prior years, large trade surpluses solidified from 2002 onward. The surpluses are a
consequence of significant exchange rate depreciation, strong world economic growth,
and a few specific bilateral trade agreements. In 2003 and 2004, the trade surplus
reached 5.0% and 5.6% of GDP (US$ 24.8 billion and US$ 33.7 billion), respectively,
leading to a current account surplus of 0.8% and 1.9% of GDP. The positive results in
the trade balance have been accompanied by both export and import growth. In 2004,
exports and imports reached US$ 96.5 billion and US$ 62.8 billion, respectively,
representing an increase of 32.0% and 30.0% in relation to the previous year. In fact, as
we can see in Figure 6, the degree of trade openness of the economy—measured by the
ratio of exports plus imports to GDP—has reached the record level of 26.5%, in sharp
contrast to a 14.0% average in the 1990s.


       Therefore, Brazil is currently in a post-adjustment period, running both trade and
current account surpluses. How does the current phase compare to the previous
adjustment after the debt crisis? In both cases, there was a strong reversion of the trade
deficit cycle. The trade balance rose from -1.2% of GDP in 1980 to 6.9% in 1984, and
from -0.8% in 1998 to 5.6% in 2004. Similarly, the trade adjustment was stimulated by


                                                                                        9
a substantial exchange rate devaluation, which simultaneously generated significant
inflationary pressures. However, the two adjustments present some important
differences. First, the economic slowdown in the 1980s adjustment was substantially
higher than in the 2000s. GDP accumulated a contraction of 6.3% in the 1981–1983
period. In the recent adjustment, the higher troughs, considering four-quarter cumulative
GDP, were of -0.5% in 1999:3, 0.0% in 2002:2, and 0.5% in 2003:4. Second, the
exchange rate movement was higher in the recent adjustment. The real effective
exchange rate rose by 35% in the months following the maxi-devaluation of February
1983 in comparison to the previous months. In 1999, the increase was around 47%, and
accumulated 66% until 2001. Third, the 1980s adjustment affected imports more
intensely than exports. In 1984, imports fell by 39.4% relative to 1980, while exports
increased 34.1%. The reduction in imports accounted for 56.8% of the change in the
trade balance. In contrast, the recent adjustment has been incurred mainly by exports. In
relation to 1998, exports grew 42.9% and 88.6% in 2003 and 2004, respectively, and
imports fell by 16.3% in 2003 and grew by 8.8% in the following year. As a
consequence, although also reflecting changes in dollar-denominated GDP, the increase
in the degree of openness has been substantially higher recently. Exports plus imports as
a percentage of GDP rose from 18.1% to 21.6% between 1980 and 1984, whereas it
went from 13.8% in 1998 to 26.5% in 2004. Fourth, in the 1980s, the country was
excluded from international capital flows, whereas, since the 1990s, it has been
integrated in the financial markets. Fifth, the level of import tariffs is lower currently
than in the 1980s. Sixth, macroeconomic regimes are completely different: low
inflation, sound fiscal policy and better monetary institutions in the 2000s versus high
inflation, unsound fiscal policy and weak monetary institutions in the 1980s.


       Although the trade balance has played the main role in the current account
boom-and-bust cycles, the income balance has undergone important changes as well.
Since 1998, the income deficit has reached a higher level (1998–2003 annual average of
3.4% of GDP), as a result of the surge in capital inflows, which increased nonresident-
owned assets in the economy. As a consequence of the external debt conversion under
the Brady Plan and the change in the pattern of capital inflows—from loans to direct
and portfolio investment—the composition of the income balance has changed
significantly since the 1990s, as we can see in Figure 7. The deficit in portfolio
investment income, rather than the deficit in other investments income, has become the


                                                                                       10
main component since 1997, accounting for 46.8% of the investment income deficit
from 2000 through 2003. The share of the income deficit attributable to direct
investments rose to 22.6%, whereas the share of the deficit attributable to other
investments income decreased to 30.6%.


2.2. Capital flows cycles and their composition


       Although current account cycles have a corresponding capital flow financing, it
is not necessarily the case that capital flows behave in the same manner in each cycle. In
fact, there are major differences in the composition of capital flows across the current
account cycles—private versus public, portfolio or FDI—that we opted to subdivide the
capital flow behavior into three longer periods (instead of the five above). We detail the
methodological decomposition of capital flows into six categories in Appendix C.
Figures 8 and 9 show the path of the main categories.


       1970s–1982: Loan flows and external debt accumulation. In the context of a
significant liquidity expansion in international financial markets, Brazil received
massive capital inflows. Table 3 shows, for each period, the average of different flows
(as a percent of GDP). The private capital account balance averaged 3.8% of GDP from
1974 through 1982. As recorded in Figure 9, the majority of capital inflows were loans,
comprising 74.3% of the private capital balance. In contrast, portfolio investment was
minimal (a 5.4% share in the flows). As a result, gross external debt, as a percentage of
GDP, from 16.8% in 1970, reached 31.5% in 1982, and peaked at 53.8% in 1984 (new
flows in the context of debt renegotiation, and maxi-devaluation of domestic currency
reducing dollar-denominated GDP);


       1983–1991: Shortage of capital flows. The external debt crisis and debt
renegotiation—extended until 1994—dominated the period. The scarce capital flows
were basically part of debt renegotiation. The private account balance averaged 1.7% of
GDP in the period (declining to 1.0% when excluding 1983–1984). In 1983 and 1984,
the country still received positive loan flows, but under the debt renegotiation. In fact,
the loan flows balance remained negative for one decade (1985–1994). Likewise, the
negligible positive portfolio investment turned into (negligible) negative flows. Net



                                                                                       11
direct investment was affected as well. As a percentage of GDP, they fell from 0.6% of
GDP, in the previous period, to 0.2%;


         1992–to the present: Financial openness, reintegration in the international
financial markets, and large swings of capital flows. The country was reintegrated into
cross-border flows. The resumption of capital flows to Brazil was associated with
several factors: i) increase in international liquidity and expansion of pension and hedge
funds; ii) the process of capital account liberalization; iii) high yield differentials
between domestic and foreign bonds; iv) the end of the external debt restructuring
period; and v) higher macroeconomic stability with the launch of the Real Plan. The
three main characteristics of capital flows in this period were the following: i) important
role played by portfolio investment; ii) large swings in capital flows ("sudden stop
crises"); and iii) increasing role of foreign direct investment.


         The resumption of capital flows was dominated by portfolio investment.5 Except
for brief pauses during the Mexican and Asian crises, portfolio inflows increased
systematically and reached a four-quarter cumulative average of US$ 20 billion between
1996 and mid-1998. Portfolio investment accounted for 73.0% of the private capital
account balance between 1992 and 1998, averaging 2.3% of GDP. In general, debt
securities flows were larger than equity flows. The expansion of debt securities was
reinforced by the return of the government to the international financial markets after
the debt restructuring, with the first issuance of sovereign bonds taking place in mid-
1995.


         Portfolio investment also played an important role in the large capital flow
swings associated with the financial crises, more intensely in the domestic crises
(exchange crisis in 1998–1999 and confidence crisis in 2002). The net portfolio balance
amounted to US$ -11.2 billion from 1998:3 through 1999:1, and to US$ -7.6 billion in
the last three quarters of 2002.




5
  The category portfolio investment follows IMF'     s definition. It is represented by cross-border investment
in equity securities that is not classified as direct investment, and debt securities. This category includes
securities negotiated in Brazil and abroad


                                                                                                           12
           The other component that played a key role during the sudden stop crises was
"other short-term assets". These flows are, in general, negative because they basically
refer to transfers of domestic currency abroad. Similar to portfolio investment, the main
negative peaks of this group were associated with the financial crises. The higher trough
took place in the exchange crisis, when its negative balance summed to US$ -15.2
billion in the last three quarters of 1998. These outflows were associated with growing
doubts about the sustainability of the exchange rate regime, and the corresponding
expectations of currency devaluation. It was a way of protecting asset values in terms of
foreign currency and having capital gains in terms of domestic currency. For those who
had issued foreign-currency denominated or linked debt, it represented a way of
hedging against prospective devaluation. After the devaluation in January 1999, these
outflows fell significantly and were increasingly lower, except during the confidence
crisis, when they reached a balance of US$ -5.6 billion in the last three quarters of 2002.


           The main change in the profile of capital flows in the second half of the 1990s
was the increasing role played by foreign direct investment. In fact, since 1998, net
direct investment has become the main inflow group. These inflows followed a cycle of
expansion, from mid-1990s through 2002, peaking in 1999 and 2000. The expansion
was stimulated by the improvement in domestic macroeconomic conditions with the
Real Plan, the lifting of restrictions on foreign investments in some sectors, and the
wave of privatizations. The change to a low-inflation environment has reduced the level
of uncertainty in the economy and ended the distortions brought about by high inflation.
Furthermore, the passage to a more solid macroeconomic regime in 1999 has built a
better economic environment.


           Privatization was not, however, the main component of net foreign direct
investment (Figure 10). From 1997 through 2000, privatizations accounted for 25.0% of
net FDI. These data, however, tend to underestimate the contribution of privatization
because they do not include additional capital inflows in the form of investment
following privatization. In spite of the reduction in FDI, the levels have been relatively
high. Net FDI stood at US$ 10.1 billion and US$ 18.2 billion in 2003 and 2004,
representing 2.1% and 3.0% of GDP, respectively.6 Therefore, in recent years, the


6
    The 2004 figures include large operations involving a single firm.


                                                                                        13
pattern of external financing has shifted from debt inflows to direct investment.
Moreover, as we can see in Figure 8, net direct investment was much less affected than
the other components during the crises.


        Flows related to official agencies have demonstrated large increases when there
was a sharp reduction in private capital flows, working clearly as “compensatory
flows”. Figure 11 shows the balance of the private capital account and the official-
agency-related loans. The role of these flows is evident during both domestic crises.
Between 2002:2 and 2003:3, net credits from the IMF reached US$ 22.7 billion (a gross
credit of US$ 33.6 billion). The correlation coefficient between the two groups is -0.17
(1992:2–2004:2).


        Using the definition of short- and long-term flows described in Appendix C,
Figure 12 shows that short-term debt flows were preponderant between 1993 and 1996,
and were clearly affected by the crises. Long-term debt flows, in turn, fell significantly
during the domestic crises. Therefore, it seems that short-term flows were more
sensitive to contagion crises than long-term flows, but the latter did not work as a factor
of stability during domestic crises.


2.3. The stocks: has the accumulation of external debt been halted?


        The revival of capital flows to Brazil was accompanied by an increase in
external debt, mainly in the second half of the 1990s. Figure 13 shows gross and net
external debt as a proportion of GDP.7 This ratio, however, is largely affected by the
effect of exchange rate variations on GDP measured in dollars. Considering the debt
level at constant prices, Figure 14 shows the path of both public and private external
debt.


        The debt accumulation in the second half of the 1990s was primarily undertaken
by the private sector. The lower interest rates on external debt relative to domestic debt,
the stability of the exchange rate, and the associated implicit guarantee of exchange rate
system continuity worked as important stimuli for the issuance of external debt, in the

7
  Net external debt is obtained subtracting reserves, commercial banks'assets, and Brazilian credits
abroad from gross debt.


                                                                                                 14
context of abundant international liquidity. Private external debt was rapidly increasing
between 1992 and 1998, rising from US$ 21.9 billion to US$ 112.3 billion. As a
consequence, the share of private sector debt in total external debt rose from 17.0% to
50.2%.


         The debt accumulation pattern has changed substantially after the float and large
depreciation of the currency. The private sector significantly decreased its issuance of
external debt, leading to a strong decline in private external debt, from US$ 111.6
billion in 2000 to US$ 71.7 billion in September 2004. The reduction in private debt
resulted partly from the abrupt termination of access during the crises, but also from the
increased uncertainty that a floating exchange regime introduces to borrowers. For
agents that do not have dollar revenues, it is highly risky to issue foreign currency debt.
Thus, the trend is for firms in the non-tradable sector to repay their debts.


         The public sector has also changed its behavior after the float of the currency.
Brazil returned to issue sovereign bonds in 1995, but, since 1998, issuance of public
external debt has been dominated by compensatory flows. After a downward trend until
1997, the growth of public sector debt resumed during the crises under IMF programs.
IMF debt rose from nearly zero in 1997 to US$ 8.8 billion in 1999, falling back in the
following year with the repayments. However, in the subsequent programs, debt owed
to the IMF debt resumed an upward trend, peaking at US$ 33.5 billion in the third
quarter of 2003. Between end-2000 and the third quarter of 2003, IMF accounted for
90.1% of the US$ 35.2 billion increase in public external debt. The latest repayments to
the IMF in 2004 have reduced total public sector debt by US$ 9.3 billion between the
third quarters of 2003 and 2004. Overall, private debt was partly replaced by public
debt.


         In the aggregate, however, the total external debt level has been decreasing since
2000. After peaking around US$ 225 billion in 1998–1999, it reached US$ 202.2 billion
in September 2004. As a proportion of GDP, after reaching 45.9% of GDP in 2002, total
external debt decreased to 34.9% in September 2004. The net-external-debt-ratio-to-
GDP fell from 35.9% to 24.9% in the same period.




                                                                                        15
       With the large expansion in exports in recent years, the ratio of gross external
debt to 12-month-exports has declined substantially, as we can see in Figure 15,
reaching 2.2 in September 2004, the lowest value in the last thirty years, and 1.6 when
considering net debt. Likewise, the proportion of interest payments to exports has
declined steadily. It reached 15.9% in September 2004, which also represents one of the
lowest values in the last three decades, as recorded in Figure 16.


       One wonders whether the remarkable decrease in debt since 2000 is the sign of a
new trend or the beginning of yet another cycle that eventually will reverse its course. It
is difficult to judge at this point. However, the combination of a few factors suggests a
new trend. First, more incentives are being provided by the floating regime for
borrowers to better assess risk, in particular in the nontradable sector. Second, exports
are increasing in a magnitude not seen before, leading to a record low ratio (although
still high by international comparison) of external debt to exports. Third, the larger role
provided by net direct investment in the latest surge in capital flows is encouraging from
a debt accumulation perspective.


3. Capital controls


       During the 1990s, Brazil liberalized its capital account, in parallel to the process
of trade liberalization and the surge in capital inflows. The capital account liberalization
was a gradual process of establishing new rules on capital inflows and outflows. Figure
17 shows an index of capital control estimated for 1990–2004: the lower the index the
more liberalized is the capital account.8 The list of liberalization measures is vast,
mostly adopted in the first half of the decade. Appendix A shows the current major
restrictions, and Appendix B presents a chronology of the main changes in capital
account regulation in the 1990–2004 period.


       The result of the liberalization process was the following: (i) reduction or
elimination of taxes on foreign capital financial transactions as well as of minimum
maturity requirements on loans; (ii) elimination of quantitative restrictions on
investments by nonresidents in financial and capital markets securities issued

8
 The index was elaborated using the chronology in Appendix B. We have normalized December 1999
equal to 100, and assigned -1 to each liberalizing measure and +1 to each restrictive one.


                                                                                           16
domestically or abroad; (iii) permission for residents to issue securities abroad,
including debt, without prior approval by the Central Bank; (iv) more freedom for
residents to invest in FDI and portfolio abroad; and finally (v) introduction of currency
convertibility through the mechanism of “international transfers in reais,” whereby
residents could transfer their resources abroad through the use of nonresident accounts.
Since March 2005, a more direct procedure is in place.


        This liberalization process occurred, however, without the necessary changes in
the overall legislation. Each new liberalizing rule was inserted at the margin of the
existing legislative framework resulting in a complex web of regulations. The present
set of regulations comprises different types of rules (laws, decree-laws, resolutions,
memos, etc.) established in different contexts and driven by diverse motivations.


        The existing legislative framework dates back as early as the 1930s. It was
originally based on less liberal principles and was implemented before financial
integration was an important consideration. The most important pillar of the existing
legislation is that the domestic currency is the only legal tender; i.e., payments in
foreign currency are not allowed.9 Moreover, banking deposits in foreign currency are
usually not allowed.10 The second pillar is that export proceeds are required to be
converted into domestic currency (“exports surrender”).11 Furthermore, the netting of
payments is not allowed, e.g., exporters cannot use their proceeds to pay for an import
or an external debt before converting them into domestic currency.12


        However, the most important pieces of capital flow legislation were introduced
in the 1960s13 to regulate foreign direct investment and loans. According to that
regulation, foreign capital inflows should be registered (and income tax paid) in order to
obtain permission for associated outflows (profits, interests, royalties, and repatriation).

9
   Decree 23,501, 11.27.33, replaced by Decree-Law 857, 9.11.69 (the exception was given for some
cases, such as contracts related to imports and exports, exchange contracts, and debt involving
nonresidents as creditor or debtor). Law 10,192, 2.14.01 (previously Provisory Measure 1,053, 6.30.95),
reaffirmed those restrictions, making also clear the restriction involves indexation to a foreign currency.
10
   There are few exceptions. Currently, foreign currency deposits are allowed for embassies, international
organisms, oil and electric energy companies, insurance companies, institutions operating in the floating
exchange market, foreigners temporarily in Brazil, Brazilians living abroad, Brazilian Postal Service
Company (ECT), and foreign cargo companies.
11
   Decree 23,258, 10.19.33.
12
   Decree-Law 9,025, 2.27.46.
13
   Laws 4,131 (9.3.62) and 4,390 (8.29.64), and Decree 55,762 (2.17.65).


                                                                                                       17
This basic legislation has remained in place without major changes.14 The legislation
also sets the grounds for the existence of two separate exchange markets.


           The 1960s legislation was enacted in the context of the Bretton Woods system
when private capital flows were scarce and dominated by direct investment.
Domestically, financial markets were underdeveloped, currency was weak—reflecting
the effects of inflation—and import substitution policies at their peak. The basic idea
was to control and limit currency convertibility. Access to foreign currency should be
restricted to imports—heavily taxed—and remittances, within certain limits, should be
associated with previous registered inflows. This legislation survived the next couple of
decades when the scenario was dominated by the debt crisis and unstable
macroeconomy.


           Nevertheless, the strong capital controls system did not prevent capital flight.
The “parallel” (or black) exchange market gained importance. The exchange rate spread
over the official exchange rate averaged 40% over the 1980s, peaking at 170% in May
1989.15 The high spread of the exchange rate over the official market encouraged import
overinvoicing and export underinvoicing. Even individuals that traveled abroad had to
resort to the (illegal) parallel market because of the extremely low limits of foreign
currency that they were allowed to buy in the official market.


           The first change in the regulation occurred in 1987 when portfolio inflows were
allowed through the establishment of foreign capital investment companies, foreign
capital investment funds, and stock and bond portfolios (the so-called Annexes I to III).


           Other changes followed. An important reference point was the liberalization of
the securities market to foreign institutional investors in 1991, with the so-called Annex
IV. Other important measures that stimulated foreign capital flows at the beginning of
the 1990s were the following: i) reduction in the tax on remittances abroad of profits
and dividends; ii) authorization for conversion of external debt instruments of the
federal public sector, bonds, and deposits denominated in foreign currency for use in the
National Privatization Program; iii) authorization for foreign investors represented by

14
     The main changes were the end of restrictions on investments in some sectors and lower tax burden.
15
     Ipeadata.


                                                                                                          18
funds, investment companies, and institutional investors to operate in the options and
futures markets for securities, exchange, and interest rates; and iv) authorization for the
issuance abroad of convertible debentures and of Depository Receipts representing
Brazilian securities, such as the American Depositary Receipts (ADRs).


        The creation of the "floating exchange rate market"—also called "dollar-tourism
market"—at end-1988, alongside the “commercial or free exchange rate market”, was
another important reference point in the process of capital account liberalization. The
goal was to bring exchange operations that were conducted in the "parallel market" into
a regulated market.16 Increasingly, the regulation broadened the operations that could go
through the new market. As a consequence, the parallel market lost its economic
significance, as reflected in the spread, which decreased significantly, averaging 14%
and 4% in the first and second halves of the 1990s. The rates in the floating and free
exchange markets were aligned in 1996, and the markets in practice unified in 1999.17


        The floating exchange rate market allowed further liberalization of residents
outflows. The main change was to broaden the possibility of conversion of domestic
into foreign currency through the nonresident accounts (the so-called CC5 accounts),
starting at the end of 1988 and further developed in the following decade.18 The 1960s
legislation determines that nonresidents could transfer abroad, regardless of any
authorization, the balance not withdrawn coming from foreign exchange sales or money
orders in foreign currency. However, it did not establish what would happen to
resources from other sources. At the end of the 1980s and beginning of the 1990s, the
central bank extended the possibility of transferring abroad, giving a "general and public
authorization" for transfers from nonresident financial institutions, as pointed out in
Banco Central do Brasil (1993), an important official text that clarified the changes in
the exchange regime. Any transfers above US$ 10,000.00 (afterwards changed to R$
10,000.00), however, should be identified and registered in the Central Bank
Information System (Sisbacen).




16
   Banco Central do Brasil (1993).
17
   Resolution 2,588, 1.25.99.
18
   See section “Resident and nonresident accounts” in Appendix B for the specific regulation.


                                                                                                19
         This transfer mechanism through the nonresident account was named
"international transfers in reais" (TIR). In practice, residents in Brazil could deposit in a
nonresident bank’s account held in a domestic bank, that could convert domestic into
foreign currency. In other words, residents could transfer money abroad making these
deposits and asking the nonresident financial institution to buy foreign currency to make
the deposit in an account abroad.19 This mechanism has represented a crucial change in
the capital account regulation: from a system based on strict limits to currency
conversion—restricted only to nonresidents and outflows related to previous inflows—
to a much broader scope, extended in practice also to residents. As stressed in Franco
and Pinho-Neto (2004), this rule represented the introduction of de facto convertibility.


        Convertibility was enhanced by the authorization for non-financial resident firms
to invest abroad up to US$ 1 million each twelve months—later expanded to US$ 5
million—without prior authorization. When above this limit, investors should provide
information to the Central Bank 30 days ahead of the exchange transaction.20 These
investments were conducted in the floating exchange rate market.21


         From 1993 to 1996, however, capital inflows reached levels that prompted the
monetary authorities to adopt restrictive measures,22 some of them temporarily relaxed
after the Mexican crisis. The vast liquidity in international markets, the more open
capital account and the interest differential between domestic and foreign interest rates23
led to a surge of capital inflows that pressured the exchange rate and the money market.
In fact, the restrictive measures were motivated by concerns regarding the amount of
sterilization operations—with their fiscal cost associated with the yield differentials—
and the short-term tenor of a significant portion of the inflows.


        The restrictive measures involved quantitative and price-based measures, which
constantly evolved as market participants found ways to circumvent them, as shown in

19
   For a more recent explanation of the international transfers in reais, see Schwartsman (2004).
20
   See section “Brazilian capital abroad” in Appendix B for more details.
21
   From 1988 through 1992, Brazilian investment abroad was required to be compensated by a sale to the
Central Bank of gold bought in the domestic market for a value equivalent to the investment.
22
   See Ariyoshi et al. (2000), Cardoso and Goldfajn (1998), Garcia and Barcinski (1998), and Garcia and
Valpassos (1998).
23
   Cardoso and Goldfajn (1998) and Garcia and Barcinski (1998) have shown that capital flows to Brazil
responded to interest rate differentials. Our estimations also provide evidence that domestic interest rates
have stimulated capital flows.


                                                                                                        20
Garcia and Valpassos (1998) and Carvalho (2005).24 The regulatory changes
discouraging capital inflows included: i) increase in the financial transaction tax on
capital inflows, in particular for shorter term flows; ii) increases in the minimum
maturity requirements for capital inflows; and iii) further quantitative restrictions on
several portfolio investment instruments.                 For example, foreign investment under
Annexes I to IV was prohibited to channel resources to fixed-yield bonds and
debentures (although partially compensated by the creation of specific foreign capital
fixed-income funds—FRF-CE). These prohibitions were gradually expanded over the
period 1993–1995, with successive measures restricting investment in derivatives
markets—unless as an explicit hedge of existing contracts—certificates of privatization
and related securities, Financial Investment Funds (FAF), futures and options markets,
and finally other specific debt securities.


           Measures aimed to stimulate outflows, such as the permission for prepayment of
foreign borrowing and import financing, were also adopted. New channels for Brazilian
investment abroad were established, such as the Brazilian Depositary Receipts (BDRs)
regulation, which allows residents to purchase securities of nonresident companies in
Brazil, or the creation of Foreign Investment Funds, which facilitates purchases of debt
securities by residents in international markets.


           The measures easing outflows make it clear that the overall objective was to
reduce net inflows without affecting the trend towards greater integration with
international financial markets. In fact, the restrictive measures did not reverse the
liberalization trend, but represented a “cycle” of restrictions around that trend, as we can
see in Figure 17. Furthermore, Figure 18 decomposes the index into controls on
outflows and inflows, showing that the focus of the measures was inflows.


           The restrictive capital inflow measures did not involve foreign direct investment.
On the contrary, the liberalization trend continued through the mid-1990s. The
constitutional distinction between Brazilian firms—licensed under Brazilian laws and
with headquarters and administration in the country—and Brazilian firms of national
capital—restricted to those under control of residents—were removed. Likewise, new


24
     Carvalho (2005) presents different strategies used by market agents to circumvent the regulation.


                                                                                                         21
opportunities for investment in public utilities were opened with the Concession Law, as
well as with the increase in the ceiling for nonresidents’ ownership of financial
institutions. Moreover, the income tax on remittance of profits and dividends abroad
was removed.


         The motivation for the restrictions adopted in this period stands in sharp contrast
to that of the 1960s legislation. The latter was established in the context of a scarcity of
foreign resources in order to prevent capital outflows—the so-called capital flight. The
objective was to restrict currency convertibility to avoid pressures on the exchange
rate—and their consequences on inflation and import costs—and try to preserve the
demand for domestic currency. In contrast, the 1993–1996 restrictions were aimed to
reduce capital inflows and ease outflows. In fact, as shown in Cardoso and Goldfajn
(1998), capital controls were endogenous. The government reacted strongly to capital
flows by increasing controls on inflows when these were booming and relaxing them in
moments of distress. However, Cardoso and Goldfajn (1998) also show that, although
the volume and composition of capital flows responded to the restrictive measures,
these measures were ineffective in the long run.


        Starting in 1997, capital controls on inflows were again relaxed with the
outbreak of the Asian and Russian crises, and later on with the Brazilian exchange
crisis. The measures from 1997 through 1999 included reduction and later elimination
of both the minimum average maturity for external loans and the financial transaction
tax on capital inflows,25 and elimination of the restrictions on investments under
Annexes I to IV. In 1999, the 1993–1996 restrictive measures had all been lifted. The
greater capital account openness culminated in Brazil accepting the obligations of IMF
Article of Agreement VIII in November 1999.26


         In the first half of the 2000s, under the new floating exchange regime adopted in
1999, nonresidents were finally allowed to invest in the same instruments in the

25
   A 5% tax is applied to inflows related to external loans with a minimum coverage maturity of up to 90
days.
26
   This article precludes the country members, without the approval of the Fund, from imposing
restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions. It also forbids
discriminatory currency arrangements or multiple currency practices. Previously, Brazil availed itself of
the transitional arrangements of Article XIV, which allows exchange restrictions but requires countries to
take measures towards acceptance of Article VIII as soon as conditions permit.


                                                                                                        22
financial and capital markets that residents do. In addition, the prepayment of external
debt was allowed as well as the conditions for the issuance of real-denominated external
debt were set. Also, an important development of that period was to eliminate the prior
approval of external loans by the Central Bank of Brazil. In effect, the current
registration process for capital flows has become a documentary requirement instead of
part of an active authorization process.


        More recently, at the beginning of March 2005, the Central Bank announced the
unification of the exchange markets and clearer rules concerning conversion of
domestic currency into foreign currency. For example, the international transfer
mechanism through deposits in accounts of nonresident financial institutions was
replaced by a more direct procedure.


         In spite of the large liberalization of the 1990s, Arida, Bacha, and Lara-Resende
(2004) point out that the resulting system does not mean unrestricted or free
convertibility. The authors list several limits of the current system, including that
current convertibility is based on monetary authority’s rules instead of laws. Therefore,
they can be lifted at any time. In addition, the public opinion still associates transfers
abroad with illicit or antipatriotic practices.27


        In fact, notwithstanding some efforts to consolidate the exchange and capital
account rules, the regulation is still fragmented and involves rules set in different
contexts and driven by various motivations. A consolidation of the whole regulation in a
unified law is necessary. Reduction in bureaucratic requirements is needed as well. The
rules would become less uncertain and clearer. These changes would facilitate the
change in mentality, originated back in the capital flight period, when transfers abroad
were necessarily associated with illicit or antipatriotic practices.


        A further step could be adopted. Arida (2003a, 2003b, 2004) defends a change in
legislation so as to assure unrestricted convertibility. He argues that the introduction by
law of free convertibility—defined as the absence of any restriction to the exchange
between foreign and domestic currencies, although keeping the domestic currency as the

27
  See Gleizer (2005) for a collection of papers on exchange arrangements and capital flow regulation in
Brazil.


                                                                                                    23
only means of domestic payments—would give a positive signal. Arida (2003b, 2004)
stresses that free convertibility should not be adopted immediately, but announced
previously and implemented gradually, accompanying also some macroeconomic
indicators and institutional changes, such as central bank independence.28


        Our view is that much can and should be done in order to simplify and
consolidate current exchange regulations. The system is excessively bureaucratic and
complicated, consequence of the patch pattern way it was created as the macroeconomic
conditions evolved and ideology changed. At this juncture a consolidation of the
advances of the last decade should be unified in a consolidated and simple law. Further
liberalization steps, beyond consolidation, will need to be accompanied by additional
institutional developments as establishing central bank autonomy, solidifying the fiscal
responsibility law and the need for a mature fiscal policy, reaching a stronger consensus
about the necessity of lower inflation, and implementing judiciary reform and further
microeconomic reforms. Complete freedom of capital flows should emerge as a
“natural” consequence of improvements and maturity in institutions.


      In summary, regarding capital controls in Brazil: i) liberalization has advanced
significantly since the 1990s; ii) the restrictive measures of the 1993–1996 period were
mostly aimed at reducing large capital inflows and did not reverse the liberalization
trend; iii) currency convertibility has increased significantly; iv) the current situation
calls for a simplification of the exchange market and elimination of existing
bureaucracy; and v) the advances achieved in the last decade (through several rules)
should be consolidated in a simple law approved by Congress.


4. Volatility of capital flows and financial crises

        The large volatility of capital flows has been one of the main arguments for
those that oppose complete liberalization of capital movements. Is the volatility of
capital flows in Brazil a permanent feature? Is the volatility large across the different
types of flows?



28
  Arida's proposal has generated some controversy. An opposite view can be found in Ferrari Filho et al.
(2005).


                                                                                                     24
        Besides the normal volatility analysis, it is important to verify the behavior of
capital flows in periods of stress, such as in financial crises. This provides more
qualitative information regarding the whole distribution of the flows. The Brazilian
economy was affected by four external and two domestic crises in the last decade: i)
Mexican (late 1994); ii) Asian (last quarter of 1997); iii) Russian (third quarter of 1998);
iv) Brazilian exchange crisis (late 1998–early 1999); v) Argentinean (second half of
2001); and vi) Brazilian confidence crisis (last three quarters of 2002). Figure 19 depicts
monthly averages of the EMBI+ Brazil,29 whose peaks reflect the crises. In this section
we conduct some basic estimates of volatility of capital flows and assess their behavior
during the crises.


Volatility of capital flows


        The results on volatility are shown in Table 4 for the 1992:1–2004:2 period
(quarterly data). Considering the coefficient of variation (ratio of standard deviation to
average), net direct investment is the less volatile group, in line with the results in
Prasad et. al. (2003), which shows, using a dataset of 76 industrial and developing
countries, that bank borrowing and portfolio flows are substantially more volatile than
FDI. Portfolio investment is the most volatile group. The standard deviation and
coefficient of variation of portfolio investment are 1.3 and 2.0 higher than those for
direct investment. Note that loans are extremely volatile as well. Thus, according to
these indicators, financing through debt securities is not more volatile than via loans.
Furthermore, the variance of direct investment is actually underestimated because its
average in the second half of the sample is substantially higher than in the first half.
Considering the 1997:1–2004:2 sample, its variation coefficient decreases to 0.5,
whereas that of portfolio investment rises to 3.0.


        When we use net flows, however, the variation coefficient is sensitive to
averages close to zero. To minimize this problem, we estimate separately the volatility
for inflows and outflows, which are shown in Table 5. Similar to net flows, inflows and
outflows of portfolio investment present a standard deviation significantly higher than



29
  The series refers to the sovereign spread of the EMBI until 1997:12, and of the EMBI+ thereafter. For
simplicity, we call it EMBI along the text.


                                                                                                    25
that for FDI.30 Likewise, contrary to expectations, the item "other long-term loans",
when compared to the group portfolio investment, does not present a higher volatility.31
Note also that trade credits present a high variation coefficient.


         The literature has emphasized the volatility of short-term flows and their role
during the financial crises. The figures on the greater stability of FDI flows support this
analysis. However, the same does not apply when we compare short- versus long-term
debt flows. Long-term debt flows present a higher standard deviation and coefficient of
variation. On the other hand, when including the groups "other short-term assets" and
net direct investment in the short- and long-term flows, respectively, the volatility is
significantly lower in the latter. Nevertheless, as we can see in Figure 12, net short-term
debt flows have been relatively more stable since mid-1999, when compared to the
previous period.


         We also conduct some basic analysis of the correlation between selected groups
(Table 6). The groups equities, debt securities, loans and trade credits are positively
correlated, although the correlation coefficients are not large.32 Net direct investment, in
turn, usually presents negative correlation with those groups. The correlation between
short- and long-term flows (not shown) is significantly higher, mainly when we use
annual data (correlation coefficient of 0.73). This result strengthens the previous
findings concerning similar volatilities of short- and long-term debt flows.


Capital flows during crises


        Sudden stops were more intense during the domestic crises than during the
external ones. Table 7 shows net flows previous to and during the crises. In the
domestic crises, the expectation of a change in regime and depreciation of domestic
currency stimulated capital outflows and discouraged capital inflows significantly. Net
flows during the Mexican and Asian crises were negative only for one or two quarters,
30
   Although the variation of coefficient of inflows and outflows of portfolio investments is lower than that
of FDI, when we consider the 1997:1–2004:2 period, the result is reversed. Furthermore, under the point
of view of pressures on the balance of payments, the standard deviation measure seems to be more
relevant because it captures the absolute amount of change in the flows.
31
   It presents a higher variation coefficient when considering inflows and similar in the case of outflows,
although it has, at the same time, a lower standard deviation.
32
   Bosworth and Collins (1999) have found no or very low correlation between foreign direct investment,
portfolio investment and loans for a 58-developing-country sample.


                                                                                                        26
and recovered quickly—four-quarter cumulative flows remained positive. In contrast,
during the exchange crisis (1999)—considering also the Russian crisis period—and the
confidence crisis (2002), the reversal of flows was large and lasted at least three
quarters. From 1998:3 through 1999:1, the cumulative private capital account balance
stood at US$ -23.2 billion, after having accumulated US$ 48.1 billion in the previous
four quarters. In the second half of 2002, flows reached US$ -12.7 billion, following
US$ 13.1 billion accumulated in the previous four quarters.


       The reversal in capital flows in the exchange crisis was higher than in the
confidence crisis for the following reasons: i) the economy was receiving large inflows,
in part because of the huge spread between domestic and foreign interest rates; ii) in
mid-1998, despite FDI growth, most of the flows consisted of portfolio investment,
loans and trade credits, which tend to respond more quickly and intensely to crises. In
contrast, FDI comprised a large part of the flows when the confidence crisis took place;
iii) after some point in time most agents considered the collapse of the exchange regime
unavoidable, with the corresponding strong devaluation of domestic currency,
remaining doubts mainly about when it would take place. In this context, protection of
asset values meant large positive net capital outflows. In contrast, the confidence crisis
occurred in a different regime, and was reversed as the elected government displayed
some strong signs of continuity in macroeconomic policy; and iv) the exchange
depreciation during the confidence crisis, after some point in time, tended to discourage
outflows and stimulate inflows. In the exchange crisis, the decision of sticking to the
pegged system did not allow this mechanism.


       In general, the literature has emphasized the role of short-term flows during the
financial crises. In fact, in Brazil, FDI has been more stable than other flows.
Nevertheless, debt securities, loans and trade credits with maturity superior to 360
days—classified as long-term flows—have exerted an important role during the crises
as well. In the moments of crisis, long-term debt inflows tended to decline as much as
short-term inflows. Actually, they may fall more as their horizon is longer and,
therefore, are more sensitive to uncertainties. The difference, of course, is that, with
longer-term debt, outflows are better distributed over time—lower repayments and
pressure for debt rollover—tending to reduce net outflows in the short-run. However,



                                                                                       27
the long-term category of the balance of payments statistics includes flows as short as
one year, which are not enough to allow great extension of maturity.


          “Other short-term assets” exerted an important role, mainly in the exchange
crisis. In fact, 44.3% of the deficit of US$ 25.1 billion in the private capital balance
from 1998:8 through 1999:1 consisted of this category, which is related to the so-called
CC5 accounts.


          Sudden stops involve both the interruption of capital inflows and an increase in
outflows. Figures 20.a to 20.c show the behavior of inflows and outflows of foreign
investments in Brazilian corporate equities, debt securities, and long-term loans. In
general, both inflows and outflows have played an important role. Outflows of
investments in equities followed closely inflows, placing in evidence their short-term
nature. The reduction in inflows was substantially higher in the exchange crisis and took
place before any increase in outflows, which actually started declining as inflows
reduced. In the case of debt securities, the fall in inflows was large during both domestic
crises. Since outflows depend on the due dates, a decrease in inflows took place before
an increase in outflows for both debt securities and long-term loans.

          In sum, we find in this section that in general FDI flows tend to be more stable
and less correlated to the other flows. Long-term debt flows worked as a stabilizing
factor during external crises, but behaved pro-cyclically during domestic crises.
Moreover, sudden stops are more pronounced when the crisis is mostly domestically
driven.


5. Capital flows and macroeconomic performance


          The analysis of capital flows in Brazil naturally brings about a set of important
questions. What has been the role of capital flows in Brazil? What have capital flows
financed? What is the relationship with other macroeconomic variables? This section
deals with these questions.


          Initially, we investigate whether capital flows have financed a change in reserves
or the capital account balance. Thereafter, using the national accounts, we examine


                                                                                         28
whether current account deficits have financed consumption or investment or even
reflected greater deficit in income account.


What have capital flows financed? International reserves versus current account
balance


       Capital flows can be associated with the current account balance or changes in
international reserves. In particular, positive net flows can be used to finance reserve
accumulation or current account deficits. Figure 21 shows that short movements in
capital flows have implied changes in reserves, whereas movements of lower frequency
are associated with current account deficits. Using quarterly data, Table 8 records the
correlation of private capital account with the current account balance and reserve
changes for different periods. Private capital account and reserve changes are highly
correlated contemporaneously. As expected, this correlation is higher in the 1992–1998
period—dominated by managed exchange systems—than in the floating exchange rate
period. As reserves respond less, the contemporaneous correlation between capital flows
and current account deficits is higher in the latter period. Likewise, the lagged and
leading correlations are higher in the recent period. These results indicate that, during
the floating exchange regime, capital flows have been associated with quicker and
larger changes in the current account.


       To have some indication of when net capital flows financed reserve
accumulation versus current account deficits, we have calculated, for each year, the
ratios of both reserve change and current account deficit to the capital and financial
account balance (including errors and omissions). Figure 22 depicts the results for
1990–2003. The left axis shows the share of net flows used to finance current account
deficits. Negative values correspond to years of positive current account balance (1992
and 2003), and values greater than 100% refer to periods of current account deficit and
reduction in reserves (1991, 1997–1999). The values in the right axis—shown in inverse
scale—represent the share of net flows that translated into reserve increases. Negative
values refer to periods of a reduction in reserves. Note, however, that the figure shows
only proportions and not the amount of the values involved.




                                                                                      29
           Capital flows were used basically to finance current account deficits, especially
during the cycle from 1995 through 2002. The exception to the rule was from 1992
through 1994, when most of net flows were employed to finance reserve accumulation.
Actually, as we can see in Figure 23, there was an intense process of reserve
accumulation from 1992 through 1996. Reserves rose from US$ 9.4 billion at end-1991
to US$ 60.1 billion at end-1996, and were fundamental for the implementation of Real
Plan. The other exception took place in 2003, eased by positive current account
results.33


What have capital flows financed? Consumption or investment?


           After averaging 0.6% over 1990–1994, the current-account-deficit-to-GDP ratio
rose by 2.8 percentage points in the 1995–1997 period, reaching 4.1% in the latter year.
The high deficits continued in the following years, averaging 4.4% over 1998–2001.
They reverted in 2002, with a deficit of 1.2%, and turned into surplus in the following
years. This section uses the national accounts to have an indication of the main
aggregate components that accounted for the deficits. National account statistics,
however, have to be used with care because they do not necessarily reflect relationships
of causality.


           We use the well-known basic identities of the national accounts:34
           CA = S - I,

           GNDY = GDP + NYCT,

           S = GNDY - C,

           C = Ch + Cg,

where CA = current account balance, S = gross domestic saving, I = investment, GNDY
= gross national disposable income, GDP = gross domestic product, NYCT = net
income from abroad and net current transfers, C = consumption, Ch = household
consumption, and Cg = government consumption.




33
     During the 1980s, the exception was 1984–1985, with high trade balance surpluses.
34
     See, for instance, IMF (1993).


                                                                                         30
           Tables 9 and 10 divide the current-account-deficit period into two phases: i)
1995–1997, characterized by a large increase in the deficit and in domestic expenditure
rates; and ii) 1998–2001, featured by some increase in the deficit and by a prominent
role of the deficit in the net income from abroad. We estimate the contribution of the
variables to the increase in the current account deficit comparing the first phase to
1990–1994, and the second phase to the first one.


           According to Table 9, the increase in the current account deficit in the first
period corresponded to both an increase in the investment ratio and a reduction in
domestic saving. The rise in the investment ratio responded for 43.2% of the deficit
increase in the period. In contrast, in the second period, the reduction in domestic saving
was accompanied by a decrease, at a lower value, in the investment ratio. Table 10
allows us to discriminate the elements behind the reduction in domestic saving.


           The current-account-deficit cycle was accompanied by an increase of 2.1 p.p. in
the consumption share in the GDP, which took place basically in 1995 and 1996, as we
can see in Figure 24.35 In fact, under the point of view of the national accounts,
consumption—household and government—accounted for the larger part (74.6%) in the
increase in the current account deficit. On the other hand, because the share of
consumption is approximately four times higher than that of investment, the percentage
increase in the consumption ratio was lower than that of investment (2.7% against
5.9%). The combination of an increase in investment and consumption comprised
117.8% of the deficit increase (net income from abroad contributed with -17.8%).


           In the 1998–2001 period, however, it was an increase in the net income deficit
that accounted for most of the increase in the current account deficit. Net-income-
deficit-to-GDP rose by 1.5 p.p., reflecting basically the debt accumulation and foreign
investments of the previous period, besides some movements related to the domestic
crises.


           In summary, the role of net financial flows in the 1990s was to finance:
           i) a strong accumulation of international reserves between 1992 and 1996;


35
     Note that the values in the right axis refer to the consumption ratio.


                                                                                        31
           ii) a large expansion of the current account deficit over 1995–1997, representing
an expansion of both investment and consumption;
           iii) an increase in the current account deficit over 1998–2001, resulting from a
higher deficit in the net income from abroad.
GDP Growth


           Since the 1980s, the Brazilian economy has experienced short-lived business
cycles. Figure 25 shows the four-quarter-moving average of GDP growth and the four-
quarter cumulative balance of the private capital account since 1992. Economic
expansions have lasted approximately two years. The figure also shows that there is an
association between capital flows and output movements. The two expansions before
the adoption of the floating exchange rate regime benefited from the large capital
inflows. Figure 3 shows clearly the appreciation trend and the large trade deficit of the
period.


           In comparison to the 1990s growth episodes, economic growth in 2000–2001
and at the present (2004) took place in a different context. First, net capital flows have
been of a lower magnitude and have been dominated by FDI. Actually, since 1998, net
direct investment has comprised more than 100% of the private capital account balance.
There has been no significant surge of short-term flows or portfolio investment. Second,
the expansions have been accompanied by a more favorable situation in the trade
balance. Third, the policy regime has changed to improve fundamentals. Furthermore,
the economic slowdown was less intense in the Brazilian confidence crisis than in other
countries’ sudden stop crises. Figure 26 shows GDP growth in the year following the
crises for a few comparable cases.


Consumption smoothing


           Based on the intertemporal approach to the current account, capital flows are
deemed to bring about greater consumption smoothing.36 When facing idiosyncratic
shocks, country’s consumers can borrow (or lend) abroad and reduce consumption
volatility. Table 11 shows consumption volatility for three periods. We compare


36
     See Obstfeld and Rogoff (1994, 1996).


                                                                                         32
volatility after capital account openness with the periods of absence of capital flows and
of the 1970s debt accumulation. In fact, consumption—its growth rate or share in
GDP—is more stable in the recent period than in the 1980s.37 The standard deviation of
consumption growth is also lower after the capital account liberalization in comparison
to the 1970s, even though the variation coefficient is slightly higher because of the
lower growth rate.38


What determines capital flows and their components?


         To assess the main determinants of capital flows, we have estimated regressions
for selected items: private capital account, official-agency-related loans, net foreign
direct investment, and net foreign investment in debt securities, equities, and loans. In
particular, we are interested in the role played by the external and domestic interest rates
and the crises. The main results are recorded in Table 12. We have used as explanatory
variables: Fed Funds interest rate, domestic interest rate minus expected depreciation,39
and EMBI+ Brazil (sovereign spread). Although the EMBI is also affected by the Fed
Funds rate, it tends to reflect basically the several crises. The correlation coefficient
between the Fed Funds rate and the EMBI is -0.208. Thus, we do not include dummies
for the crises, whose specification implies some arbitrariness and may distort the
estimations.40




37
   In contrast, Prasad et. al. (2003) have found that the median of the consumption volatility of 22 more
financially integrated developing countries—which include Brazil—increased in the 1990s in comparison
to the 1980s.
38
   One should be cautious about these comparisons because the periods may involve different moments in
the cycle, and of course GDP has additional determinants. In particular, 1983–1991 was a period marked
by the external adjustment resulting from the debt crisis and by the recession brought about by the Collor
Plan in 1990. On the other hand, the 1970s was a period of great economic expansion, and the last decade
was featured by several financial crises.
39
   Calculated using the Selic in the first working day of the month divided by the expected exchange rate
change, measured as the ratio between the forward rate for contracts due at the beginning of the following
month and the spot rate. All dependent variables are measured at constant U.S. prices.
40
   Initially, we have conducted unit root tests—augmented Dickey-Fuller formulation—basically to avoid
incurring spurious regression. We reject the null for all dependent variables, except for direct investment.
In the case of the regressors, we accept the null of presence of a unit root in the U.S. and domestic interest
rates, and reject it for the EMBI. In the estimations, we have used two-stage-least squares, employing
standard errors corrected by Newey-West heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent covariance
matrix. The instrument variables for domestic interest rate and the EMBI Brazil were these variables
lagged one and two periods. We consider that the Fed Funds rate is not affected contemporaneously by
shocks to capital flows to Brazil.


                                                                                                          33
         The role played by the EMBI and the domestic interest rate is evident. In the
regressions of the variables representing private capital flows, the EMBI enters
significantly with a negative sign and the domestic interest rate with a positive sign,
except in the case of direct investment. Greater yields in domestic bonds attract capital
inflows, and financial crises stimulate net outflows. The Fed Funds rate enters
significantly only in the equity and direct investment equations, but with a positive sign.
One possible explanation is that increases in the U.S. interest rate tend to generate
economic slowdown, discouraging investment in that country and thus stimulating
investment abroad.


         In contrast to the other private flows, the coefficient on the domestic interest rate
is negative in the direct investment equation. In this case, as an increase in the domestic
interest rate generates an economic slowdown, inward direct investment is
discouraged.41 The equation for official-agency loans appears with a positive coefficient
on the EMBI, indicating the role played by these loans in working as "compensatory
flows" during some crises.42


The relationship between capital flows and macroeconomic performance: a VAR
approach


         We have estimated a structural vector autoregression to further examine the role
played by capital flows. Our interest is to assess the importance and impact of capital
flow movements on other macroeconomic variables as well as the factors behind those
movements.


         To estimate the VAR, we choose variables that are related to the behavior of the
current account and capital flows: industrial production, current account balance, private
capital account, terms of trade (measured as the ratio of export prices to import prices),
EMBI+ Brazil, real effective exchange rate (measured as the value of foreign currency


41
   Since we could not reject the null of presence of a unit root in the direct investment, we have also
estimated in first differences, after having rejected the presence of cointegration. None of the coefficients
is significant.
42
    We have also tested for the inclusion of other variables, such as output—level and growth—and
exchange rate—measured as deviation of a trend estimated using HP filter—but they did not enter
significantly.


                                                                                                         34
in terms of domestic currency), and domestic real interest rate (Selic rate). The
exogenous variables are the Fed Funds interest rate and the U.S. industrial production.


       The sample goes from 1995:1 through 2004:8. Unfortunately, although we are
using monthly data, some of the results are sensitive to the identification structure
assumed concerning the contemporaneous effects of the shocks. Therefore, the results
have to be seen with caution. Appendix D brings a more detailed explanation of the
variables and identification structure used.


       For simplicity, we show only the resulting impulse response functions and the
variance error decomposition (Figure 27 and Table 13). In general, the results using the
point estimates of the impulse response functions are consistent with the theory and
historical evidence. The most interesting result refers to the behavior of the variables
when the economy is hit by a shock to the EMBI. An increase in the country risk
premium clearly leads to a positive response of interest rate, exchange rate depreciation
(depreciation of domestic currency) and a reduction in capital flows (measured by the
private capital account balance). Although with some lag, output falls. As exchange rate
depreciates, terms of trade deteriorate. These results are in line with the historical
evidence concerning the effects of several crises on the economy.


       As expected, in response to positive interest-rate shocks, output falls. Positive
shocks to the current account, in turn, lead to an exchange rate appreciation, reduction
in the EMBI, and some improvement in terms of trade and output levels. Positive
shocks to capital flows are not persistent but lead to a reduction in the interest rate,
which seems to cause exchange rate depreciation. In response to a favorable shock to
terms of trade, exchange rate tends to appreciate. Finally, positive shocks to the
exchange rate are followed by an increase in the interest rate and EMBI. The increase in
the country risk premium, in turn, tends to cause a reduction in the capital flows.
Current account tends to respond somewhat positively. Output, however, declines, but
reverts as the exchange rate, EMBI and interest rate return to their previous values.


       The variance error decomposition allows us to have an idea of the importance of
certain shocks for forecast errors. Shocks to current account, private capital account and
exchange rate explain large part of output forecast errors in a 12 or 24-month horizon.


                                                                                        35
Interest rate shocks affect output forecast errors more strongly in the short horizon.
Private capital account forecast errors, in turn, are largely explained by shocks to the
EMBI, exchange rate and interest rate. In the case of exchange rate, shocks to the
country risk premium, private capital account and current account respond for large part
of its forecast errors. Interest rate forecast errors, in turn, are explained by shocks to
private capital account, terms of trade, EMBI and exchange rate, besides shocks to
itself.


6. Conclusions


           Notwithstanding the financial crises and macroeconomic volatility of the recent
past, financial liberalization has led to reduced external vulnerability. Balance of
payments patterns have changed. Recent growth has been accompanied by a more
favorable trade balance position. The profile of external financing has improved after
the floating of the currency. The private sector has decreased significantly its issuance
of external debt and FDI has replaced portfolio investment as the main financing source.


           Liberalization of the capital account in the last fifteen years has provided more
convertibility to the currency. The new rules, however, coexist with an old legislation
that was established in a more control-prone environment. Therefore, the result is a
complex web of regulations and rules that require consolidation and a mentality that still
associates transfers abroad with illicit or antipatriotic practices (based on the capital
flight legislation period).


           We believe further progress in capital account convertibility is warranted.
Liberalization should be accompanied by a broad range of reforms to improve and
foster stronger institutions—such as approval of de jure central bank independence (not
only de facto)—establish a longer track record of responsible fiscal policy (under the
fiscal responsibility law) and reduce microeconomic inefficiencies and contractual
uncertainties.


References
Arida, Persio (2003a), “Por uma moeda plenamente conversível”, Revista de Economia
          Política, 23(3): 151-154, Jul.-Sept.


                                                                                         36
Arida, Persio (2003b), “Ainda sobre a conversibilidade”, Revista de Economia Política,
     23(3): 135-142, Jul.-Sept.
Arida, Persio (2004), "Aspectos Macroeconômicos da Conversibilidade: uma Discussão
     do Caso Brasileiro", mimeo.
Arida, Persio, Edmar L. Bacha, and André Lara-Resende (2004), “Credit, interest, and
     jurisdictional uncertainty: conjectures on the case of Brazil”, forthcoming in
     Giavazzi, Francesco, Ilan Goldfajn, and Santiago Herrera (eds.) (2005), Inflation
     targeting, debt and the Brazilian experience, 1999 to 2003, MIT Press.
Ariyoshi, Akira, Karl Habermeier, Bernard Laurens, Inci Otker-Robe, Jorge I. Canales-
     Kriljenko, and Andrei Kirilenko (2000), “Capital controls: country experiences
     with their use and liberalization”, IMF, Occasional Paper no. 190.
Banco Central do Brasil (1993), "O regime cambial brasileiro: evolução recente e
     perspectivas", Brasília, Banco Central do Brasil.
Banco Central do Brasil (2001), "Notas metodológicas do balanço de pagamentos",
     Notas Técnicas do Banco Central do Brasil no. 1, June.
Bosworth, Barry P., and Susan M. Collins (1999), “Capital flows to developing
     economies: implications for saving and investment”, Brookings Papers on
     Economic Activity, 1999(1): 143-180.
Cardoso, Eliana, and Ilan Goldfajn (1998), “Capital flows to Brazil: the endogeneity of
     capital controls”, IMF Staff Papers, 45(1), 161-202.
Carvalho, Bernardo S. de M. (2005), "A eficácia dos controles de entrada de capitais",
     Master'
           s Thesis, PUC-Rio, mimeo.
Cerqueira, Ceres A. (2003), Dívida Externa Brasileira, 2nd ed., Brasília, Banco Central
     do Brasil.
Edwards, Sebastian (2005), "Capital controls, sudden stops and current account
     reversals", NBER, Working Paper no. 11170, Mar.
Ferrari Filho, Fernando, Frederico G. Jayme Jr., Gilberto T. Lima, José L. Oreiro and
     Luiz F. Paula (2005), "Uma avaliação crítica da proposta de conversibilidade
     plena do real", Revista de Economia Política, 25(1): 133-151, jan.-mar.
Franco, Gustavo H. B., and Demosthenes M. Pinho Neto (2004), “A desregulamentação
     da conta de capitais: limitações macroeconômicas e regulatórias”, PUC-RJ, Texto
     para Discussão no. 479, Jan.




                                                                                    37
Garcia, Márcio G. P., and Alexandre Barcinski (1998), “Capital flows to Brazil in the
     nineties: macroeconomic aspects and the effectiveness of capital controls”,
     Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance, 38(3): 319-357.
Garcia, Márcio G. P., and Marcus V. F. Valpassos (1998), “Capital flows, capital
     controls and currency crisis: the case of Brazil in the nineties”, PUC-RJ, Texto
     para Discussão no. 389, Nov.
Giavazzi, Francesco, Ilan Goldfajn, and Santiago Herrera (eds.) (2005), Inflation
     targeting, debt and the Brazilian experience, 1999 to 2003, MIT Press.
Gleizer, Daniel (ed.) (2005), Aprimorando o mercado de câmbio brasileiro, São Paulo,
     Bolsa de Mercadorias & Futuros.
Hamilton, James D. (1994), Time Series Analysis, Princeton, Princeton University
     Press.
International Monetary Fund (1993), Balance of Payments Manual, Washington, D.C.
International Monetary Fund, Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange
     Restrictions, Washington, D.C., various issues.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff (1994), “The intertemporal approach to the
     current account”, NBER, Working Paper no. 4893, Oct.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff (1996), Foundations of International
     Macroeconomics, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Prasad, Eswar, Kenneth Rogoff, Shang-Jin Wei, and M. Ayhan Kose (2003), “Effects of
     financial globalization on developing countries: some empirical evidence”, IMF,
     Occasional Paper no. 220, Mar.
Schwartsman, Alexandre (2004), “Descontrole nas contas CC5”, Valor Econômico,
     8.30.04.
Sims, Christopher A., James H. Stock, and Mark W. Watson (1990), "Inference in
     Linear Time Series Models with Some Unit Roots", Econometrica, vol. 58, no. 1,
     pp. 113-144, Jan.
Soihet, Elena (2002), “Índice de controle de capitais: uma análise da legislação e dos
     determinantes do fluxo de capital no período 1990-2000”, EPGE-FGV, Master'
                                                                              s
     Thesis, June.
Stiglitz, Joseph (2002), Globalization and its discontents, W.W. Norton, New York and
     London.




                                                                                   38
Appendix A: Main exchange restrictions in Brazil


Export Surrender
   •   Export proceeds are required to be converted into domestic currency (“exports
       surrender”). Furthermore, the netting of payments is not allowed, e.g., exporters
       cannot use their proceeds to pay for an import or an external debt before
       converting them into domestic currency.

Controls on capital flows
   •   There are generally no current taxes on capital flows. Two exceptions. Short-
       term fixed income flows (up to 90 days) are taxed at a 5% rate. Payments of
       credit card transactions are taxed at 2%.
   •   All capital flows must be registered at the Central Bank of Brazil

Transfers of currency

   •   Transfers abroad by residents are allowed but have to be registered at the Central
       Bank.
   •   Travelers may take out or bring into the country domestic or foreign banknotes,
       checks, or traveler'
                          s checks without restriction but must declare to customs any
       amount over R$ 10,000 or its equivalent.

Limits on transactions and deposits in foreign currency

   •   Settlements of transactions among residents and pricing of contracts or goods in
       foreign currency is prohibited.
   •   Lending in foreign currency is prohibited, except for onlending of external
       foreign currency loans by banks.
   •   Deposits in foreign currency are generally not allowed. There are several
       exceptions. Residents: authorized foreign exchange dealers, tourist agencies,
       Brazilian citizens living abroad, the Brazilian Post Office Administration, credit
       card administration companies, companies responsible for the development and
       execution of projects in the energy sector, and insurance and reinsurance
       companies and reinsurance brokers. Nonresidents: embassies, foreign
       delegations, international organizations, foreign transportation companies,
       foreign citizens in transit in the country, and reinsurance companies.

Direct Investment

   •   Foreign direct investment in Brazil is generally free. However, there are legal
       restrictions on participation in certain economic activities.
   •   Brazilian direct investment abroad requires prior approval by the Central Bank.
       The exception is transfers of up to the equivalent of US$5 million, including all
       remittances in the previous 12 months.

Nonresident participation in local markets

   •   No restriction on purchase of debt instruments. Purchase by nonresident of


                                                                                      39
       shares is also generally free. There are restrictions in certain economic activities.
   •   Nonresident may issue shares (or other securities that represent ownership) only
       through Brazilian Depositary Receipts (BDRs). The exception is for
       MERCOSUR countries, where direct sales are also allowed.

Resident restrictions on investment and issues abroad

   •   Residents may purchase bonds or other debt securities through dedicated
       offshore investment funds (FIEX).
   •   Residents may invest only in stock exchanges in MERCOSUR countries.
       Brazilians are allowed to purchase Depositary Receipts issued abroad by
       companies headquartered in Brazil.
   •   Corporations may issue Depositary Receipts abroad.




                                                                                         40
                                                                                                              (*)
Appendix B: Cronology of main changes to capital account regulation (1990–2004)

                                          Resident and nonresident accounts
                                              (1)   (2)
         Normative               Date     N         D                                     Description

Regulation implemented
prior to the 1990s
Decree 23,501, replaced      11.27.33,                    Establishment of the domestic currency as the only legal tender. In other
by Decree-Law 857            9.11.69                      words, payments in foreign currency are not allowed (exceptions included
                                                          contracts related to imports and exports, exchange contracts, and debt
                                                          involving nonresidents as creditor or debtor). Law 10,192, 2.14.01
                                                          (previously Provisory Measure 1,053, 6.30.95), reaffirmed those
                                                          restrictions, and also clarified that restriction includes indexation to a
                                                          foreign currency.

Decree 42,820                12.16.57                     Determination that "it is permissible to take out or bring in domestic and
                                                          foreign paper currency, as well as stocks and any other financial assets
                                                          that have monetary value" (article 17). The National Monetary Council
                                                          (CMN), if necessary, can restrict the entry and exit of domestic paper
                                                          money (article 20).
Decree 55,762                2.17.65                      Permission for nonresidents to transfer abroad, without prior
                                                          authorization, the balance resulting from foreign exchange sales or money
                                                          orders in foreign currency (article 57).
Circular Letter 5            2.27.69                      Classification of nonresidents’ deposit accounts into two categories: i)
                                                          "free accounts – coming from exchange sales", and ii) "free accounts –
                                                          from other origins". The balance of the former that is not withdrawn is
                                                          freely convertible into foreign currency; however, if the balance is
                                                          withdrawn and then subsequently returned to the account, it is classified
                                                          in the second category.

Resolution 1,552             12.22.88                     Creation of the "floating exchange rate market"—also called "dollar-
                                                          tourism market"—alongside the “commercial or free exchange rate
                                                          market”. Permission for authorized institutions to transfer their long
                                                          foreign currency position to nonresident institutions in exchange for
                                                          domestic currency. Furthermore, permission for the Central Bank to
                                                          change the conditions of the floating exchange rate market at any time.


Main changes
Circular Letter 2,259        2.20.92      L         O     Creation of a third category in the free accounts established in Circular
                                                          Letter 5, complementing Resolution 1,552: "free accounts – financial
                                                          institutions – floating exchange rate market", which can be opened by
                                                          nonresident financial institutions and whose withdrawals and deposits are
                                                          freely available, including those coming from exchange sales or
                                                          purchases.

Resolution 1,946, Circular 7.29.92,       R         O     Requirement that international transfers in domestic currency should be
2,242                      10.7.92                        identified and registered in the Central Bank Information System
                                                          (Sisbacen), when equal to or greater than US$ 10,000.00.

Circular 2,677, Circular     4.10.96,     E         O     Consolidation and revision of the regulation on nonresidents’ accounts
2,242                        10.7.92                      and international transfers in reais . Requirement of Sisbacen identification
                                                          when withdrawals or deposits are equal to or greater than R$ 10,000.00
                                                          (revoked Circular Letter 5).

Notes: In this table, we focus on the so-called CC5 accounts.
(1)
    L, R and E refer to liberazing, restrictive and regulatory measures, respectively.
(2)
    I and O refer to related to measures to inflows and outflows, respectively.
(*) We focus on regulation of capital account and convertibility of domestic currency into foreign currency. Thus, we do not
deal, for example, with export and import payments. Resolutions are rules set by the National Monetary Council; circulars,
circular letters and communications by the Central Bank of Brazil; and directives by the Ministry of Finance. This
chronology was written consulting directly the rules, but using initially IMF, Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements
and Exchange Restrictions , and Soheit (2002).



                                                                                                                         41
                                                           Foreign direct investment
                                                (1)       (2)
            Normative              Date     N         D                                          Description

Regulation implemented
prior to the 1990s
Law 4,131, Law 4,390 and 9.3.62,                                Regulation of foreign capital in Brazil, basically direct investment and
Decree 55,762            8.29.64,                               loans, and the associated remittance of income abroad.
                         2.17.65
Resolution 1,460                2.1.88                          Regulation of the conversion of external debt into investment in the
                                                                country.
Constitution                    10.5.88                         Restriction on foreign investment in some economic sectors.
Main changes
Resolution 1,810                3.27.91     L         I         Authorization of the conversion of external debt instruments of the federal
                                                                public sector, bonds, and deposits denominated in foreign currency for
                                                                use in the National Privatization Program.
Law 8,383                       12.30.91 L            O Elimination of the additional tax, ranging from 40% to 60%, on remittance
                                                        of profits and dividends abroad that exceeded 12% of registered capital –
                                                        effective 1.1.92. Reduction to 15% of the withholding tax on profits and
                                                        dividends of nonresidents – effective 1.1.93.

Resolution 1,894                1.9.92      L         I         Reduction from twelve to six years of the period that investments resulting
                                                                from the conversion of external debt instruments for use in the National
                                                                Privatization Program are required to remain in Brazil.

Circular 2,487                  10.5.94     R         I         Prohibition of inflows in the form of both advances for future capital
                                                                increases and bridge investments in anticipation of future conversion of
                                                                debts into investment.
Law 8,987                       2.13.95     L         I         Opening of new possibilities for investment in public utilities with the
                                                                Concession Law.
Constitutional                  8.15.95     L         I         Removal of the constitutional distinction between Brazilian
Amendment 6                                                     firms—licensed under Brazilian laws and with headquarters and
                                                                administration in the country—and Brazilian firms of national
                                                                capital—restricted to those under control of residents—and the related
                                                                special treatment given to the latter. Regardless of owner nationality, firms
                                                                licensed under Brazilian laws and with headquarters and administration in
                                                                the country were guaranteed: i) special treatment in the case of small
                                                                firms; and ii) exclusivity rights in the mining sector.


Constitutional                  8.15.95     L         I         Removal of the constitutional requirement that navigation along the coast
Amendment 7                                                     and in the inland waterways be conducted by national vessels.

Statement of Reasons 311, 8.23.95,          L         I         Possibility for an increase in the ownership participation of nonresidents in
Communications 5,796      9.9.97,                               financial institutions, after case-by-case analysis by the monetary
and 10,844                3.19.03                               authority, and Republic President'   s final decision.

Law 9,249                       12.26.95 L            O Removal of income tax, previously of 15%, on remittance of profits and
                                                        dividends abroad.
Directive MF 28                 2.8.96      R         I         Imposition of a financial transaction tax (IOF) of 5% on privatization
                                                                funds, when the resources enter the country.
Directive MF 85                 4.24.97     L         I         Reduction in the financial transaction tax (IOF) from 5% to 0% on
                                                                privatization funds.
Circular 2,997                  8.15.00     E                   Introduction of electronic registration (RDE) for foreign direct investment.

Resolution 2,815                1.24.01     L         I         Revocation of rule set in Resolution 2,099, 8.17.94, which precluded the
                                                                opening of new bank branches controlled by nonresidents.

(1)
      L, R and E refer to liberazing, restrictive and regulatory measures, respectively.
(2)
      I and O refer to related to measures to inflows and outflows, respectively.



                                                                                                                               42
                                Foreign portfolio investment and external loans

                                          (1)       (2)
        Normative             Date    N         D                                           Description

Regulation implemented
prior to the 1990s
Law 4,131 and 4,390,       9.3.62,                        Regulation of foreign capital in Brazil, basically direct investment and
Decree 55,762              8.29.64,                       loans, and the associated remittance of income abroad.
                           2.17.65
Resolution 63              8.21.67                        Regulation of external loans that are on-lent by resident financial
                                                          institutions.
Resolution 64              8.23.67                        Inclusion of BNDES among the institutions authorized to on-lend loans
                                                          under Resolution 63.
Resolution 125             12.12.69                       Requirement that external loans be previously approved by the BCB.

Resolution 498             11.22.78                       Determination of a minimum maturity of ten years for external loans to be
                                                          eligible for reimbursement, reduction or exemption from income tax.

Resolution 644             10.22.80                       Exemption from tax on the remittance abroad of interest, commission and
                                                          issuance expenditures of commercial paper.
Resolution 1,289, with     3.20.87                        Regulation of the creation, operation, and management of foreign capital
Annexes I to III                                          investment companies, foreign capital investment funds, and stock and
                                                          bond portfolios.
Resolution 1,460           2.1.88                         Regulation of the conversion of external debt into investment in the
                                                          country.
Main changes
Resolution 1,734           7.31.90    L         I         Authorization for certain financial institutions to issue commercial paper
                                                          abroad.
Resolution 1,803           3.27.91    L         I         Reduction in the minimum maturity of external loans from ten to five years
                                                          for those to be eligible for reimbursement, reduction or exemption from
                                                          income tax (revoked Resolution 498).
Debt Agreement             4.1.91     E                   Preliminary agreement with nonresident creditor banks for the elimination
                                                          of arrears outstanding at the end of 1990.
Resolution 1,832           5.31.91    L         I         Liberalization of the securities market to foreign institutional investors, via
                                                          Annex IV to Resolution 1,289. These investments were given exempted
                                                          from income and capital gains tax, but subject to a 15% tax on income
                                                          remitted abroad.
Circular 1,969, replaced by 6.6.91,   L         I         Authorization for the issuance of convertible debentures abroad.
Circular 2,199              7.16.92
Resolution 1,853           7.31.91    L         O         Tax exemption for the remittance abroad of interest, commission and
                                                          issuance expenditures, applied to commercial paper, extended to floating
                                                          rate notes, fixed rate notes, floating rate certificates of deposit, fixed rate
                                                          certificates of deposit, publicly-issued bonds, and private issued bonds.

Resolution 1,848, replaced 8.1.91,    L         I         Authorization for the issuance abroad of Depository Receipts representing
by Resolution 1,927        5.18.92                        Brazilian securities (American Depositary Receipts – ADRs, and
                                                          International Depositary Receipts – IDRs) – Annex V.
Resolution 1,872           9.25.91    L         I         Permission for external borrowing for agricultural financing.
Circular 2,083             11.7.91    L         I         Reduction in the minimum term for on-lending opera-tions related to
                                                          Resolution 63 from one year (investment banks and BNDES) or six
                                                          months (commercial banks) to 90 days.
Resolution 1,901           1.29.92    L                   Authorization for natural and juridical persons to invest in securities in
                                                          Mercosur countries.




                                                                                                                        43
                        Foreign portfolio investment and external loans (continued)
                                        (1)       (2)
        Normative           Date    N         D                                          Description
Communications 2,747     3.12.92,   R         I         Increase in the minimum average maturity of debt securities (commercial
and 2,757                3.13.92                        paper and those listed in Resolution 1,853, 7.31.91) to 30 months to be
                                                        eligible for tax exemptions.

Circular Letter 2,269    4.24.92    R         I         Requirement that the minimum average maturity for issuance of debt
                                                        securities must be 30 months, and increase, from 30 to 60 months, in the
                                                        minimum average maturity required for those to be eligible for tax
                                                        exemptions (revoked Communications 2,747 and 2,757).

Resolution 1,921         4.30.92    L                   Authorization for hedge operations against interest rate risk in the
                                                        international market.
Resolution 1,935         6.30.92    L         I         Authorization for foreign investors represented by funds, investment
                                                        companies, and institutional investors to operate in the options and
                                                        futures markets for securities, exchange, and interest rates.
Resolution 1,968         8.30.92    L                   Authorization for natural and juridical persons to invest in derivatives
                                                        markets as hedge operations in Mercosur countries (replaced Resolution
                                                        1,901).
Circular Letter 2,333    10.29.92   R         I         Authorization for external loans only for those with a minimum average
                                                        maturity of 30 months.
Circular Letter 2,372    6.16.93    R         I         Increase in both the minimum average maturity required for the issuance
                                                        of debt securities from 30 to 36 months, and in the minimum average
                                                        maturity from 60 to 96 months for eligibility for reimbursement, reduction
                                                        or exemption from income tax (revoked Circular Letter 2,269).

Circular Letter 2,373    6.16.93    R         I         Increase in the minimum average maturity required for loans from 30 to
                                                        36 months (revoked Circular Letter 2,333).
Resolution 1,986         6.28.93    R         I         Increase in the minimum average maturity of loans from 60 to 96 months
                                                        for those to be eligible for reimbursement, reduction or exemption from
                                                        income tax (revoked Resolution 1,803).
Resolution 2,012         7.30.93    L                   Expansion of the hedge operations that firms are allowed to undertake,
                                                        including, besides those related to interest rates previously allowed, those
                                                        related to exchange rate and commodity prices (revoked Resolution
                                                        1,921).
Resolution 2,013         8.19.93    R         I         Prohibition of foreign capital, registered under Annexes I to IV, to invest in
                                                        fixed-income bonds.
Decree 995               11.25.93   R         I         Imposition of a financial transaction tax (IOF) of 5% on investments in
                                                        fixed-income funds and 3% on external loans when entering the country.


Resolution 2,028         11.25.93   R         I         Prohibition of foreign capital, registered under Annexes I to IV, to invest in
                                                        debentures, accompanied by the creation of foreign capital fixed-income
                                                        funds – FRF-CE, to invest in private debt securities. Portfolio investment
                                                        by foreign investors in fixed-income instruments was restricted to those
                                                        new funds.
Circular 2,384           11.26.93   L         I         In the absence of objection by the Central Bank of Brazil, automatic
                                                        authorization for the issuance of debt securities by the private sector after
                                                        five working days of the request for authorization.
Resolution 2,034         12.17.93   R         I         Prohibition of foreign capital, registered under Annexes I to IV, to invest in
                                                        derivatives markets—unless as a hedge—including operations that result
                                                        in fixed income. FRF-CE funds were allowed to invest in federal bonds,
                                                        derivatives and in Financial Investment Funds – FAF (revoked Resolution
                                                        2,028).




                                                                                                                    44
                         Foreign portfolio investment and external loans (continued)
                                          (1)       (2)
        Normative             Date    N         D                                          Description
Resolution 2,042           1.13.94    L                   Authorization for certain institutions to conduct swap operations involving
                                                          gold, exchange rates, interest rates, and price indices in the over-the-
                                                          counter market.
Resolution 2,046           1.19.94    R         I         Change in the regulation of investments under annexes I to IV, including
                                                          prohibition of investment in debentures (revoked Resolution 2,013).


Circular 2,410             3.2.94     R         I         Termination of the automatic authorization for the issuance of debt
                                                          securities abroad that had been set by Circular 2,384, 11.26.93.

Circular Letter 2,444      3.14.94    R         I         Renewal or extension of contracts of debt securities subject to the same
                                                          rules as new contracts established by Circular Letter 2,372, 6.16.93.

Debt Agreement             4.15.94    E                   Conclusion of the arrangements to reschedule Brazil'
                                                                                                             s external debts to
                                                          commercial bank creditors.
Resolution 2,079           6.15.94    R         I         Prohibition of foreign capital, registered under Annexes I to IV, to invest in
                                                          certificates of privatization and related securities.
Resolution 2,105           8.31.94    L         O         Permission for prepayment of external loans and import financing.
Resolution 2,115           10.19.94   R         I         Prohibition of foreign capital, registered under Annexes I to IV, to invest in
                                                          Financial Investment Funds – FAF.
Directive MF 534           10.19.94   R         I         Increase in the financial transaction tax (IOF) from 5% to 9% on foreign
                                                          investment in fixed-income funds, and from 3% to 7% on external loans,
                                                          and imposition of a tax of 1% on foreign investment in securities.

Circular 2,492             10.19.94   R         I         Increase in the minimum maturity for on-lending operations under
                                                          Resolution 63 from 90 to 540 days (revoked Circular 2,083).
Circular 2,545             3.9.95     L         I         Reduction in the minimum term for on-lending operations related to
                                                          Resolution 63 from 540 days to 90 days (revoked Circular 2,492).
Circular 2,546             3.9.95     L         I         Reduction in the minimum average maturity required for loans from 36 to
                                                          24 months, with maintenance of the minimum average maturity of 96
                                                          months for those to be eligible for reimbursement, reduction or exemption
                                                          from income tax (revoked Circular Letters 2,372 and 2,373).

Circular 2,547, replaced by 3.9.95,   L         I         Reduction in the minimum average maturity required for the renewal and
Circular 2,559              4.20.95                       extension of debt securities contracts from 36 months to 180 days, with
                                                          maintenance of the minimum average maturity of 96 months for eligibility
                                                          for reimbursement, reduction or exemption from income tax (revoked
                                                          Circular Letter 2,444).

Directive MF 95            3.9.95     L         I         Reduction in the financial transaction tax (IOF) from 9% to 5% on foreign
                                                          investment in fixed-income funds, from 1% to 0% on foreign investment in
                                                          securities, and from 7% to 0% on external loans.

Resolution 2,147           3.9.95     R         O         Revocation of the permission for prepayment of external loans and import
                                                          financing (revoked Resolution 2,105).
Resolution 2,148           3.16.95    L         I         Permission for external borrowing for the financing of agricultural
                                                          investment. Minimum maturity for these external loans of 180 days
                                                          (revoked Resolution 1,872).
Resolution 2,170           6.30.95    L         I         Permission for financial institutions to contract resources abroad, with a
                                                          minimum maturity of 720 days, for the financing of construction or
                                                          acquisition of new real estate ventures.




                                                                                                                       45
                           Foreign portfolio investment and external loans (continued)
                                            (1)       (2)
        Normative              Date     N         D                                           Description
Directive MF 202            8.10.95     R         I         Increase in the financial transaction tax (IOF) from 5% to 7% on foreign
                                                            investment in fixed-income funds, and from 0% to 5% on external loans,
                                                            and imposition of a 7% rate on interbank foreign exchange operations
                                                            between financial institutions abroad and institutions authorized to operate
                                                            in the foreign exchange market, and on the formation of short-term cash
                                                            holdings (“disponibilidades” ) of nonresidents.

Directive MF 228            9.15.95     L         I         Imposition of a differentiated financial transaction tax (IOF) on external
                                                            loans according to average maturity: 5% for those with an average
                                                            maturity of two years, 4% for three years, 2% for four years, 1% for five
                                                            years, and 0% for six years.
Resolution 2,188            10.8.95     R         I         Prohibition of foreign capital, registered under Annexes I to IV, to invest in
                                                            futures and options markets (revoked Resolution 2,115).

Circular 2,661              2.8.96      R         I         Increase in the minimum average maturity required for external credits to
                                                            36 months, with maintenance of the minimum average maturity of 96
                                                            months for debt securities to be eligible for reimbursement, reduction or
                                                            exemption from income tax (revoked Circulars 2,546 and 2,559).

Resolution 2,246            2.8.96      R         I         Prohibition of foreign capital, registered under Annexes I to IV, to invest in
                                                            Agrarian Debt Bonds (TDA), National Development Fund Bonds (OFND)
                                                            and Siderbras debentures (revoked Resolution 2,188).

Resolution 2,247            2.8.96      L         I         Permission for nonresidents to invest in Mutual Investment Funds in
                                                            Emerging Firms.
Resolution 2,248            2.8.96      L         I         Permission for nonresidents to invest in Real Estate Investment Funds.

Resolution 2,266            3.29.96     L         I         Expansion of permission for external borrowing to finance agricultural
                                                            activities to all financial institutions, not only those participating of the
                                                            national system of rural credit.
Resolution 2,271            4.18.96     R         I         Restriction of external financing for states, Federal District and
                                                            municipalities, and their dependencies, foundations and firms, to the
                                                            refinancing of their domestic debt.
Resolution 2,280            5.22.96     L         I         Establishment of some exceptions to the restrictions set in Resolution
                                                            2,271 (revoked Resolution 2,271).
Directive MF 241            10.31.96    L         I         Reduction in the differentiated financial transaction tax (IOF) on external
                                                            loans according to average maturity: 3% for those with an average
                                                            maturity less than three years, 2% for four years, 1% for five years, and
                                                            0% for equal to or above five years.

Resolution 2,337 and        11.28.96,   E                   Introduction of electronic registration (RDE) for inward and outward flows,
Circular 2,728              11.28.96                        starting with foreign portfolio investment.
Resolution 2,345            12.19.96    L         I         Authorization for the issuance abroad of Depository Receipts representing
                                                            non-voting shares of resident financial institutions with shares traded in
                                                            the stock market – Annex V.
Law 9,430                   12.27.96    E                   Revocation of the decrees that gave authority to the National Monetary
                                                            Council to set some rules on nonresident income tax. As a consequence,
                                                            termination of tax rules set in Resolution 1,853, and Circulars 2,546 and
                                                            2,661.
Provisory Measure 1,563,    12.31.96,   R         I         Exemption from income tax on interest, commission and issuance
turned into Law 9,481       8.13.97                         expenditures of debt securities with a minimum average maturity of 96
                                                            months. Exemption from income tax on interest of loans with a minimum
                                                            maturity of fifteen years.




                                                                                                                          46
                           Foreign portfolio investment and external loans (continued)
                                           (1)       (2)
        Normative              Date    N         D                                         Description
Directive MF 85             4.24.97    L         I         Reduction in the financial transaction tax (IOF) from 7% to 2% on foreign
                                                           investment in fixed-income funds, from the differentiated rates to a flat
                                                           rate of 0% on loans, and from 7% to 2% on interbank exchange
                                                           operations between financial institutions abroad and institutions
                                                           authorized to operate in the exchange market, and on the formation of
                                                           short-term cash holdings of nonresidents.
Resolution 2,384            5.22.97    L         I         Permission for foreign capital, registered under Annexes I to IV, to invest
                                                           in convertible debentures, and futures and options markets as hedge
                                                           operations.
Resolution 2,406            6.26.97    L         I         Authorization for creation of Investment Funds in Emerging Firms –
                                                           Foreign Capital.
Circular 2,783              11.13.97   L         I         Reduction in the minimum average maturity required for loans from 36 to
                                                           twelve months for new loans, and to six months for renewed or extended
                                                           loans.
Circular 2,807              2.26.98    R         I         Increase in the minimum average maturity required for loans from twelve
                                                           to 24 months for new loans, and from six to twelve months for renewed or
                                                           extended loans (revoked Circulars 2,661 and replaced Circular 2,783).

Circular 2,834, replaced by 8.24.98,   L         I         Reduction in the minimum average maturity required for loans from 24 to
Circular 2,850              11.30.98                       twelve months for new loans, and from twelve to six months for renewed
                                                           or extended loans (revoked Circular 2,807).
Directive MF 348            12.30.98   R         I         Increase in the financial transaction tax (IOF) from 2% to 2.38% on
                                                           foreign investment in fixed-income funds, on interbank exchange
                                                           operations between financial institutions abroad and institutions
                                                           authorized to operate in the exchange market, and on the formation of
                                                           short-term cash holdings of nonresidents, and from 0% to 0.38% on
                                                           foreign investment in securities. Imposition of a 0.38% rate on financial
                                                           transfers abroad and from abroad.

Circular 2,859              1.27.99    L         I         Reduction in the minimum average maturity required for loans from twelve
                                                           to nine months for new loans, and from nine to six months for renewed or
                                                           extended loans (revoked Circular 2,850).
Resolution 2,590            1.28.99    L         I         Reduction in the minimum average maturity from 180 to 90 days for
                                                           agricultural loans.
Resolution 2,591            1.28.99    L         I         Permission for foreign capital, registered under Annexes I to IV, to invest
                                                           in public debt securities of the federal government.
Directives MF 56 and 157    3.12.99,   L         I         Reduction in the financial transaction tax (IOF) from 2.38% to 0.5% on
                            6.24.99                        foreign investment in fixed-income funds, on interbank exchange
                                                           operations between financial institutions abroad and institutions
                                                           authorized to operate in the exchange market, and on the formation of
                                                           short-term cash holdings of nonresidents.

Resolution 2,625            7.29.99    L         I         Permission for financial institutions to issue bonds abroad and use the
                                                           proceeds freely in the domestic market as long as those resources stay a
                                                           minimum of five years in the country.
Resolution 2,622            7.29.99    L         I         Permission for nonresidents to invest in futures contracts related to
                                                           agricultural products.
Directive MF 306            8.18.99    L         I         Reduction in the financial transaction tax (IOF) from 0.5 to 0% on foreign
                                                           investment in fixed-income funds, on interbank exchange operations
                                                           between financial institutions abroad and institutions authorized to operate
                                                           in the exchange market, and on the formation of short-term cash holdings
                                                           of nonresidents (revoked Directives MF 56 and 157).




                                                                                                                       47
                              Foreign portfolio investment and external loans (continued)

                                                 (1)       (2)
            Normative               Date     N         D                                         Description

Directive MF 306                8.18.99      L         I         Reduction in the financial transaction tax (IOF) from 0.5 to 0% on foreign
                                                                 investment in fixed-income funds, on interbank exchange operations
                                                                 between financial institutions abroad and institutions authorized to operate
                                                                 in the exchange market, and on the formation of short-term cash holdings
                                                                 of nonresidents (revoked Directives MF 56 and 157).

Resolution 2,628                8.6.99       L         I         Permission for foreign capital, registered under Annexes I to IV, to invest
                                                                 in fixed-income instruments, although within some limits (replaced
                                                                 Resolutions 2,384 and 2,591).
Resolution 2,683                12.29.99     L         I         Elimination of the requirement of five years for the proceeds from the
                                                                 bonds issued abroad by financial institutions to stay in the country.
                                                                 Elimination of minimum average maturity required for external loans
                                                                 (revoked Resolution 2,625).
Directive MF 492                12.29.99     R         I         Determination of the financial transaction tax (IOF) on external loans at a
                                                                 rate of 0% for those with average maturity above 90 days, and 5% for
                                                                 those with average maturity up to 90 days.
Provisory Measure 2,013-        12.30.99,    R         O         Termination of the income tax exemption on interest, commission and
4, turned into Law 9,959        1.27.00                          issuance expenses for debt securities with a minimum average maturity of
                                                                 96 months, and of the income tax exemption for loans with maturity
                                                                 greater than 15 years. Interest payments on all external loans and debt
                                                                 securities, regardless of the maturity, taxed at 15%.

Resolution 2,689                1.26.00      L         I         Regulation of investment in the financial and capital markets, allowing
                                                                 nonresidents to invest in the same instruments as residents. Inward
                                                                 investment must be registered at the Central Bank.

Circular 2,975                  3.29.00      E                   Update on conditions for the electronic registration (RDE) of portfolio
                                                                 investment (replaced Circular 2,728).
Resolution 2,770                8.30.00      L         I         Consolidation of the regulation on external loans, including debt
                                                                 securities. Termination of the requirement of prior approval by the Central
                                                                 Bank for those operations, except for those involving the public sector as
                                                                 a debtor. Maintenance of the requirement of registration at the Central
                                                                 Bank for those operations (revoked 67 resolutions, 96 circulars, and 51
                                                                 circular letters, including Resolutions 63, 64, 125, and 1,986, and Circular
                                                                 2,410).
Circular 3,027                  2.22.01      E                   Introduction of electronic registration (RDE) for external loans, including
                                                                 debt securities.
Constitutional                  6.12.02,     L         I         Exemption from the Provisional Contribution on Financial Transactions
Amendment 37, and               7.10.02                          (CPMF) for entries into foreign investor accounts involving inflows of
Decree 4,296                                                     financial resources to the country and remittances abroad when such
                                                                 resources are used exclusively in stock operations.

Resolution 3,217                6.30.04      L         O         Permission for the prepayment of external debt, including debt securities.

Resolution 3,221                7.29.04      L         I         Establishment of conditions for the issuance of real -denominated external
                                                                 debt.
(1)
      L, R and E refer to liberazing, restrictive and regulatory measures, respectively.
(2)
      I and O refer to related to measures to inflows and outflows, respectively.




                                                                                                                            48
                                                       Brazilian capital abroad
                                             (1)   (2)
           Normative            Date     N         D                                       Description

Regulation implemented
prior to the 1990s
Circular 1,280               1.18.88                     Requirement that Brazilian investments abroad be compensated by a sale
                                                         to the Central Bank of gold bought in the domestic market for a value
                                                         equivalent to the investment. Previously, authorization for Brazilian
                                                         investment abroad was decided on a case-by-case basis by the monetary
                                                         authority.
Resolution 1,534             11.30.88                    As an alternative to the exchange compensation with gold mechanism,
                                                         investment abroad by Brazilian enterprises may be authorized at the
                                                         official exchange rate in an amount equal to direct foreign investment
                                                         received by the firm.
Main changes
Resolution 1,925             5.5.92      L         O     Termination of the mechanism of exchange compensation with gold,
                                                         transferring the operations of investment abroad to the floating exchange
                                                         rate market.
Circular 2,243               10.14.92    L         O     Authorization for nonfinancial resident firms to invest abroad up to US$1
                                                         million without prior authorization, for each 12 months by economic
                                                         group. When above this value, investors must provide information to the
                                                         Central Bank 30 days ahead of the exchange transaction.


Circular 2,472               8.31.94     L         O     Increase in the limit of the value of Brazilian investments abroad that do
                                                         not require previous authorization from US$ 1 to US$ 5 million.

Resolution 2,111             9.22.94     L         O     Authorization of Foreign Investment Funds (FIEX) for investment in debt
                                                         securities in international markets.

Resolution 2,318             9.26.96     L         O     Regulation of residents'investments in Brazilian Depositary Receipts
                                                         (BDRs).
Resolution 2,356             2.27.97     L         O     Permission for residents to invest in Depositary Receipts issued abroad
                                                         representing resident firms’ securities.
Circular 2,863               2.10.99     R         O     Increase in the minimum share of Brazilian sovereign bonds in FIEX funds
                                                         from 60% to 80%.
Circular 2,877               3.17.99     R         O     Prohibition of financial institutions to invest directly or indirectly in FIEX
                                                         funds.
Resolution 2,716             4.12.00     L         O     Permission for private pension funds to invest up to 10% of their
                                                         resources in BDRs.
Resolution 2,717             4.12.00     L         O     Permission for insurance companies, capitalization companies, and open
                                                         private pension funds to invest up to 10% of their resources in BDRs.

Resolution 2,763             8.9.00      E               New regulation on residents'investments in Brazilian Depositary Receipts
                                                         (BDRs), which represent securities of nonresident companies (replaced
                                                         Resolution 2,318).
Decree-Law 1,060,            10.21.69,   E               Implementation of the first survey of Brazilian capital abroad, which has
Circular 3,039 and           6.8.01,                     subsequently been conducted on an annual basis. The provision of
Resolution 2,911             11.29.01                    information from residents on their assets abroad is mandatory.

(1)
      L, R and E refer to liberazing, restrictive and regulatory measures, respectively.
(2)
      I and O refer to related to measures to inflows and outflows, respectively.




                                                                                                                        49
Appendix C: Classification of capital flows

        In the text, we classify the items of the capital and financial account into six
groups: net direct investment, portfolio investment, loans and trade credits, other short-
term assets, official-agency-related loans, and other items.43 We do not use the category
"other investments" of IMF'
                          s classification because it consists of disparate flows. In
particular, it includes both compensatory flows and private bank loans; thus, using the
balance of this category may be misleading. For example, in 2002, despite negative net
loan flows and large currency transfers abroad, the other investments balance does not
appear as significantly negative (only US$ -0.2 billion) because of IMF loans (a net
inflow of US$ 11.5 billion).


        a) Net direct investment. It follows IMF'
                                                s definition. It covers inflows (outflows)
related to acquisition, subscription and increase in the capital of resident (nonresident)
enterprises, and similarly flows related to partial or total sale of the capital. It also
includes intercompany loans.44 Differently from the investor in equities, the "direct
investor seeks a significant voice in the management" of the enterprise (IMF, 1993,
p.80). In general, the criterion used is that the direct investor owns 10% or more of the
ordinary shares or voting power (for an incorporated enterprise) or the equivalent (for
an unincorporated enterprise) (IMF, 1993, p.86);


        b) Portfolio investment. This category follows IMF'
                                                          s definition as well. It is
represented by cross-border investment in equity securities that is not classified as direct
investment, and debt securities.45 We also consider these two items separately when
relevant. This category includes securities negotiated in Brazil and abroad;




43
   The balance of payments statistics are produced by the Central Bank of Brazil and are available on its
website (www.bcb.gov.br). The statistics follow IMF'   s recommendations (IMF, 1993; Banco Central do
Brasil, 2001). Although those recommendations were implemented in 2001, the historical statistics were
conformed to the new methodology. We do not use the statistics published in the International Financial
Statistics (IFS) database of the IMF, because its high level of aggregation does not allow us to make the
classification used in this paper.
44
   It should include reinvested earnings as well, but because the data does not include this item since
1999, we exclude it to maintain the coherence throughout the series. The statistics do not include
intercompany trade credits either.
45
   Throughout the paper, we have excluded from the series of portfolio investment and loans the values
related to the conversion of debt under the Brady Plan, which appear in the second quarter of 1994.
Maintaining them in the series would distort the analysis.


                                                                                                     50
         c) Loans and trade credits. It comprises loans not related to official agencies—
which we call loans—and suppliers'and buyers'credits;


         d) Other short-term assets. This group aims to capture the movements of
currency and deposits, which played an important role during the crises. For example, in
1998, the negative balance of this category reached US$ -17.6 billion. It consists of
three items of the balance of payments statistics: "currency and deposits of
nonresidents" (which includes flows through the called CC5 accounts classified as
"disposable funds"), "currency and deposits of non-financial residents" (which includes
deposits available abroad), and "other short-term assets" within other domestic
investments (which includes flows through the CC5 accounts below 10,000 reais);


         e) Official-agency-related loans. It consists of loans to the monetary authority
(such as those from the IMF, BIS, Bank of Japan, and U.S. Treasury) and long-term
financing from bilateral or multilateral organizations (such as IBD and World Bank
Group).46 These loans have clearly worked as compensatory flows. For instance, in the
crisis years of 1998 and 2002, the balance of this group was largely positive, US$ 10.9
and US$ 12.2 billion, respectively;


         f) Other items. This category corresponds to the remaining items of the capital
and financial account. It includes diverse items, but quantitatively the most important
ones are "currency and deposits of financial residents"47 and "other liabilities" within
other foreign investments (mainly external liabilities assumed by the Central Bank, but
whose repayments and interests were not sent abroad duly).48 The latter was the major
item of the group through mid-1990s because of the arrears that occurred in some
periods.

46
   Before 1979, some of the items that comprise official-agency-related loans are available only on an
annual basis. We distributed the annual values over the four quarters and added to the data available
quarterly.
47
   We do not classify "currency and deposits of financial residents" into the group "other short-term
assets" because they are the main counterpart of the payments registered in the balance of payments. For
example, when a resident repays a loan, it represents a reduction in external liabilities (increase in net
assets of residents), but as counterpart there is a reduction in the foreign assets of the bank that sold the
foreign currency (reduction in net assets of residents). In fact, the balance of this item was positive in
1998 and 2002.
48
   The other items are "capital account" (according to IMF'       s (1993) definition, which covers capital
transfers and acquisition or disposal of nonproduced, nonfinancial assets), financial derivatives, and other
long-term assets of residents (Brazil' s participation in multilateral organizations, and greater-than-one-
year escrow deposits).


                                                                                                         51
        We also classify flows according to their maturity. Short-term debt flows
correspond to equities and short-term debt securities, loans and trade credits. When
including other short-term assets, we call them "short-term flows expanded". Long-term
debt flows in turn comprise long-term debt securities, loans and trade credits, which,
according to the balance of payments classification, correspond to contracts with
maturity superior to 360 days. When including net direct investment, we call this group
"long-term flows expanded".


Appendix D: Methodology used in the VAR estimation

        To estimate the VAR, we have used the following endogenous variables:49 i)
log-level of industrial production in Brazil (seasonally adjusted); ii) current account
balance at constant prices (seasonally adjusted by the authors; ratio to the average GDP
in the period);50 iii) private capital account (ratio to the average GDP in the period); iv)
log of terms of trade, measured as the ratio of export prices to import prices; v) EMBI+
Brazil, sovereign spread;51 vi) log of real effective exchange rate (measured as the value
of foreign currency in terms of domestic currency);52 and vii) real interest rate,
measured as the Selic interest rate deflated by the IPCA.53 The exogenous variables are
the Fed Funds interest rate and the U.S. industrial production (seasonally adjusted).


        The sample goes from 1995:1 through 2004:8. It starts when the balance of
payments statistics on a monthly basis are available according to IMF’s (1993)



49
   The data source are the following: i) IBGE; ii) and iii) BCB; iv) Funcex, available in Ipeadata; v) JP
Morgan; vi) and vii) BCB. The estimations were conducted using basically the Rats software.
50
   We do not use the ratio to the current GDP because the large movements in the exchange ratio tend to
distort the analysis: movements in the ratio can reflect changes in the exchange ratio rather than capital
account changes. On the other hand, the absence of normalization generated problems for the
convergence of the algorithm to estimate the structural parameters. The same reasoning is valid for the
private capital account.
51
   Average of daily data of the EMBI Brazil from 1992:1 through 1996:12, and the EMBI+ Brazil
thereafter.
52
   Estimated by the Central Bank of Brazil using the IPCA as internal deflator, and U.S. CPI as external
deflator. It corresponds to the average of the domestic currency value in relation to 15 countries weighed
by the participation of these countries in Brazil’s exports.
53
   We use the inflation accumulated in the last twelve months because of the difficulties in using a
measure for expected inflation for the whole sample. We use 12 months because of the volatility of the
inflation rate of one or even six months. From 1995:01 through 1995:07, however, we use the average
inflation in the period starting in 1994:09 instead of 12 months to avoid the distortions caused by the
high-inflation period.


                                                                                                      52
methodology. Furthermore, it does not include the high-inflation period.54 We have
estimated the VAR using the variables in levels,55 employing six lags for the
endogenous variables.56 For the exogenous variables, we use their contemporaneous and
one-period lagged values.57


         To determine the identification structure concerning the contemporaneous
effects of the shocks, we have considered the relationships between variables and
possible lags in the effects of one variable on another as well as the correlation of the
estimated reduced-form residuals. First, we have assumed that current account, terms of
trade and interest rate are not affected contemporaneously by shocks to other variables.
Effective exports and imports are usually result of contracts set in advance.58 Terms of
trade, besides depending on exogenous variables, are affected by pricing-to-market
decisions, which tend to react with some lag. Although interest rate is a financial
variable, we are using the rate whose target is set by the Central Bank. We are assuming
that there is a one-month lag in the reaction of the Central Bank either because
information is not available promptly or because there is some lag in Central Bank'
                                                                                  s
decisions. In particular, the target for the basic interest rate is usually set on a monthly
basis rather than on a daily basis.59 Second, since the EMBI and exchange rate are
financial variables, they tend to react more quickly. We assume then that reduced-form
shocks to the other variables affect those variables contemporaneously. Third, for output
and capital flows, we have used the matrix of correlation coefficients of reduced-form
residuals. We have considered only residuals that have a correlation coefficient greater
than 0.1, which led to assume that output responds contemporaneously to terms of trade,
EMBI, exchange rate,60 and interest rate, and capital flows to EMBI, exchange rate and
interest rate.


54
   Thus, we do not face the problem of measuring the real interest rate in the high-inflation period and
making it comparable to the low-inflation period.
55
   The estimation is consistent even in the presence of variables integrated of order one (Sims, Stock, and
Watson, 1990; Hamilton, 1994).
56
   Schwarz criterion has indicated two lags, but, using a Lagrange multiplier test, we reject the null
hypothesis of absence of serial correlation in the residuals. We then add lags until accepting the null of no
serial correlation.
57
   Further lags were not significant. The presence of one lag also avoids the problem of spurious
regression (Hamilton, 1994).
58
   Even in the case of terms of trade, the correlation coefficient between the reduced-form shock to that
variable and to current account balance was not positive (–0.02).
59
   Even in the case of crises, the basic interest rate did not react in the same month.
60
   The correlation with exchange rate is low, but the coefficient was included to ease the convergence of
the algorithm.


                                                                                                         53
       The resulting structure was the following (time subscripts were omitted):


       1 0 0 a14 a15 a16 a17            OUT               OUT                          eOUT
       0 1 0 0 0 0 0                    CA                 CA                           eCA
       0 0 1 0 a 35 a 36 a 37            KA                KA                          eKA
                                                                          OUT _ US
       0 0 0 1 0 0 0                    TOT    = c + A( L) TOT + H ( L)              + eTOT ,
                                                                          INT _ US
      a 51 a 52 a 53 a 54 1 a 56 a 57   EMBI             EMBI                          eEMBI
      a 61 a 62 a 63 a 64 a 65 1 a 67    ER                ER                           eER
       0 0 0 0 0 0 1                    INT               INT                          eINT


where OUT, CA, KA, TOT, EMBI, ER, INT, OUT_US, and INT_US stand for output,
current account, private capital account, terms of trade, EMBI+ Brazil, real effective
exchange rate, real interest rate, U.S. output, and U.S. interest rate, respectively, c is a
vector of constants, A and H are coefficient matrices, L is the lag operator, and e is the
structural shock. Since there are 26 free parameters, the model is over-identified. Even
though most of the structural coefficients are not significant, we can accept the
identification restrictions (p-value of 0.293).




                                                                                                54
                                                                                                                                                                                                              US$ billion
                                                 US$ billion




                                                                                                                                                                                      -40
                                                                                                                                                                                            -30
                                                                                                                                                                                                  -20
                                                                                                                                                                                                        -10
                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           60

                                                                                                                                                                             1970:4




                               -30
                                     -20
                                           -10
                                                  0
                                                               10
                                                                    20
                                                                         30
                      1970:1                                                                                                                                                 1971:4
                      1971:1                                                                                                                                                 1972:4
                      1972:1                                                                                                                                                 1973:4
                      1973:1                                                                                                                                                 1974:4
                      1974:1                                                                                                                                                 1975:4
                      1975:1                                                                                                                                                 1976:4
                      1976:1
                                                                                                                                                                             1977:4
                      1977:1
                                                                                                                                                                             1978:4
                      1978:1
                                                                                                                                                                             1979:4
                      1979:1
                                                                                                                                                                             1980:4
                      1980:1
                                                                                                                                                                             1981:4
                      1981:1
                                                                                                                                                                             1982:4
                      1982:1
                                                                                                                                                                             1983:4
                      1983:1
                                                                                                                                                                             1984:4
                      1984:1


                                                                                                                                                   Current Account
                                                                                                                                                                             1985:4
                      1985:1




     Income Balance
                                                                                                                                                                             1986:4
                      1986:1




                                                                                                          Figure 2
                                                                                                                                                                             1987:4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Figure 1




                      1987:1
                                                                                                                                                                             1988:4
                      1988:1
                                                                                                                                                                             1989:4
                      1989:1
                                                                                                                                                                             1990:4
                      1990:1




                                                                                             Trade Balance and Income Balance
                      1991:1
                                                                                                                                                                             1991:4

                      1992:1                                                                                                                                                 1992:4




     Trade Balance
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Current Account and Private Capital Account




                      1993:1                                                                                                                                                 1993:4

                      1994:1                                                                                                                                                 1994:4
                                                                                                                                                   Private Capital Account




                      1995:1                                                                                                                                                 1995:4

                                                                              (four-quarter cumulative balance - 1970:4–2004:2 - at 2003 prices)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (four-quarter cumulative balance - 1970:4–2004:2 - at 2003 prices)




                      1996:1                                                                                                                                                 1996:4

                      1997:1                                                                                                                                                 1997:4

                      1998:1                                                                                                                                                 1998:4
                      1999:1                                                                                                                                                 1999:4
                      2000:1                                                                                                                                                 2000:4
                      2001:1                                                                                                                                                 2001:4




55
                      2002:1                                                                                                                                                 2002:4
                      2003:1                                                                                                                                                 2003:4
                                                                                                                 Figure 3
                                                                                   Real Effective Exchange Rate and Cumulative 12-month Trade Balance
                                                                                                             (1991:1–2004:9)

               35                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 180


               30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  160
               25


               20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 140




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Exchange Rate
US$ billion




               15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  120
               10


                   5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              100


                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  80
               -5


              -10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 60
                       1991:01
                                 1991:06
                                           1991:11
                                                     1992:04
                                                               1992:09
                                                                         1993:02
                                                                                   1993:07
                                                                                             1993:12
                                                                                                       1994:05
                                                                                                                 1994:10
                                                                                                                           1995:03
                                                                                                                                     1995:08
                                                                                                                                               1996:01
                                                                                                                                                         1996:06
                                                                                                                                                                   1996:11
                                                                                                                                                                             1997:04
                                                                                                                                                                                       1997:09
                                                                                                                                                                                                  1998:02
                                                                                                                                                                                                            1998:07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1998:12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1999:05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1999:10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2000:03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2000:08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2001:01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2001:06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2001:11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2002:04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2002:09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2003:02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2003:07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2003:12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2004:05
                                                                                                                                       Trade Balance                                             Real Effective Exchange Rate




                                                                                                                                                    Figure 4
                                                                                                                                           GDP Growth Rate (1991–2004)


              6



              5



              4



              3
%




              2



              1



              0



              -1
                             1991                    1992                    1993                      1994                   1995                       1996                 1997                      1998                    1999                    2000                      2001                   2002                       2003                  2004




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        56
                                           %                                                                                                       R$ per US$




                              0
                                  5
                                      10
                                           15
                                                20
                                                     25
                                                          30
                                                                                                                           0.0
                                                                                                                                 0.5
                                                                                                                                       1.0
                                                                                                                                             1.5
                                                                                                                                                      2.0
                                                                                                                                                                2.5
                                                                                                                                                                      3.0
                                                                                                                                                                            3.5
                                                                                                                                                                                  4.0


                                                                                                                  1994:1
                      1970
                      1971                                                                                        1994:5

                      1972                                                                                        1994:9

                      1973                                                                                        1995:1




     *Estimated GDP
                      1974                                                                                        1995:5
                      1975                                                                                        1995:9
                      1976                                                                                        1996:1
                      1977                                                                                        1996:5
                      1978                                                                                        1996:9
                      1979
                                                                                                                  1997:1
                      1980
                                                                                                                  1997:5
                      1981
                                                                                                                  1997:9
                      1982
                                                                                                                  1998:1
                      1983
                                                                                                                  1998:5
                      1984
                                                                                                                  1998:9
                      1985
                                                                                                                  1999:1
                      1986
                                                                                                                  1999:5




                                                                                   Figure 6
                                                                                                                                                                                              Figure 5




                      1987
                      1988                                                                                        1999:9
                                                                                                                                                                                          (1990:1–2004:10)




                      1989                                                                                        2000:1
                                                                                                                                                                                        Nominal Exchange Rate




                      1990                                                                                        2000:5
                      1991                                                                                        2000:9
                      1992                                                                                        2001:1
                      1993                                                                                        2001:5




                                                               Ratio of Exports plus Imports to GDP (1970–2004)
                      1994                                                                                        2001:9
                      1995
                                                                                                                  2002:1
                      1996
                                                                                                                  2002:5
                      1997
                                                                                                                  2002:9
                      1998
                                                                                                                  2003:1
                      1999
                                                                                                                  2003:5
                      2000
                                                                                                                  2003:9
                      2001
                                                                                                                  2004:1
                      2002




57
                                                                                                                  2004:5
                      2003
                      2004*                                                                                       2004:9
                                                                                                                 Figure 7
                                                                                                         Income Account Deficit
                                                                                     (four-quarter cumulative balance - 1979:4–2004:2 - at 2003 prices)
              22.5


              20.0


              17.5


              15.0
US$ billion




              12.5


              10.0


               7.5


               5.0


               2.5


               0.0
                      1979:4
                               1980:3
                                        1981:2
                                                  1982:1
                                                              1982:4
                                                                       1983:3
                                                                                  1984:2
                                                                                           1985:1
                                                                                                    1985:4
                                                                                                              1986:3
                                                                                                                       1987:2
                                                                                                                                1988:1
                                                                                                                                          1988:4
                                                                                                                                                   1989:3
                                                                                                                                                             1990:2
                                                                                                                                                                        1991:1
                                                                                                                                                                                 1991:4
                                                                                                                                                                                            1992:3
                                                                                                                                                                                                     1993:2
                                                                                                                                                                                                              1994:1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1994:4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1995:3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1996:2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1997:1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1997:4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1998:3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1999:2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2000:1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2000:4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2001:3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2002:2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2003:1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2003:4
                                                  Income - Direct Investments                                                                      Income - Portfolio Investments                                                                         Income - Interest - Other Investments




                                                                                 Figure 8
                                    Direct Investments, Portfolio Investments, Loans and Trade Credits and Other Short-Term Assets
                                                   (four-quarter cumulative balance- 1990:4 – 2004:2 - at 2003 prices)

              36


              28


              20


              12
US$ billion




               4


               -4


              -12


              -20


              -28
                    1990:4

                               1991:2

                                         1991:4

                                                     1992:2

                                                                   1992:4

                                                                                1993:2

                                                                                           1993:4

                                                                                                     1994:2

                                                                                                                 1994:4

                                                                                                                            1995:2

                                                                                                                                         1995:4

                                                                                                                                                    1996:2

                                                                                                                                                               1996:4

                                                                                                                                                                            1997:2

                                                                                                                                                                                          1997:4

                                                                                                                                                                                                     1998:2

                                                                                                                                                                                                               1998:4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1999:2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1999:4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2000:2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2000:4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2001:2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2001:4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2002:2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2002:4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2003:2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2003:4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2004:2




                                            Direct Investments                                                         Portfolio Investments                                                         Loans and Trade Credits                                                            Other Short-Term Assets




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          58
                                                                                      Figure 9
                                                     Debt Securities, Loans, Trade Credits and Equity Securities - Ratio to GDP
                                                                                    (1970–2003)
           4.5

           4.0

           3.5

           3.0

           2.5

           2.0

           1.5
% of GDP




           1.0

           0.5

           0.0

           -0.5

           -1.0

           -1.5

           -2.0

           -2.5
                  1970
                         1971
                                1972
                                       1973
                                              1974
                                                     1975
                                                            1976
                                                                   1977
                                                                          1978
                                                                                 1979
                                                                                        1980
                                                                                                1981
                                                                                                        1982
                                                                                                               1983
                                                                                                                      1984
                                                                                                                             1985
                                                                                                                                    1986
                                                                                                                                           1987
                                                                                                                                                  1988
                                                                                                                                                          1989
                                                                                                                                                                  1990
                                                                                                                                                                          1991
                                                                                                                                                                                 1992
                                                                                                                                                                                        1993
                                                                                                                                                                                               1994
                                                                                                                                                                                                      1995
                                                                                                                                                                                                             1996
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1997
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1998
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1999
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2003
                                                                                  Debt Securities                            Loans                       Trade Credits                         Equity Securities




                                                                                      Figure 10
                                                        Net Foreign Direct Investment and Privatization as a proportion of GDP
                                                                                    (1990–2004)
           8



           7



           6



           5
% of GDP




           4



           3



           2



           1



           0
                   1990            1991              1992          1993            1994                1995           1996           1997           1998                 1999           2000           2001            2002              2003          2004

                                                                                               Foreign Direct Investment (Net)                                   Privatization




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  59
                                                                                                             Figure 11
                                                                                    Private Capital Account and Official-Agency-Related Loans
                                                                                 (four-quarter cumulative balance - 1990:1–2004:2 - at 2003 prices)
              60



              48



              36



              24
US$ billion




              12



               0



              -12



              -24
                    1990:1

                             1990:3

                                       1991:1

                                                 1991:3

                                                            1992:1

                                                                        1992:3

                                                                                     1993:1

                                                                                                  1993:3

                                                                                                            1994:1

                                                                                                                         1994:3

                                                                                                                                     1995:1

                                                                                                                                                1995:3

                                                                                                                                                           1996:1

                                                                                                                                                                     1996:3

                                                                                                                                                                              1997:1

                                                                                                                                                                                       1997:3

                                                                                                                                                                                                1998:1

                                                                                                                                                                                                         1998:3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1999:1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1999:3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2000:1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2000:3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2001:1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2001:3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2002:1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2002:3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2003:1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2003:3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2004:1
                                                                                                                     Private Capital Account                                                             Official-Agency-Related Loans




                                                                                                             Figure 12
                                                                                               Short- and Long-Term Debt Net Flows
                                                                                 (four-quarter cumulative balance - 1990:1–2004:2 - at 2003 prices)
              48




              32




              16
US$ billion




               0




              -16




              -32
                    1990:4

                              1991:2

                                        1991:4

                                                   1992:2

                                                               1992:4

                                                                            1993:2

                                                                                         1993:4

                                                                                                       1994:2

                                                                                                                     1994:4

                                                                                                                                  1995:2

                                                                                                                                              1995:4

                                                                                                                                                         1996:2

                                                                                                                                                                    1996:4

                                                                                                                                                                              1997:2

                                                                                                                                                                                       1997:4

                                                                                                                                                                                                1998:2

                                                                                                                                                                                                          1998:4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1999:2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1999:4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2000:2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2000:4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2001:2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2001:4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2002:2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2002:4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2003:2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2003:4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2004:2




                                                                                                                                           Short-Term Debt Flows                                           Long-Term Debt Flows




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       60
                                                                                                  Figure 13
                                                                        Gross and Net External Debt as a proportion of GDP (1971–2004)
              60%




              50%




              40%




              30%




              20%




              10%




               0%
                    1971

                           1972
                                   1973

                                          1974

                                                 1975

                                                        1976
                                                               1977

                                                                      1978

                                                                             1979

                                                                                    1980
                                                                                           1981

                                                                                                  1982

                                                                                                         1983

                                                                                                                 1984

                                                                                                                        1985

                                                                                                                               1986

                                                                                                                                      1987
                                                                                                                                             1988

                                                                                                                                                    1989

                                                                                                                                                           1990

                                                                                                                                                                  1991
                                                                                                                                                                         1992

                                                                                                                                                                                1993

                                                                                                                                                                                       1994
                                                                                                                                                                                               1995

                                                                                                                                                                                                      1996

                                                                                                                                                                                                             1997

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1998

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1999

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2000

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2001

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Sep-04
                                                               Gross external debt as a proportion of GDP                                                          Net external debt as a proportion of GDP
              Note: Following IMF'
                                 s recommendations, intercompany loans are excluded from external debt (starting in 1992 as data on these loans are not available previously).




                                                                                                                    Figure 14
                                                                                                         Public and Private External Debt
                                                                                                           (1989–2004 - at 2003 prices)
              160


              140


              120


              100
US$ billion




              80


              60


              40


              20


               0
               1989               1990           1991          1992           1993            1994              1995           1996          1997           1998           1999               2000           2001          2002           2003          Sep-04
                                                                                       Public Sector External Debt                                                Private Sector External Debt




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                61
                                 %




                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                   3
                                                                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                                                           5
                                                                                                                                                               6




              0
                  10
                       20
                            30
                                     40
                                          50
                                               60
      1970                                                                                                                     1971

      1971                                                                                                                     1972

      1972                                                                                                                     1973

      1973                                                                                                                     1974

      1974                                                                                                                     1975

      1975                                                                                                                     1976

      1976                                                                                                                     1977

      1977                                                                                                                     1978
      1978                                                                                                                     1979
      1979                                                                                                                     1980
      1980                                                                                                                     1981
      1981                                                                                                                     1982
      1982                                                                                                                     1983




                                                                                                        Gross External Debt
      1983                                                                                                                     1984
      1984                                                                                                                     1985
      1985                                                                                                                     1986
      1986                                                                                                                     1987
      1987
                                                                                                                                                                                            Figure 15




                                                                                                                               1988




                                                                         Figure 16
      1988                                                                                                                     1989
      1989
                                                                                                                               1990
      1990
                                                                                                                               1991
      1991
                                                                                                                               1992
      1992
                                                                                                                               1993
      1993
                                                                                                                               1994
      1994                                          Ratio of Interest Payments to Exports (1970–2004)
                                                                                                        Net External Debt




                                                                                                                               1995
                                                                                                                                                                   Ratio of Gross and Net External Debt to Exports (1971–2004)




      1995
                                                                                                                               1996
      1996
                                                                                                                               1997
      1997
                                                                                                                               1998
      1998
                                                                                                                               1999
      1999
                                                                                                                               2000
      2000
                                                                                                                               2001
      2001
                                                                                                                               2002




62
      2002
                                                                                                                               2003
      2003
                                                                                                                              Sep-04
     Sep-04
                                                                                                                              Figure 17
                                                                                                                Cumulative Index of Capital Control –
                                                                                                            Normalization 1989:12=100 (1990:01 – 2004:12)
          100



               95



               90



               85



               80



               75



               70



               65



               60
                    Jan-90

                               Jul-90

                                          Jan-91

                                                    Jul-91

                                                              Jan-92

                                                                        Jul-92

                                                                                 Jan-93

                                                                                          Jul-93

                                                                                                   Jan-94

                                                                                                             Jul-94

                                                                                                                      Jan-95

                                                                                                                                Jul-95

                                                                                                                                          Jan-96

                                                                                                                                                     Jul-96

                                                                                                                                                                Jan-97

                                                                                                                                                                           Jul-97

                                                                                                                                                                                       Jan-98

                                                                                                                                                                                                   Jul-98

                                                                                                                                                                                                                Jan-99

                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Jul-99

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Jan-00

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Jul-00

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Jan-01

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Jul-01

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Jan-02

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Jul-02

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Jan-03

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Jul-03

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Jan-04

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Jul-04
      Note: Elaborated by the authors using the chronology in Appendix B. We have normalized December 1989 equal to 100, and assigned -1 to
      each liberalizing measure and +1 to each restrictive one. Thus, the lower the index value, the lower the level of capital control.




                                                                                                           Figure 18
                                                                                 Cumulative Index of Capital Control on Inflows and Outflows –
                                                                                        Normalization 1989:12=100 (1990:1 – 2004:12)
110




100




90




80
      Jan-90



                             Jan-91



                                                   Jan-92



                                                                       Jan-93



                                                                                          Jan-94



                                                                                                             Jan-95



                                                                                                                                 Jan-96



                                                                                                                                                       Jan-97



                                                                                                                                                                              Jan-98



                                                                                                                                                                                                       Jan-99



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Jan-00



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Jan-01



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Jan-02



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Jan-03



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Jan-04
                Jul-90



                                        Jul-91



                                                             Jul-92



                                                                                 Jul-93



                                                                                                   Jul-94



                                                                                                                       Jul-95



                                                                                                                                            Jul-96



                                                                                                                                                                  Jul-97



                                                                                                                                                                                          Jul-98



                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Jul-99



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Jul-00



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Jul-01



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Jul-02



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Jul-03



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Jul-04




                                                                                                                                    Inflows                                         Outflows

       Note: See Figure 17.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        63
                                                                                                                          Figure 19
                                                                                                       EMBI Brazil (1994:1-2004:10) - Sovereign Spread

                 2500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Brazilian
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Confidence Crisis

                 2000                                                                                                                         Brazilian
                                                                                                                                           Exchange Crisis
                                              Mexican Crisis
                                                                                                                         Russian                                                                                      Argentinean
                                                                                                                          Crisis                                                                                         Crisis
                 1500
basis points




                 1000                                                                                          Asian Crisis



                  500




                      0
                                            Jul-94




                                                                    Jul-95




                                                                                             Jul-96




                                                                                                                       Jul-97




                                                                                                                                              Jul-98




                                                                                                                                                                             Jul-99




                                                                                                                                                                                                   Jul-00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Jul-01




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Jul-02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Jul-03




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Jul-04
                          Jan-94




                                                         Jan-95




                                                                               Jan-96




                                                                                                           Jan-97




                                                                                                                                  Jan-98




                                                                                                                                                                Jan-99




                                                                                                                                                                                        Jan-00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Jan-01




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Jan-02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Jan-03




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Jan-04
                                                                                                 Figure 20.a
                                                            Foreign Portfolio Investments - Brazilian Company Equities: Inflows versus Outflows
                                                                     (four-quarter cumulative balance - 1990:4–2004:2 - at 2003 prices)
                 50




                 40




                 30
   US$ billion




                 20




                 10




                  0
                      1990:4

                                   1991:2

                                                1991:4

                                                           1992:2

                                                                    1992:4

                                                                             1993:2

                                                                                        1993:4

                                                                                                  1994:2

                                                                                                              1994:4

                                                                                                                        1995:2

                                                                                                                                 1995:4

                                                                                                                                           1996:2

                                                                                                                                                       1996:4

                                                                                                                                                                    1997:2

                                                                                                                                                                               1997:4

                                                                                                                                                                                        1998:2

                                                                                                                                                                                                 1998:4

                                                                                                                                                                                                            1999:2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1999:4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2000:2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2000:4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2001:2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2001:4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2002:2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2002:4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2003:2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2003:4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2004:2




                                                                                                                                               Inflows                                                        Outflows




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 64
                                     US$ billion                                                                                                                                    US$ billion




                         0
                             2
                                 4
                                         6
                                                   8
                                                       10
                                                            12
                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                      5
                                                                                                                                                                          10
                                                                                                                                                                               15
                                                                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                                                                                  25
                                                                                                                                                                                                       30
                                                                                                                                                                                                            35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 40


                1990:4                                                                                                                                   1990:4

                1991:2                                                                                                                                   1991:2

                1991:4                                                                                                                                   1991:4

                1992:2                                                                                                                                   1992:2

                1992:4                                                                                                                                   1992:4

                1993:2                                                                                                                                   1993:2

                1993:4                                                                                                                                   1993:4

                1994:2                                                                                                                                   1994:2

                1994:4                                                                                                                                   1994:4

                1995:2                                                                                                                                   1995:2

                1995:4                                                                                                                                   1995:4

                1996:2                                                                                                                                   1996:2




     Inflows
                                                                                                                                              Inflows
                1996:4                                                                                                                                   1996:4

                1997:2                                                                                                                                   1997:2




                                                                                                  Figure 20.c
                1997:4                                                                                                                                   1997:4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Figure 20.b




                1998:2                                                                                                                                   1998:2

                1998:4                                                                                                                                   1998:4

                1999:2                                                                                                                                   1999:2
                                                                                                                                              Outflows




                1999:4                                                                                                                                   1999:4




     Outflows
                2000:2                                                                                                                                   2000:2

                2000:4                                                                                                                                   2000:4
                                                                       (four-quarter cumulative balance - 1990:4–2004:2 - at 2003 prices)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (four-quarter cumulative balance - 1990:4–2004:2 - at 2003 prices)




                2001:2                                                                                                                                   2001:2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Foreign Portfolio Investment - Debt Securities: Inflows versus Outflows




                                                                 Other Foreign Investments – Other Long-Term Loans: Inflows versus Outflows




                2001:4                                                                                                                                   2001:4

                2002:2                                                                                                                                   2002:2

                2002:4                                                                                                                                   2002:4

                2003:2                                                                                                                                   2003:2




65
                2003:4                                                                                                                                   2003:4
                2004:2                                                                                                                                   2004:2
                                                                                                              Figure 21
                                                                             Capital and Financial Account, Current Account Deficit and Reserve Changes
                                                                                  (four-quarter cumulative balance - 1970:4–2004:2 - at 2003 prices)
                          60



                          45



                          30



                          15
      US$ billion




                           0



                          -15



                          -30



                          -45
                                1970:4
                                         1971:4
                                                  1972:4
                                                           1973:4
                                                                    1974:4
                                                                             1975:4
                                                                                       1976:4
                                                                                                1977:4
                                                                                                         1978:4
                                                                                                                  1979:4
                                                                                                                           1980:4
                                                                                                                                     1981:4
                                                                                                                                              1982:4
                                                                                                                                                       1983:4
                                                                                                                                                                1984:4
                                                                                                                                                                         1985:4
                                                                                                                                                                                  1986:4
                                                                                                                                                                                           1987:4
                                                                                                                                                                                                    1988:4
                                                                                                                                                                                                             1989:4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1990:4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1991:4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1992:4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1993:4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1994:4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1995:4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1996:4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1997:4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1998:4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1999:4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2000:4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2001:4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2002:4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2003:4
                                                                                      Current Account Deficit                                                        Capital and Financial Account                                                                 Reserve Changes




                                                                                                                                  Figure 22
                                                                                                         Share of the Capital and Finance Account Balance used for
                                                                                                                Current Account and for Change in Reserves

                            200%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -100%




                            150%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -50%
                                                                                                           Change in
                                                                                                            reserves
Current Account Deficit




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Change in Reserves
                            100%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0%




                                 50%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          50%




                                    0%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        100%

                                                                                                                                       Current account
                                -50%
                                                                                                                                            deficit                                                                                                                                                                                           150%




                           -100%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        200%
                                1990                           1991                   1992                 1993                     1994               1995                  1996                   1997                1998                     1999               2000                 2001                   2002                 2003




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          66
.                                                                                                                                                            Figure 23
                                                                                                                                             International Reserves - Liquidity Concept
                                                                                                                                            (six-month moving average - at 2003 prices)
                    90


                    80


                    70


                    60
  US$ billion




                    50


                    40


                    30


                    20


                    10


                          0
                              1971:05
                                        1972:04
                                                  1973:03
                                                            1974:02
                                                                      1975:01
                                                                                1975:12
                                                                                          1976:11
                                                                                                    1977:10
                                                                                                              1978:09
                                                                                                                        1979:08
                                                                                                                                  1980:07
                                                                                                                                            1981:06
                                                                                                                                                      1982:05
                                                                                                                                                                1983:04
                                                                                                                                                                          1984:03
                                                                                                                                                                                    1985:02
                                                                                                                                                                                              1986:01
                                                                                                                                                                                                        1986:12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1987:11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1988:10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1989:09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1990:08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1991:07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1992:06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1993:05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1994:04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1995:03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1996:02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1997:01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1997:12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1998:11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1999:10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2000:09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2001:08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2002:07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2003:06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2004:05
                                                                                                                                          Figure 24
                                                                                                                    Components of National Accounts as a Proportion of GDP
                                                                                                                                         (1990-2003)
                                    0.25                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.85




                                        0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.8
Investments, Income Account




                                    0.15                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.75
   Current Account, Saving,




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Consumption
                                        0.1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.7




                                    0.05                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.65




                                           0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.6




                                  -0.05                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.55
                                                        1990                    1991                    1992                      1993                 1994                    1995                     1996                   1997                   1998                    1999                    2000                      2001                  2002                   2003



                                                                      Current Account                                                                 Saving                                                      Investment                                                        Income Account                                                                      Consumption




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  67
                                                                          Figure 25
                             Private Capital Account Balance (four-quarter cumulative balance - at 2003 prices) and GDP Growth
                                                     Rate (four-quarter moving average) - 1992:1–2004:2
              60                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        12


              50                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        10


              40                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        8


              30                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6
US$ billion




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             GDP
  PKA




              20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %
              10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2


               0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0


          -10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -2


          -20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -4
                   1992:4

                            1993:2

                                     1993:4

                                              1994:2

                                                        1994:4

                                                                 1995:2

                                                                          1995:4

                                                                                     1996:2

                                                                                              1996:4

                                                                                                       1997:2

                                                                                                                  1997:4

                                                                                                                           1998:2

                                                                                                                                      1998:4

                                                                                                                                               1999:2

                                                                                                                                                        1999:4

                                                                                                                                                                   2000:2

                                                                                                                                                                            2000:4

                                                                                                                                                                                     2001:2

                                                                                                                                                                                              2001:4

                                                                                                                                                                                                       2002:2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2002:4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2003:2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2003:4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2004:2
                                                                                               Private Capital Account                                                   GDP Growth Rate




                                                                                                                      Figure 26
                                                                                                                GDP Growth after Crises


                            2003                        1998                  1995                      1998                         1998                   1998                      2002                        2002                   1998
                            Brazil                     Russia                Mexico                     Korea                       Malaysia               Thailand                  Uruguay                    Argentina              Indonesia
              2

                               0.5

              0



              -2



              -4



              -6                                        -5.3
  %




                                                                                   -6.2
                                                                                                          -6.7
              -8                                                                                                                      -7.4



         -10

                                                                                                                                                                 -10.5
                                                                                                                                                                                        -10.8                     -10.9
         -12



         -14                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -13.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    68
                                                               Figure 27
                                       Impulse-Response Functions - SVAR (1995:01–2004:08)

                                                                                                                        Shock to
                        out                                  ca                                  ka                                  tot                              embi                                   er                                   int
        1. 2                                 1. 2                                1. 2                                1. 2                                 1. 2                               1. 2                                1. 2

        0. 6                                 0. 6                                0. 6                                0. 6                                 0. 6                               0. 6                                0. 6

 out    0. 0                                 0. 0                                0. 0                                0. 0                                 0. 0                               0. 0                                0. 0

       - 0. 6                               - 0. 6                              - 0. 6                              - 0. 6                               - 0. 6                             - 0. 6                              - 0. 6
                2   4    6    8   10   12            2   4    6   8   10   12            2   4    6   8   10   12            2   4    6    8   10   12            2   4   6   8   10   12            2   4    6   8   10   12             2   4    6    8   10   12
        0. 8                                 0. 8                                0. 8                                0. 8                                 0. 8                               0. 8                                0. 8
        0. 6                                 0. 6                                0. 6                                0. 6                                 0. 6                               0. 6                                0. 6
        0. 4                                 0. 4                                0. 4                                0. 4                                 0. 4                               0. 4                                0. 4

 ca     0. 2
        0. 0
                                             0. 2
                                             0. 0
                                                                                 0. 2
                                                                                 0. 0
                                                                                                                     0. 2
                                                                                                                     0. 0
                                                                                                                                                          0. 2
                                                                                                                                                          0. 0
                                                                                                                                                                                             0. 2
                                                                                                                                                                                             0. 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0. 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0. 0
       - 0. 2                               - 0. 2                              - 0. 2                              - 0. 2                               - 0. 2                             - 0. 2                              - 0. 2
                2   4    6    8   10   12            2   4    6   8   10   12            2   4    6   8   10   12            2   4    6    8   10   12            2   4   6   8   10   12            2   4    6   8   10   12             2   4    6    8   10   12
        2. 7                                 2. 7                                2. 7                                2. 7                                 2. 7                               2. 7                                2. 7
        1. 8                                 1. 8                                1. 8                                1. 8                                 1. 8                               1. 8                                1. 8
        0. 9                                 0. 9                                0. 9                                0. 9                                 0. 9                               0. 9                                0. 9

 ka     0. 0
       - 0. 9
                                             0. 0
                                            - 0. 9
                                                                                 0. 0
                                                                                - 0. 9
                                                                                                                     0. 0
                                                                                                                    - 0. 9
                                                                                                                                                          0. 0
                                                                                                                                                         - 0. 9
                                                                                                                                                                                             0. 0
                                                                                                                                                                                            - 0. 9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0. 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                - 0. 9
       - 1. 8                               - 1. 8                              - 1. 8                              - 1. 8                               - 1. 8                             - 1. 8                              - 1. 8
                2   4    6    8   10   12            2   4    6   8   10   12            2   4    6   8   10   12            2   4    6    8   10   12            2   4   6   8   10   12            2   4    6   8   10   12             2   4    6    8   10   12
        1. 4                                 1. 4                                1. 4                                1. 4                                 1. 4                               1. 4                                1. 4

        0. 7                                 0. 7                                0. 7                                0. 7                                 0. 7                               0. 7                                0. 7

 tot    0. 0                                 0. 0                                0. 0                                0. 0                                 0. 0                               0. 0                                0. 0

       - 0. 7                               - 0. 7                              - 0. 7                              - 0. 7                               - 0. 7                             - 0. 7                              - 0. 7
                2   4    6    8   10   12            2   4    6   8   10   12            2   4    6   8   10   12            2   4    6    8   10   12            2   4   6   8   10   12            2   4    6   8   10   12             2   4    6    8   10   12
        0. 9                                 0. 9                                0. 9                                0. 9                                 0. 9                               0. 9                                0. 9
        0. 6                                 0. 6                                0. 6                                0. 6                                 0. 6                               0. 6                                0. 6
        0. 3                                 0. 3                                0. 3                                0. 3                                 0. 3                               0. 3                                0. 3

embi    0. 0
       - 0. 3
                                             0. 0
                                            - 0. 3
                                                                                 0. 0
                                                                                - 0. 3
                                                                                                                     0. 0
                                                                                                                    - 0. 3
                                                                                                                                                          0. 0
                                                                                                                                                         - 0. 3
                                                                                                                                                                                             0. 0
                                                                                                                                                                                            - 0. 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0. 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                - 0. 3
       - 0. 6                               - 0. 6                              - 0. 6                              - 0. 6                               - 0. 6                             - 0. 6                              - 0. 6
                2   4    6    8   10   12            2   4    6   8   10   12            2   4    6   8   10   12            2   4    6    8   10   12            2   4   6   8   10   12            2   4    6   8   10   12             2   4    6    8   10   12
        3. 0                                 3. 0                                3. 0                                3. 0                                 3. 0                               3. 0                                3. 0
        2. 0                                 2. 0                                2. 0                                2. 0                                 2. 0                               2. 0                                2. 0
        1. 0                                 1. 0                                1. 0                                1. 0                                 1. 0                               1. 0                                1. 0

  er    0. 0
       - 1. 0
                                             0. 0
                                            - 1. 0
                                                                                 0. 0
                                                                                - 1. 0
                                                                                                                     0. 0
                                                                                                                    - 1. 0
                                                                                                                                                          0. 0
                                                                                                                                                         - 1. 0
                                                                                                                                                                                             0. 0
                                                                                                                                                                                            - 1. 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0. 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                - 1. 0
       - 2. 0                               - 2. 0                              - 2. 0                              - 2. 0                               - 2. 0                             - 2. 0                              - 2. 0
                2   4    6    8   10   12            2   4    6   8   10   12            2   4    6   8   10   12            2   4    6    8   10   12            2   4   6   8   10   12            2   4    6   8   10   12             2   4    6    8   10   12
        3. 0                                 3. 0                                3. 0                                3. 0                                 3. 0                               3. 0                                3. 0

        2. 0                                 2. 0                                2. 0                                2. 0                                 2. 0                               2. 0                                2. 0


 int
        1. 0                                 1. 0                                1. 0                                1. 0                                 1. 0                               1. 0                                1. 0

        0. 0                                 0. 0                                0. 0                                0. 0                                 0. 0                               0. 0                                0. 0

       - 1. 0                               - 1. 0                              - 1. 0                              - 1. 0                               - 1. 0                             - 1. 0                              - 1. 0
                2   4    6    8   10   12            2   4    6   8   10   12            2   4    6   8   10   12            2   4    6    8   10   12            2   4   6   8   10   12            2   4    6   8   10   12             2   4    6    8   10   12




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         69
                                                      Table 1
                                  Balance of Payments (% of GDP) and GDP Growth

                                                                                 International              Per Capita
                                                  Capital and          Private                     GDP
                 Current           Trade                                          reserves -                  GDP
                                                   Financial           Capital                    Growth
                 Account          balance                                          Liquidity                 Growth
                                                   Account             Account                   Rate (%)
                                                                                   concept                   Rate (%)


   1970            -1.97            0.54              3.01               1.75       2.79          10.40        7.20
   1971            -3.31            -0.70             4.42               3.14       3.50          11.34        8.42
   1972            -2.87            -0.41             6.46               5.53       7.12          11.94        9.05
   1973            -2.48            0.01              4.89               3.91       7.63          13.97       11.07
   1974            -6.80            -4.25              5.92              4.82       4.77           8.15        5.45
   1975            -5.39            -2.73              4.91              4.14       3.11           5.17        2.58
   1976            -4.17            -1.46              5.52              4.93       4.25          10.26        7.60
   1977            -2.72             0.05              3.47              2.78       4.09           4.93        2.45
   1978            -3.47            -0.51              5.91              5.17       5.91           4.97        2.54
   1979            -4.79            -1.27              3.41              2.87       4.34           6.76        4.34
   1980            -5.36            -1.19              4.04              3.56       2.91           9.20        6.80
   1981            -4.53             0.47              4.93              4.36       2.90          -4.25       -6.34
   1982            -6.00             0.29              4.46              1.95       1.47           0.83       -1.34
   1983            -3.57             3.42              3.92              3.29       2.41          -2.93       -4.99
   1984            0.05              6.90             3.44               0.96       6.32           5.40        3.20
   1985            -0.12             5.91              0.09             -0.91       5.50           7.85        5.64
   1986            -2.06             3.22              0.56              0.35       2.62           7.49        5.35
   1987            -0.51             3.96              1.15              1.35       2.64           3.53        1.56
   1988            1.37              6.28             -0.69             -1.09       2.99          -0.06       -1.88
   1989            0.25              3.88             0.15               0.42       2.33           3.16        1.36
   1990            -0.81             2.29              0.98              1.72       2.13          -4.35       -5.95
   1991            -0.35             2.61              0.04              0.78       2.32           1.03       -0.66
   1992            1.58              3.93             2.57               0.60       6.13          -0.54       -2.15
   1993            -0.16             3.10              2.44              2.85       7.50           4.92        3.26
   1994            -0.33             1.93              1.60              1.86       7.15           5.85        4.20
   1995            -2.61            -0.49              4.12              4.33       7.35           4.22        2.62
   1996            -3.03            -0.72              4.38              4.46       7.75           2.66        1.10
   1997            -3.77            -0.84              3.19              3.07       6.46           3.27        1.72
   1998            -4.24            -0.83              3.77              2.37       5.66           0.13       -1.36
   1999            -4.72            -0.22              3.23              2.26       6.77           0.79       -0.71
   2000            -4.02            -0.12              3.21              4.40       5.48           4.36        2.82
   2001            -4.55             0.52              5.31              3.75       7.04           1.31       -0.17
   2002            -1.66             2.86              1.74             -0.92       8.23           1.93        0.45
   2003            0.82              4.89             1.01               0.50       9.73           0.54       -0.92
   2004            1.94              5.60             -1.22              0.07       8.80           4.94        3.44

Source: Central Bank of Brazil (BCB), IBGE and authors'calculations.




                                                                                                                      70
                                                      Table 2
                          Balance of Payments (% of GDP) and GDP Growth - Period Averages

                                                                                                 International                      Per Capita
                                                           Capital and             Private                             GDP
                    Current               Trade                                                   Reserves -                          GDP
   Period                                                   Financial              Capital                            Growth
                    Account              Balance                                                   Liquidity                         Growth
                                                            Account                Account                             Rate
                                                                                                    concept                           Rate


1974-1982                    -4.80                -1.18                  4.73           3.84                3.75            5.03               2.59
1983-1994                    -0.39                3.95                   1.35           1.01                4.17            2.54               0.68
1995-1998                    -3.41                -0.72                  3.87           3.56                6.80            2.56               1.01
1999-2001                    -4.43                0.06                   3.91           3.47                6.43            2.14               0.63
2002-2004                    0.37                 4.45                   0.51           -0.11               8.92            2.45               0.97

Source: BCB, IBGE and authors'calculations.




                                                                   Table 3
                                                  Net Capital Flows by Groups - Ratio to GDP

                     Direct           Equity            Debt                            Trade          Other Short-      Official
    Period                                                                 Loans                                                       Other Items
                  Investment         Securities       Securities                        Credits        term assets      Agencies

1974–1982             0.56              0.03              0.17             2.86          0.07              0.20            0.53             -0.04
1983–1991             0.20              0.02              -0.02            0.40          -0.36             0.12            0.11              0.40
1992–2004             2.27              0.56               0.77            -0.18          0.08             -0.91           0.42             -0.40
 1992-1996            0.53              0.86               1.61             0.62          0.72             -0.61           0.16             -1.14
 1997-2004            3.36              0.36               0.25            -0.68         -0.31             -1.10           0.59              0.07
Source: BCB and authors'calculations.
Notes: The values of debt securities, portfolio investment and loans exclude the values related to the debt conversion under the Brady Plan.




                                                                        Table 4
                                                          Volatilities of Net Capital Flows
                                          (quarterly data - 1992:1–2004:2 - US$ million - at 2003 prices)

                                                                                                                     Other         Short-
                            Direct        Equity            Debt            Portfolio                                                          Long-Term
                                                                                        Loans         Trade credit Short-Term      Term
                         Investment      Securities       Securities      Investment                                                             Flows
                                                                                                                     Assets        Flows


Standard Deviation               3077          1668               3718          4084          2813          2284         1799          4582           5166

Mean                             3717             947             1559          2488          -100          2601        -1712          1645           1102

Variation Coefficient            0.83             1.76            2.39           1.64        -28.12          0.88        -1.05          2.78          4.69
Source: BCB and authors'calculations.
Notes: See table 3.




                                                                                                                                         71
                                                                               Table 5
                                                              Volatilities of Inflows and Outflows
                                                (quarterly data - 1992:1–2004:2 - US$ million - at 2003 prices)


                                                                                                                           Long-Term              Long-Term
                            Foreign Direct     Foreign Portfolio      Brazilian                          Other Long-Term
                                                                                      Debt Securities                    Suppliers'Trade         Buyers'Trade
                             Investment          Investment        Company Equity                             Loans
                                                                                                                             Credits                Credits


        Inflows
Standard Deviation                      3852               5007                3112              2916                  846               893              1006
Mean                                    5253              10046                5356              4690                 1027               693               952
Variation Coefficient                   0.73               0.50                0.58               0.62                 0.82              1.29             1.06

      Outflows
Standard Deviation                       965               4310                2719              2731                  649               677               927
Mean                                    1287               7371                4268              2343                 1051               722              1116
Variation Coefficient                   0.75               0.58                0.64               1.17                 0.62              0.94             0.83

Source: BCB and authors'calculations.
Notes: See table 3.


                                                                  Table 6
                                                    Correlations across Capital Flows
                                             (quarterly data - 1992:1–2004:2 - at 2003 prices)

                          Equity                                                                                    Portfolio           Direct
                                             Debt Securities           Loans            Trade Credit
                         Securities                                                                               Investment         Investment

Equity Securities           1.00                  0.27                  0.34                 0.43                    0.48                -0.28

Debt Securities             0.27                  1.00                  0.36                 0.15                    0.97                -0.11

Loans                       0.34                  0.36                  1.00                 0.15                    0.41                -0.38

Trade Credit                0.43                  0.15                  0.15                 1.00                    0.24                0.16

Portfolio
                            0.48                  0.97                  0.41                 0.24                    1.00                -0.17
Investments
Direct
                            -0.28                 -0.11                -0.38                 0.16                   -0.17                1.00
Investments

Source: BCB and authors'calculations.
Notes: See table 3.


                                                                     Table 7
                        Private Capital Account Balance and Crises (US$ million - at current prices)


                                                                               Private Capital Account Balance

                      Crises                    Period              Four-Quarter           Quarterly
                                                                   Average Before       Average During               Difference
                                                                       Crisis             the Crises


            Mexican                      1994:4–1995:1                         4,242                      196                    4,046

            Asian                        1997:4                                9,000                     1,364                   7,636

            Russian                      1998:3                              12,014                 -17,290                     29,304

                                         1999:1                                4,662                    -5,499                  10,161
            Exchange Crisis
                                         1998:3–1999:1                       12,014                     -7,724                  19,738

            Argentinian                  2001:4                                6,264                     1,454                   4,810

                                         2002:3–2002:4                         3,271                    -6,363                   9,634
            Confidence Crisis
                                         2002:2–2002:4                         3,918                    -3,045                   6,962

            Source: BCB and authors'calculations.




                                                                                                                                                 72
                                                          Table 8
                                        Correlation between Private Capital Account
                                   and the Items Current Account and Change in Reserves

                                                                         Private Capital Account

                                         1974:1 1991:4            1992:1 2004:2            1992:1 1998:4        1999:1 2004:2

             Current Account*
                  lag (-4)                       -0.178                   0.005                 0.039                  -0.216
                  lag (-3)                       -0.320                  -0.190                -0.193                  -0.312
                  lag (-2)                       -0.334                  -0.238                -0.267                  -0.365
                  lag (-1)                       -0.384                  -0.284                -0.280                  -0.501
               contemporary                      -0.367                  -0.262                -0.148                  -0.544
                 lead (+1)                       -0.351                  -0.235                -0.130                  -0.501
                 lead (+2)                       -0.442                  -0.338                -0.361                  -0.460
                 lead (+3)                       -0.458                  -0.381                -0.353                  -0.507
                 lead (+4)                       -0.486                  -0.418                -0.316                  -0.454
           Change in Reserves
             contemporary                        0.329                    0.704                0.766                   0.427

         Source: BCB and authors'calculations.
         *Seasonally Adjusted


                                                         Table 9
                             Domestic Saving and Investment as a Share of GDP and their
                              Contribution to the Increase in the Current Account Deficit -
                                                       1990-2001

                                                              Current               Domestic
                                                                                                      Investment
                                                          Account Deficit            Saving
                                                                                                          (c)
                                                            (a)=(c)-(b)               (b)

                         1990-1994 (1)                                    0.6%             19.8%              20.4%
                         1995-1997 (2)                                    3.4%             18.2%              21.6%
                         1998-2001 (3)                                    4.4%             16.6%              21.0%
                                     (2) – (1)                              2.8               -1.6               1.2

                          Contribution to the increase
                                                                     100.0%                56.8%              43.2%
                                in the CA deficit

                                     (3) – (2)                              1.1               -1.6              -0.6
                          Contribution to the increase
                                                                     100.0%                153.2%             -53.2%
                                in the CA deficit

                         Source: IBGE and authors'calculations.


                                                      Table 10
              Components of National Accounts as a Share of GDP and their Contribution to the Increase
                                     in the Current Account Deficit - 1990-2001

                                      Current                                                                  Household        Government
                                                   Income Deficit          Investment       Consumption
                                   Account Deficit                                                            Consumption       Consumption

1990-1994 (1)                                0.6%            1.8%                 20.4%              78.4%             60.4%          18.0%
1995-1997 (2)                                3.4%            1.4%                 21.6%              80.4%             61.7%          18.8%
1998-2001 (3)                                4.4%            2.9%                 21.0%              80.6%             61.4%          19.1%
            (2) – (1)                            2.8              -0.5               1.2                2.1              1.3             0.8
Contribution to the increase in
                                          100.0%           -17.8%                 43.2%              74.6%             45.5%          29.1%
        the CA deficit

            (3) – (2)                            1.1              1.5               -0.6                0.1              -0.3            0.4
Contribution to the increase in
                                          100.0%          143.3%                  -53.2%             9.9%          -17.3%            139.9%
        the CA deficit

Source: IBGE and authors'calculations.




                                                                                                                                          73
                                                                        Table 11
                                       Growth Rate and Volatility of Consumption and GDP in Brazil – 1974:2003

                                                        Consumption                                                                            GDP

    Period                           Growth Rate                                     Share in GDP                                        Growth Rate

                                      Standard          Coefficient of                            Standard                                Standard         Coefficient of
                     Average                                                  Average                                Average
                                      Deviation          Variation                                Deviation                               Deviation         Variation

  1974-1982            4.95              5.30               1.07                   78.5                1.4               5.03                  4.49             0.89

  1983-1991            2.18              4.30               1.97                   75.3                3.7               2.27                  4.31             1.90

  1992-2003            2.20              2.54               1.15                   79.3                1.6               2.43                  2.08             0.86

Source: IBGE and authors'calculations.




                                                              Table 12
                                            Determinants of Capital Flows (1995:1–2004:8)


                                                                                          Dependent Variable

             Regressors                                                                                                     Direct
                                                Private                                                                                          Official-
                                                                   Debt               Equities               Loans
                                                Capital                    (1)              (1)               (1)
                                                                                                                         Investment              Agency
                                                Account         Securities                                                       (1)
                                                                                                                                                  Loans

Constant                                           1938.9*                506.3*              488.2             122.2           1237.0**               -882.4
                                                  (1164.9)               (262.3)            (701.8)           (450.8)            (537.9)              (865.9)

U.S. Interest Rate                                   238.7                 -14.0             147.4*               86.1          332.3***                -81.9
                                                   (175.7)                (38.8)             (78.0)             (77.3)            (64.8)              (126.5)
                               (2)
Domestic Interest Rate                                 95.5**            20.7**                30.0*           33.7**           -70.2***                 19.7
                                                       (39.1)             (8.7)               (16.3)           (15.6)             (10.4)               (29.6)

EMBI+ Brazil                                     -426.6***               -0.7***              -1.7**           -1.6***                  1.0*          114.2**
                                                   (127.8)                 (0.3)               (0.8)             (0.6)                 (0.6)           (55.5)

R-squared                                          0.3201                0.1857             0.1914            0.2302             0.1810               0.0518

Adjusted R-squared                                 0.3015                0.1635             0.1693            0.2092             0.1587               0.0260

Unit Root Test for the
                             (3)
Dependent Variable - p-value                       0.0071                0.0000             0.0984            0.0146             0.2343               0.0302


Notes: Standard errors—shown in parentheses—were corrected by Newey-West heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent covariance
matrix estimator. Estimation using two-stage least squares. Instrument variables: constant, U.S. interest rate, and the variables domestic rate and
Embi lagged one and two periods. *, ** and *** indicate the coefficient is significant at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

(1) These variables refer to net foreign investment.
(2) Minus expected exchange rate depreciation.
(3) P-value found using the augmented Dickey-Fuller test. Number of lags selected according to modified AIC, which generated the same number
of lags as modified SIC.




                                                                                                                                                      74
                                                                Table 13
                                          Variance Error Decomposition (%) - SVAR (1995:01–2004:08)

                                                                                                                                 Real
                                                                                              Private                                         Real
                                             Standard                         Current                      Terms of   EMBI     Effective
               Variables                                       Output                         Capital                                       Interest
                                              Error*                          Account                       Trade     Brazil   Exchange
                                                                                              Account                                         Rate
                                                                                                                                 Rate
Output
            3 steps                              1.6             54.0             0.3             1.1        1.8       1.5       26.0           15.3
           12 steps                              2.3             26.3            14.1            12.9        3.9       9.4       21.5           11.8
           24 steps                              2.7             19.5            19.0            20.1        5.6       9.7       16.4            9.9
Current Account
            3 steps                              0.9              0.5            82.0                0.1     0.3       2.0        3.3           11.8
           12 steps                              1.2              4.7            57.8                4.1     3.1       8.4        8.6           13.5
           24 steps                              1.2              4.3            54.1                6.9     3.3       9.0        8.6           13.7
Private Capital Account
            3 steps                              4.1              5.1             1.5            37.6        0.8      23.1       23.7            8.2
           12 steps                              5.1              7.4             6.4            31.9        3.7      19.2       22.3            9.2
           24 steps                              5.3              7.2             6.7            31.2        3.9      18.6       22.1           10.2
Terms of Trade
            3 steps                              1.6              0.5             0.4             4.0        80.6      4.6        8.6           1.3
           12 steps                              2.9              1.1            10.9            11.2        33.8     19.7       19.7           3.6
           24 steps                              3.7              0.9            23.5            19.7        22.6     17.4       12.7           3.1
EMBI Brazil
            3 steps                              1.8              0.9             1.3            22.5        2.4      44.3       27.2           1.5
           12 steps                              3.2              2.5            11.8            35.3        1.5      33.7       10.5           4.8
           24 steps                              3.4              2.7            15.6            34.1        1.6      30.8        9.9           5.4
Real Effective Exchange Rate
            3 steps                              5.5              8.1             0.1            12.2        11.2      3.0       61.2           4.2
           12 steps                              8.4              7.2             9.9            16.8         8.7     21.8       31.7           4.0
           24 steps                              8.9              6.8            14.3            16.5         9.0     19.8       29.1           4.4
Real Interest Rate
            3 steps                              3.4              1.1             0.6            11.5         0.1      5.1       18.5           63.2
           12 steps                              4.9              3.2             4.6            15.1        17.2      7.8       21.1           31.0
           24 steps                              5.6              3.2             7.2            13.2        15.5     12.2       22.3           26.3

* Standard errors are underestimated because their estimation assumes that coefficients are known.




                                                                                                                                           75
