                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                        BARRIERS TO ENTRY

                                           Dennis W. Carlton

                                         Working Paper 11645
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11645


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2005




I thank Robert Gertner, Gregory Pelnar, Sam Peltzman, Robert Pindyck, Richard Posner, and Hal Sider for
helpful comments. This paper is a considerable extension of Carlton (2004) which has been incorporated
with minor editing into this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Dennis W. Carlton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Barriers To Entry
Dennis W. Carlton
NBER Working Paper No. 11645
September 2005
JEL No. L1, L4

                                           ABSTRACT




This paper analyzes the concept of barriers to entry. It explains that the concept is a static one and
explores the inadequacy of the concept in a world with sunk costs, adjustment costs and uncertainty.
The static concept addresses the question of whether profits are excessive. The more interesting and
relevant question is how fast entry or exit will erode profits or losses and how do the bounds that
entry and exit place on price vary with uncertainty and sunk cost. Intuition based on the static
concept of barrier to entry can be misleading in many industries.


Dennis W. Carlton
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
dennis.carlton@gsb.uchicago.edu
                                                                                DRAFT: 9/15/05

                                          Barriers to Entry
                                          By Dennis W. Carlton1



           The concept of barriers to entry has been a barrier to economists’ understanding

of industrial structure and has misled courts and regulatory agencies repeatedly as they

attempt to use the concept in antitrust cases or regulatory proceedings. There are two

primary reasons why it has proved so confusing a concept. First, the theoretical

underpinnings for the concept arise from the structure-conduct-performance literature

which itself has been shown to suffer severe theoretical problems. Second, a large part of

the confusion has arisen because authors are often unclear about the precise consequences

of a “barrier to entry.” For example, is price too high, profit too high, entry too slow, or

social welfare too low, or all of these? If the point of defining barriers to entry is to

identify some (exogenous) conditions that imply social harm, one should not define

“barriers” as conditions that cause social harm, unless one can identify the conditions ex

ante before solving for the equilibrium. Otherwise such a definition serves little purpose.



           The work of George Stigler (1968) and Harold Demsetz (1968) clarified much of

the confusion surrounding the meaning of entry barriers. However, that work, like most

work in industrial organization, ignored dynamics and, in particular, uncertainty and

adjustment costs. There is often a confusion of adjustment costs with a barrier to entry,

even when competition prevails. More generally, industrial-organization economists have

1
    Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, and NBER (e-mail:
      dennis.carlton@gsb.uchicago.edu). I thank Robert Gertner, Gregory Pelnar, Sam Peltzman, Robert
      Pindyck, Richard Posner, and Hal Sider for helpful comments. This paper is a considerable extension
      of Carlton (2004) which has been incorporated with minor editing into this paper.


                                                    -2-
tended to ignore adjustments costs and therefore think in terms of only short run and long

run, useful pedagogical tools, but ones that are often inadequate to address practical

antitrust and regulatory problems. Furthermore, industrial organization economists have

generally ignored the consequences of uncertainty. By introducing uncertainty into a

dynamic model, new insights emerge about how entry and exit constrain price in an

industry. Many of these insights are contrary to the intuition one obtains from models

with no uncertainty. For example, one may observe no entry in a competitive industry

earning significant short run profits over extended periods.



       Although there is undoubtedly disagreement among economists as to what

constitutes a barrier to entry, that disagreement does not always lead to great

misunderstanding among economists as to the predictions of industry outcomes. By that I

mean that economists are much better at figuring out the market equilibrium than

agreeing on and applying definitions. But definitions and their application can have

enormous effects if they are used, as here, as a tool of analysis in antitrust cases and in

regulatory proceedings. Then, disagreement over whether a barrier exists or not can

matter in terms of the outcome of an antitrust trial or regulatory proceeding, even if there

may be no disagreement among economists about the effect of the disputed barrier on a

market’s equilibrium.



       This chapter is organized as follows. Section I explains the deficiency in relying

on the structure-conduct-performance model to understand entry barriers. Section II

describes how Stigler and Demsetz clarified the notion of entry barriers in a static world.




                                             -3-
Section III explains why dynamic models are needed to understand the entry process and

to understand what can slow down or eliminate a firm’s incentive to enter. Section IV

discusses the consequences of introducing uncertainty into a dynamic analysis involving

sunk costs. Section V discusses briefly the empirical evidence on entry and exit. Section

VI relates the analysis of entry and exit to antitrust and regulatory concerns. Section VII

presents a conclusion.



I. Bain’s Barriers to Entry

       Joe Bain (1956) deserves credit for trying to find presumably exogenous factors

of industry structure that influences how competition occurs and that prevent price from

reaching the competitive level. Bain’s investigations led him to identify several factors as

barriers to entry, such as scale economies, large capital requirements, product

differentiation, and cost advantage. These barriers protect a firm from entry and thereby

enable it to enjoy above-normal rates of return.



       The problem with Bain’s analysis of entry barriers is not his definition (namely,

entry conditions allowing for an elevated long run price), but his failure to articulate a

consistent theory whereby the factors he identifies as entry barriers such as scale

economies, large capital requirements, and product differentiation lead to such an

elevated price. Bain’s analysis makes most sense if one has a view of the world in which

“barriers” determine the number of firms which, in turn, determines the competitiveness

of the industry, and thereby determines each firm’s rate of return. This structure-conduct-

performance view of the world is, alas, too simple. The number of firms is typically




                                            -4-
determined by a decision to enter based on profitability. But profitability for any given

number of firms is determined not just by exogenous factors such as costs, but also by

price, which will be determined by the “vigor of competition” or, in game theory terms,

by the competitive game being played. The effect of a particular “barrier to entry” on

price determination will depend on the nature of this competitive game. There is no

reason to assume that this game is the same across different industries. Economists have

made little progress in explaining how this competitive game depends on exogenous

factors. It is possible to show how industries with the exact same structure (e.g., cost

conditions, demand conditions) will have very different outcomes depending on the

particular form of competition in the industry. For example, John Sutton’s (1991, 1998)

pathbreaking work convincingly demonstrates that industries where competition is very

“vigorous” will be more highly concentrated than those where competition is not as

vigorous.2 High concentration, far from being an indicator of a lack of competition, can

indicate precisely the reverse! In those industries, there may be large firms but the large

size will not be associated with high price. Therefore, the effect of a structural industry

factor on the equilibrium price will vary enormously across industries and what is a

“barrier” in one industry may have no effect on price in another.



           Sutton’s point can be easily seen by considering the following. Imagine an

industry that in one country (country A) is described by quantity (i.e. Cournot)

competition, but in another country (country B) is cartelized with free entry into the



2
    The “vigor of competition” can be precisely defined. Industry A is more vigorously competitive than
      industry B if, all else equal, price is lower for industry A for any given number of firms (see Sutton,
      1991).


                                                      -5-
cartel. As long as there is a fixed cost to entry, the price in country B will exceed that in

country A, yet concentration in country A will exceed that in country B.



       Unless one would include the “vigor of competition” in the list of factors defining

entry barriers, it is misleading to treat the number of firms as determined by “entry

barriers,” and it seems an odd use of language to term “vigor of competition” as an entry

barrier. Indeed, the example illustrates the difficulty with treating the number of firms as

determined by entry barriers alone.



       I have made the point that the number of firms, their size, and the equilibrium

price is determined by more than just the factors Bain claimed. But one can go further, as

Sutton has, and claim that several of the factors that Bain treats as determinants of the

industry equilibrium such as product differentiation and cost advantage are themselves

not exogenous and can be altered by investment. For example, firms can compete against

each other by investing in the development of new products, in the promotion of the

product, or in the reduction of costs. Indeed, competition along non-price dimensions can

explain why concentration does not necessarily change as industries grow, but instead

product quality (or advertising) increases, or costs fall. The significance of this point

cannot be overstated. Models that focus on only price competition may fail miserably to

correctly predict industry concentration and consumer welfare when there are other

product dimensions along which competition occurs. This is likely to be particularly true

in industries requiring investment and creation of new products. Indeed, I think that it is

no coincidence that many of the most controversial antitrust and regulatory cases have




                                             -6-
arisen in high-technology industries (e.g. computers, telecommunications) where

competition in R&D and new products is paramount.



           Thus, although Bain deserves credit for identifying what are interesting facts

about an industry, these facts are not necessarily exogenous and do not alone determine

the number of firms, which in turn does not alone determine price. Bain’s quest to

identify “barriers” lacks theoretical rigor.



II. Stigler and Demsetz to the Rescue

           The confusion surrounding the meaning of “barriers to entry” often results

because the precise consequence of having an entry barrier is unclear. If there are such

“barriers,” are rates of return too high? Is the existence of such barriers socially

undesirable, and therefore, is it proper to use antitrust laws (or legislation) to attack the

problem? Although Bain was trying primarily to answer the first question, many have

focused on the second. I will soon explain why the two question are very different and

why the first question is not the right one for antitrust or regulation to focus on. I will also

explain why the concept of entry barrier may not be particularly appropriate for

answering the second question.



           Stigler (1968) clarified matters by defining an entry barrier as a cost advantage

that an incumbent firm enjoys compared to entrants.3 With such an advantage, the


3
    The definition of a long-run barrier to entry in Carlton and Jeffrey Perloff (2000) is a slight variant of
      Stigler’s.




                                                        -7-
incumbent firm can permanently elevate its price above its costs and thereby earn a

supracompetitive return.4 This means that, if the incumbent firm has to spend one million

dollars annually to establish its reputation, then as long as a new entrant could do the

same, there is no reason to expect the incumbent firm to earn supracompetitive returns.

Stigler paid no attention to dynamics or sunk costs in his discussion and focused

implicitly only on the long-run steady state. (A sunk cost, like a fixed cost, does not vary

with output, but unlike fixed costs, is not recoverable if the firm shuts down.)



           Demsetz’s (1968) classic article further clarified matters by considering a model

in which it is efficient to have only one firm, an extreme example of scale economies. As

long as an entrant and the incumbent are on equal footing to bid for customers, there is no

reason to expect the winner to earn supracompetitive returns. Demsetz’s analysis, like

Stigler’s, pinpoints symmetry as the key to answering the question: what determines

whether a firm can earn excess returns? Demsetz’s work provided a foundation for

contestability (William Baumol et al., 1982) in which costless entry and exit leave all

firms in a symmetric position.



           Although Stigler’s definition of “barrier” as a differential cost is concise and

unambiguous, it does raise the question of why it should be called a “barrier.” Why not

call it “differential cost advantage”? This may seem overly pedantic, but introduction of

unnatural use of language can lead to confusion. Consider, for example, an industry

where the government restricts the number of firms to 100. The government issues 100

4
    This advantage, if it were, say, managerial skill, could be described as a rent, but in order to determine
      (static) efficiency for the products being produced, one must be careful to figure out whether price
      equals marginal cost for the advantage firm.


                                                       -8-
licenses to operate and sells them in an open market. The entry restriction is likely to be

inefficient, but as long as all firms have access to the (artificially) scarce license at the

market-clearing price, there is no entry barrier according to Stigler’s definition.5 All firms

earn a normal rate of return. Yet there is a restriction to entry. It seems to mangle the

English language to refuse to call this entry restriction a “barrier to entry.” Using

language in an unnatural way invites confusion in antitrust and regulatory proceedings.



III. Dynamics Should Be the Focus of Attention, but Barriers to Entry Ignore Them

           The usual discussions of barriers to entry typically focus on the long run and

ignore adjustment costs. In the short run, the concept of an entry barrier is not meaningful

(since, by assumption, entry is not possible). But why is the long run of interest? Only

because economists often slip into ignoring dynamics and go back to our simple models

of short and long run. But as a practical matter, the long run may be of no interest

whatsoever. It may take so long to get there that the persistence of supracompetitive

profits until then turns out to be the fact of practical importance, not that these excess

profits are eliminated in some far-off future year.



           Now introduce the notion of adjustment costs, costs incurred as the firm alters its

output. Adjustment costs, once incurred, are sunk costs. Those adjustment costs, together

with industry characteristics (including the competitive game), will influence the speed

with which equilibrium adjusts over time. It is not typically a helpful thought experiment

for public policy-makers to ask what would occur if adjustment costs were zero. That is a



5
    This example is from Stigler (1968).


                                               -9-
bit like asking: if wages were zero, what would the new equilibrium be? Because there

are adjustment costs and because they are not a market imperfection (any more than a

wage is a market imperfection), one is likely to obtain misleading insights into policy by

ignoring adjustment costs. I see no reason to call adjustment costs an entry barrier. Trying

to use “barriers to entry” to refer to both the time it takes to reach a new equilibrium and

to whether there are excess long-run profits is confusing.



       Once dynamics enter the picture, one knows that there can be all sorts of strategic

behavior that can advantage one firm over another. The source of any successful strategic

behavior must ultimately be traceable to an asymmetry among firms. What game theory

(and the contestability literature) makes clear is that in the presence of sunk costs credible

commitments can be made. An asymmetry can arise because one firm is in a market

before another firm and can therefore act to make binding commitments before others.

For example, building a plant with a large capacity in advance of others may be a way to

make a credible commitment to produce large outputs, and this investment may

advantage the firm making the investment.



       By focusing on dynamics, one can now ask different, and I think more interesting,

questions than those suggested by prior thinking dominated by concepts of the short and

long run. One can ask not only whether price will eventually equal the competitive level,

but also how long it will take before price reaches the competitive level. In response to,

say, a merger that winds up raising price by 10 percent, how much of that price increase

will be eroded by entry in two years or five years? If an incumbent firm uses exclusive




                                            - 10 -
five-year contracts with its distributors and 20 percent of them expire each year, how

long will take for price to adjust in response to a surge in demand, compared to the case

of three-year contracts? I contend that these are much more interesting questions to

answer and are of more practical importance than the one implicitly posed by Bain or

Stigler in defining entry barriers (i.e., what conditions allow one firm to earn excess

long-run profits.).



IV. Uncertainty, Sunk Costs and Dynamics

       The inadequacy of the (static) concept of barriers to entry becomes even more

striking when uncertainty is introduced into a dynamic setting in the presence of sunk

costs. Indeed the introduction of uncertainty can alter some of our basic intuitions about

entry and exit even in competitive markets. This is a complicated topic and the interested

reader is referred to Dixit and Pindyck (1993) and Pindyck (2005). It is a topic that

unfortunately has not received much attention in the world of antitrust. Let me try to use

some simple models to develop some basic insights.



a) Certainty and No Adjustment Costs In The Long Run

       Let’s start by reviewing the standard theory under certainty. Imagine that there are

two periods, period 1(the short run) and period 2 (the long run). All firms are assumed

identical, no entry can occur in the short run, though exit can occur. In the short run, the

number of firms is fixed at some number N 1 . If firms have the standard U-shaped

average cost (AC) and average variable cost (AVC) curves with minimums respectively

at C1 and C2 (see Figure 1), then equilibrium is as follows. In the short run, price is




                                            - 11 -
determined by the intersection of supply (which is the sum over N 1 firms of their

individual supply curves) and demand. Price can never be below C1 , and when price is at

C1 , some firms already in the industry may exit.6 In the long run, price will equal C2 .




                                    AC
                                                                                       Supply SR
            $                            AVC                      $


                                                                                            Supply LR
             C2                                                  C2


             C1                                                  C1

                                  Output                                              Output




                                                 Figure 1



           This description of equilibrium, though standard, is inadequate because it fails to

explain why in the short run price does not equal C2 . More specifically, the description

fails to explain why N 1 firms are present in the short run. One explanation is that there

were prior periods in which price exceeded C2 and that we are observing an adjustment

over time to altered but foreseen demand changes. That explanation is what we already

talked about in the previous sections involving adjustment costs.




6
    C 1 is sometimes called the shutdown point. I assume that in the short run all fixed costs are sunk in the
      sense that they are not recoverable if exit occurs.


                                                      - 12 -
       A second explanation is that price is not perfectly predictable, firms were

surprised, and price in period 1 was lower than expected. But this observation highlights

the need to model explicitly the effect of uncertainty on entry or exit decisions. I will

focus in this section on this second explanation and explore how uncertainty and sunk

costs influence the decision of whether to enter or exit and show that these two factors

have profound implications on the timing of entry and exit. This effect is in addition to

the already discussed effect of adjustment costs on timing.



       Return to the simple model consisting of two periods, period 1 (the short run) and

period 2 (long run). Suppose that C1 = $4 and C2 = $5. This standard model predicts

that price can never be below $4 and can be above $5 only in the short run and when it is

above $5 it will induce entry in the long run. Now, we have already discussed how the

“short run” is really a simplification and to be more accurate we should talk in terms of

speed of adjustment. Even with that caveat, the insight of the model is not to expect price

to stay above $5 without inducing entry.



b) Uncertainty and Sunk Cost

       This standard model though fails to account for the consequences of the

unexpected shift in demand that can cause price to be below C2 in period 1. Presumably

these shifts in demand happen all the time and if so price will vary and decisions about

entry in period 1 will be based on the expectation of future prices. Let us explicitly model

this uncertainty and see how it influences the entry decision. Suppose firms must decide

to invest and enter at the beginning of each period before observing actual price. Suppose



                                            - 13 -
further than the investment is sunk and must be made at the beginning of each period. It

is not possible to hold inventory from one period to the next. Notice that there is now no

difference between period 1 and period 2. It follows that firms will invest as long as

expected profits equal zero. This means that entry will not occur in period 2 unless

expected profits are 0 or above, even though price in period 1 exceeds $5. Moreover,

each firm produces more when price is high, than when price is low. This means that the

average price received (the price weighted by quantity produced) exceeds the expected

price (which is the unweighted price). It is also true that one can show that this average

price exceeds C2 , while the expected price is below C2 . (See Dreze and Sheshinski

[1976]).



       So, let me summarize. When investment each period must occur before entry, and

when demand is uncertain causing price to fluctuate, entry occurs only if expected profits

are non-zero. The observed price will fluctuate from a floor of $4 to higher prices. The

average price paid will exceed $5, while the expected price will be below $5. These

results arise in a competitive model with free entry at the beginning of each period. Entry

does not reduce the price fluctuations. It simply determines the equilibrium number of

firms needed to drive expected profits to zero. If the demand uncertainty in periods 1 is

independent of the demand uncertainty in period 2, the equilibrium number of firms in

period 1 and 2 will be the same.. There will be no additional entry next period even if

price exceeds $5 this period. Period 1 and period 2 are not connected in the sense that

what happens to price in period 1 has no effect on what happens to price in period 2.




                                           - 14 -
c) Time Dependence

       In many markets, there is a relationship over time in the equilibrium in periods 1

and 2 so that the price in period 1 is useful for predicting the price in period 2, in contrast

to the model just presented. As we have already seen, adjustment costs can cause such a

dependency if investments in period 1 can influence the production capacity in period 2.

That element is missing in our model under uncertainty just presented. Another important

reason for a time dependency in the equilibrium is a time dependency in the underlying

uncertainty. For example, firms may be using a new technology whose costs are

uncertain initially but eventually become known. In other markets, price may initially be

highly uncertain but that uncertainty may change over time, or the expected price could

change over time. In these markets, the decision to enter or exit is more complicated than

in either our simple deterministic model or even the model with uncertainty. The reason

is that now the decision is not just whether to invest to enter, but also when to do so. By

delaying a decision, the firm preserves the option of making the decision in the future

when there may be more information. The combination of long lasting investment plus

time dependency of uncertainty can lead to different patterns of prices and entry or exit

than one might otherwise expect.



        To illustrate these ideas let me use a simple model. We previously used a model

in which firms had to invest, then observed price. After the price was observed, the firm

produced, sold its output and its investment was used up. Then the situation would repeat

itself in period 2. There was no gain to waiting to enter since there is no gathering of new

information in period 2 and investments made in period 1 had no effect in period 2. Now,




                                             - 15 -
change two features of the model. First, the investment lasts two periods, not one. This

induces a time dependency in the model, so that equilibrium in period 2 depends on what

happens in period 1. Second, suppose that by the beginning of period 2, firms have a

better idea of what price might be or by how much price is likely to fluctuate compared to

their knowledge at the beginning of period 1. Firms can enter either at the beginning of

period 1 or period 2. In equilibrium, the expected profit of a firm that enters in period 1 is

zero and so too for a firm that enters in period 2. The advantage of entering in period 1 is

that the firm can earn revenues for two periods. The disadvantage is that the period 1

price may be low, in which case the firm will do poorly in both period 1 and 2 because a

low price in period 1 indicates that price will also be low in period 2. Had the firm waited

and observed a low price in period 1, it would have decided not to enter in period 2.



       Suppose the demand curve in period 1 is either 100 − P or 90 − P with equal

probability. The demand in period 2 is whatever it is in period 1. For an investment of

$10, a firm can enter in period 1, and produce (at zero cost) 1 unit in period 1 and 1 unit

in period 2. If a firm chooses to enter in period 2, it must pay $7, though it will produce

output of 1 unit for only one period.



       In period 1, 89 firms enter (see Appendix). With probability 1/2, the price in

period 1 is $11 and this high price induces 4 additional firms to enter in period 2 to drive

price to $7 in period 2. With probability ½, the price in period 1 is $1, and this low price

induces no additional firms to enter in period 2, so the price in period 2 remains at $1.

Notice that a firm that enters in period 2 earns zero profits. A firm that enters in period 1




                                            - 16 -
also earns zero expected profits since its expected revenue over the two periods is just ½

(11 + 7) + ½ (1 + 1) or $10 which exactly equals the initial investment cost of entering.



From this simple model, we observe the following:

1. The decision to enter depends on the current state of information and that information

   changes over time. At the beginning of period 1, price is uncertain. At the beginning

   of period 2, price is known.

2. The timing of entry will involve trading off the benefit of early entry (earning

   expected profits in period 1) versus the benefit of delay (avoiding a bad price outcome

   and being stuck with it for a while). An early entrant foregoes an option to wait and

   enter in period 2.

3. In a competitive industry with free entry, the option value to waiting equals zero (i.e.

   expected profits equal zero regardless of whether the firm enters in period 1 or 2). If

   there are only a limited number of firms that can enter, there will be positive profits

   but the expected value of waiting will equal zero (i.e. firms earn the same expected

   profits regardless of whether they enter in period 1 or 2).

4. If one recalculates the equilibrium for different demand curves, one can determine the

   effect of changes in uncertainty. As initial uncertainty increases, but holding constant

   expected demand, less entry occurs in period 1, more in period 2, and price

   fluctuations in period 1 are greater. This illustrates that the entry process and

   specifically the timing of entry will be driven by the value of the information one

   obtains from waiting. This value will depend upon what one learns about prices by

   waiting. If prices today are informative about prices tomorrow (as in this model), entry




                                            - 17 -
   next period will be related to the current price level. If prices today are not informative

   about future prices (as in previous model when demand uncertainty repeated itself

   each period and investments lasted only one period), entry next period is not related to

   current prices. Therefore, the entry process will depend upon the time dependence of

   the price structure which in turn depends on how uncertainty evolves and how long

   sunk investments last. This time dependence will be an equilibrium characteristic of

   the particular industry and will generally differ across industries. Hence, the entry

   process across industries will differ based on the fundamentals of underlying

   uncertainty and the nature of the irreversible investment.

5. Although not captured in the simple model, it is easy to see that an entrant should be

   concerned with both the cost and flexibility of his plant. An early entrant may be able

   to save money by choosing an inflexible plant, but this limits his ability later on to

   respond as industry conditions change. Therefore, if information about price volatility

  is revealed over time, later entrants will choose plants of different flexibility than early

 entrants.



       There is no exit decision in the model but it is easy to incorporate one. Suppose at

the end of period 1, after prices are observed, that each firm already in the industry must

decide whether to spend some amount, say $2, to preserve its ability to produce in period

2. Clearly, any firm already in the industry will do so if price in period 1 exceeds $2

because price in period 1 is, by assumption, a perfect predictor of price in period 2. But

what if price in period 1 is low, say $1. In that case, no firm would pay $2 in order to sell

at $1 in the second (and final) period. Hence we will see exit of firms at the end of period




                                            - 18 -
1. Enough firms must exit to drive that low price up to $2 in period 2. The ability to exit

is an option that is valuable to the firm because it reduces the firms’ losses. If instead, the

firm had to spend an extra $2 as a sunk cost to enter initially and had no required on

going expenditures of $2, the firm would be worse off because it would lose the ability to

save the $2 by exiting at the end of period 1.



       The exit decision will alter the number of firms in period 2, and so will affect

price in period 2. By doing so, it affects the decision to enter in period 1! Entry and exit

are different processes that affect each other in equilibrium and together determine the

equilibrium price. By recognizing that an exit decision can cut off losses, the firm can

decide how to structure its technology - - high sunk costs with low operating costs or low

sunk costs with high operating costs. A firm may opt for the latter even if it is more

costly for any given production levels over a given time interval because it allows the

firm to exit if times are bad and save some ongoing expenditures. [e.g., Would a firm

prefer to spend up front $10 to be able to produce 1 unit for each of two periods or would

it prefer to spend $7 per period to be able to produce 1 unit per period? It depends. In the

second scheme the firm may decide not to spend the $7 to produce in period 2 if it

observes a low price in the first period.]



       Conversely, a firm may choose not to exit an industry if there is a possibility that

next period (and subsequently) the price may be high. To see this clearly, I will use a

slightly more complicated model with at least three periods and a little bit more

uncertainty. Suppose that at the end of period 1 if price is currently low, (unlike in the




                                             - 19 -
simple model) there is a small chance that next period (and forever more) the price will

be much higher. Well, the firm might pay to remain in the industry (i.e. not exit) to see

what happens in period 2. If price fails to be high in period 2, then the firm does not pay

an additional amount to remain in the industry in period 3 and exits. But the point is that

the expected price in period 2 may be low, yet the firm will still find it profitable to stick

around, hoping to benefit (forever) from the high price which might materialize.



       To better understand this, consider the following. Suppose the price in period 2

will be either $20 or 0 with probability ½ respectively. If it costs $15 to remain in the

industry each period and this cost must be made before observing price, the expected

profit in period 2 is negative ($10 – $15 = -$3), but that calculation ignores the fact that

at the end of period 2 the firm will know whether prices in the future will be either $20 or

$0. If the price is $20 forever, the firm earns $10 forever ($20 minus the $10 per period

investment). If the price in period 2 is zero, the firm drops out at the end of period 2 and

stops investing $10 per period. The important point is this: firms remain in an industry in

period 2 even though the expected (period 2) profit is negative. They do so because they

preserve an option to remain in the industry in the future should that prove to be

profitable.



       These admittedly simple and somewhat artificial models illustrate how

complicated an analysis of entry and exit can be. It is not the case that the simple lower

and upper bounds on price determined as the minimum of the average variable cost and

average cost curve respectively – correspond to trigger points for exit and entry in a




                                            - 20 -
dynamic world with uncertainty and sunk costs. Firms choose to stay in an industry when

they appear to be losing money per period, and will be hesitant to enter an industry even

when price is currently high because price could subsequently fall. The length of time an

investment is sunk will influence these decisions. If no investments are sunk, or if there is

no financial advantage to pay up front as a sunk cost rather than pay per period, the

process of entry and exit is simple. There is one price in both the short and long run that

will prevail – the price that corresponds to minimum average cost, C 2 . But building in

irreversibility of investments, uncertainty and evolution of uncertainty over time (i.e. time

dependence in price) greatly complicates the analysis. These last factors are fundamental

determinants of industry equilibrium just as are underlying costs and demand.



       To see how much the traditional analysis changes as a consequences of dynamics

involving sunk cost and uncertainty, I will use some results from Dixit and Pindyk

(1993). Their models are much more complicated and realistic than my simple ones and

rely on some very sophisticated techniques beyond the scope of this paper. But their

results and the intuition behind them are informative and illustrate several of the points I

have made. Imagine an industry where price today is informative about what price will be

tomorrow. It does not perfectly predict future prices, as in my simple model, but instead

gives an indication as to whether prices will be high or low next period. Also, suppose

that to enter the industry, a firm must make an irreversible investment that allows the firm

to produce over some extended time period. Each period a firm in the industry must pay

an amount to remain active next period; otherwise it exits the industry.




                                           - 21 -
           Dixit and Pindyck (1993, pp. 264-267) develop such a model for the copper

industry. If one were to use the simple model with no uncertainty, the values of C 1 and

C 2 are approximately $.79 and $.88. That is, one would see exit when price hits $.79 and

entry when price exceeds $.88. Using a model incorporating the features of uncertainty

and irreversible investment that I have just discussed, they calculate that the actual exit

and entry thresholds are $.55 and $1.35. As our simple models suggested, firms will

remain in an industry even when current profits are negative, and firms will not enter

even when current profits are positive. Thus, the presence of uncertainty not only

dramatically alters the timing and profitability of entry and exit, but changes the range of

prices that can be observed in equilibrium. Moreover, one can use the model to calculate

the likely price of copper. It turns out that copper producers will earn what look like

super competitive profits about 60 percent of the time and will earn what look like below

competitive profits about 30 percent of the time. Of course, expected profits over time

equal zero as a condition of equilibrium. Stated differently, the copper price is outside the

$.79 and $.88 range of the simple model about 90 percent of the time. How tightly entry

and exit constrain price are much different in models that account for uncertainty and

adjustment cost.



V. Empirical Studies of Entry and Exit7

           Bain deserves credit for pioneering empirical studies on the reasons why some

industries allow incumbents to earn excess rates of profit. Bain (1956) identifies whether

certain industries have product differentiation, scale economies, large capital

7
    The interested reader is referred to Carlton and Perloff (2005) Ch. 8 for a more extended discussions of
      some of these issues.


                                                     - 22 -
requirements, and cost advantage in order to understand why entry does not erode excess

profits.



           Although I have questioned whether Bain’s theoretical analysis allows him to

claim that he has identified underlying structural features of the industry (i.e. ones that

are exogenous), his studies do allow one to see what industry features coincide with high

profits and lack of entry and are therefore valuable. A key issue, and thrust of my earlier

criticism, is whether he has identified correlation or causation. If the conditions he

identifies as “barriers” are endogenous (i.e. determined as a result of competition) then

his observations, though interesting as industry descriptions, do not amount to a theory of

how industry performance depends on entry barriers.



           There is good deal of controversy as to whether there is empirical support for the

claim that “entry barriers” lead to high profits. (See Carlton and Perloff [2005], Ch. 8).

There have been relatively few studies of the speed with which excess profits are eroded,

but one common finding, that goes back at least to Stigler (1963), is that excess profits

are eliminated very slowly in concentrated industries.



           Sutton (1991, 1998) is the most recent systematic study across industries in which

intensive study of individual industries is used to identify underlying structural conditions

to predict competitive performance. He does not focus on rates of return (which is what

motivated Bain and Stigler) as much as on equilibrium concentration. His work

emphasizes the distinction between exogenous and endogenous sunk costs, and shows




                                              - 23 -
how endogenous sunk costs are an outcome of a (static) competitive game. For Sutton,

the competitive game is taken as exogenous, but R&D and advertising may not be.

Accordingly, it would not make sense to treat R&D or advertising as an exogenous

barrier.



           There have been several empirical studies of the entry and exit process. Some of

the key findings of those studies are8:



      1. There is an enormous amount of entry and exit of firms in manufacturing. About

           40 percent of firms in an industry were not there 5 years earlier, and, will not be

           there in five years. Industries with lots of entry also have lots of exit.

      2. Entrants and exiters are typically quite small relative to the industry average.

      3. Entrants that have no experience in related industries are much smaller and fail

           quicker than entrants with experience. For example, entrants with experience in

           related industries are about 3 times the size of entrants with no experience.

      4. There are large differences across industries in both entry and exit rates.

      5. For any one industry over time, the exit rates are more sensitive to business

           conditions than entry rates.

      6. Industry expansion and contraction occurs largely through mature firms.

      7. There is enormous heterogeneity in size across firms in the same industry,

           indicating for example different shut down costs and benefits.




8
    Source: Dunne Roberts Samuelson (1998); Davis and Haltiwanger (1998).


                                                 - 24 -
   Research on attacking the general problems of deriving equilibrium exit and entry

processes in a dynamic model with uncertainty and heterogeneity is just beginning. Early

pioneering work (e.g., Bresnahan and Reiss [1991]) did not focus on option values, but

did recognize and estimate heterogeneity amongst firms. The theory and empirical

methods of figuring out dynamic equilibrium is quite complicated. Recent work (e.g.,

Ericson and Pakes [1995], Pakes et al. [2005], Bajari et al. [2003]) has made significant

progress in dealing with the theoretical and empirical problems arising in a model taking

into account uncertainty, dynamics and heterogeneity. But this body of research is just

emerging and it is premature to draw general conclusion.



VI. The Use of Entry Barriers in Antitrust and Regulatory Proceedings

       Entry barriers are frequently an issue in antitrust cases and regulatory

proceedings. Aside from the imprecision in its meaning, a problem with using the

concept is that entry barriers are concerned with the long run, yet the long run may not be

relevant for antitrust or regulatory proceedings. What often matters for antitrust and

regulation is not what might happen in some year far off in the future, but what will

actually happen now and in the relatively near future. For some industries, especially

those with long lived capital, the very long run many be a relevant consideration, but

even here, uncertainty and adjustment costs will matter. Rather than focusing on whether

an “entry barrier” exists according to some definition, analysts should explain how the

industry will behave over the next several years. That will force them to pay attention to

uncertainty and adjustment costs, the importance of which are recognized by some (e.g.,




                                           - 25 -
Robert Pindyck [2005], Richard Posner [2001], Richard Schmalensee [2004], Preston

McAfee and Michael Williams [2004]).



       The Horizontal Merger Guidelines of the Department of Justice and Federal Trade

Commission do a good job of explaining that entry matters in merger analysis only when

it is timely (e.g., within two years) and of sufficient magnitude to keep price from rising

above current levels. One may quibble about the “timely” definition, but the point is

clear. What should matter to policymakers is how fast entry erodes any price increase

caused by a merger, and not whether it eventually does so. In litigated cases such as

Section 2 cases, emphasis should be placed on how long entry will take before it erodes

any temporary market power created by some attacked practice and whether the attacked

practice creates efficiency benefits. The “rule of reason” is the correct approach here, in

which the costs and benefits are compared, but it often seems that possible efficiencies do

not always receive full consideration. There seems to be a negative connotation to the

word “entry barrier” and no recognition that, without some “entry barrier”, there may be

no incentive to create new products or services. Indeed, as Demsetz (1982) has observed,

property rights could be defined as the ultimate barrier to entry.



       In some regulatory proceedings (e.g., telecommunications, railroads), there has

been a tendency to rely on contestability theory as a guide to setting price. Contestability

theory is often described as a theory in which there are no barriers to entry or exit, so that

instantaneous entry or exit is possible. I have already explained why it is a mistake to

confuse barriers to entry with factors affecting the timing of entry. They are two distinct




                                            - 26 -
concepts. But contestability theory, as commonly implemented, ignores uncertainty and

adjustment costs.9 As we have already seen, the ability of entry and exit to constrain price

can differ depending on the presence of uncertainty and adjustment costs. Therefore, the

equilibrium in the absence of uncertainty and adjustment costs need not be the same as

the equilibrium with uncertainty and adjustment costs, especially for growing industries.

Where the two equilibria differ, one obtains misleading policy advice by ignoring

uncertainty and adjustment costs.



VII. Conclusion

           The words that one uses often can have unintended consequences when their

meaning is unclear or even when their meaning is clear to the speaker but not to the

listener. Barriers to entry as identified by Bain, is a confusing concept. Barriers to entry is

defined by Stigler is clear, but perhaps strange, because the words mean something other

than what would naturally come to mind. In any case, the failure of the concept of

barriers to entry to incorporate a time dimension means that it is a concept in need of

additional embellishment in order to be useful in antitrust or regulatory proceedings.



           Putting aside the precise definition for “barrier to entry”, the idea that entry or exit

can keep price in some narrow price band is wrong for certain industries. Underlying

uncertainty and sunk costs can significantly alter the equilibrium from one based on

models that ignore these factors such as models based on contestability theory. Entry and




9
    Martin Weitzman (1983) proved that in continuous time contestability theory simplifies to constant
     returns to scale, that is, a model with no adjustment costs.


                                                    - 27 -
exit are more complicated phenomena than these models suggest. Using such models to

formulate antitrust or regulatory policy can be a mistake.



                                 Appendix I - Equilibrium

        If Q is output determined at the beginning of period 1 before price is observed,

then since demand is with equal probability either 100 − P or 90 − P , equating supply to

demand reveals that price will be either 100 – Q or 90 – Q with equal probability. In

period 2, either someone will enter and drive price down to $7 or no one will enter and

price will remain at its period 1 level.



        If a firm enters at the beginning of period 1, its expected profit, ∏ , is

∏ = ½ (100 – Q) + ½ (90 – Q) + ½ $7 + ½ (90 – Q) - $10 on the assumption (to be

verified) that 100 – Q > $7. Rewrite ∏ as ∏ = 50 + 90 + 3.5 – 1.5Q – 10 or

∏ = 133.5 – 1.5Q. In a competitive equilibrium with free entry, ∏ = 0 .



        Setting ∏ = 0 yields Q = 89, which implies from the demand curves in period 1

that price in period 1 is either $11 or $1. If price in period 1 is $11, then entry of 4 firms

occurs in period 2 in order to drive price in period 2 to $7. If price in period 1 is $1, no

entry occurs in period 2 and price in period 2 remains at $1.



                                       REFERENCES




                                             - 28 -
Bain, Joe. Barriers to New Competition: Their Character and Consequences in

Manufacturing Industries. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1956



Bajari, P., L. Benkard, and J. Levin (2003); “Estimating Dynamic Models of Imperfect

Competition”, mimeo, Standford GSB.



Baumol, William; Panzar, John and Willig, Robert. Contestable Markets and The

Theory of Industrial Structure. New York; Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich, 1982.



Bresnahan, T. and P. Reiss (1991): “Entry and Competition in Concentrated Markets”,

Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 99, No. 5. pp. 977-1009.



Carlton, Dennis and Perloff Jeffrey. Modern Industrial Organization. Reading, MA:

Addison Wesley, 2000.



Davis, Steven J., John C. Haltiwanger, and Scott Schuh, Job Creation and

Destruction, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997



Demsetz, Harold. “Why Regulate Utilities.” Journal of Law and Economics, April 1968,

11(1), pp. 55-65.



________. “Barriers to Entry.” American Economic Review, March 1982, 72(1),

pp 47-57.




                                         - 29 -
Dixit, Avinash K and Robert S. Pindyck, Investment Under Uncertainty, Princeton

University Press, 1994.



Dunne, Timothy, Mark J. Roberts and Larry Samuelson, “Patterns of Firm Entry and

Exit in U.S. Manufacturing Industries,” Rand Journal of Economics, Vol. 19, No. 4,

Winter 1988.



Ericson, R. And A. Pakes (1995): “Markov-Perfect Industry Dynamics: A Framework

for Emphirical Work”, Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 62, No. 1, pp. 53-82.



McAfee, R. Preston, Hugo M. Mialon, and Michael A. Williams, “What Is a Barrier to

Entry?” American Economic Review, May 2004, 94, 461-465.



Pakes, Ariel, Michael Ostrovsky, and Steve Berry, “Simple Estimators for the

Parameters of Discrete Dynamic Games (with Entry / Exit Examples)”, Harvard and

Yale, June 2005.



Pindyck, Robert. “Sunk Costs and Real Options in Antitrust”, NBER Working Paper

11430, 2005.



Posner, Richard. Antitrust Law: An Economic Perspective. Chicago, IL: University of

Chicago Press, 2001.




                                         - 30 -
Schmalensee, Richard, “Sunk Costs and Antitrust Barriers to Entry,” American

Economic Review, May 2004, 94.



Stigler, George. The Organization of Industry. Homewood, IL: Irwin., 1968.



________. Capital and Rates of Return in Manufacturing Industries. Princeton, NJ:

Princeton University Press, 1963.

Sutton, John. Sunk Costs and Market Structure. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991.



________. Technology and Market Structure. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998.



Weitzman, Martin. “Contestable Markets: An Uprising in the Theory of Industrial

Structure: Comment.” American Economic Review, June 1983, 73(3), pp. 486-87.




                                        - 31 -
