NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHO ARE THE GREATEST LIVING ARTISTS?
THE VIEW FROM THE AUCTION MARKET
David W. Galenson
Working Paper 11644
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11644
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2005

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by David W. Galenson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Who Are the Greatest Living Artists? The View from the Auction Market
David W. Galenson
NBER Working Paper No. 11644
September 2005
JEL No. J
ABSTRACT

Many art critics and scholars argue that art markets are irrational, and that there is no correlation
between prices and artistic importance. This paper identifies all living artists who have executed at
least one work that has sold at auction for at least $1 million, and ranks them both by the highest
price for which any of their works have sold, and by the number of times their works have sold for
$1 million or more. These rankings show that the most valuable art is made by the greatest artists:
the leaders in these tables, including Jasper Johns, Bruce Nauman, Robert Rauschenberg, Gerhard
Richter, and Jeff Koons, are clearly among the most important artists alive today. This study also
underscores the fact that the most important art of the past 50 years has overwhelmingly been made
by young geniuses who have made radical conceptual innovations at early ages.

David W. Galenson
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
galenson@uchicago.edu

3
The Value of Art Prices
There is a good correlation between what is considered great art
and what is expensive art... The artists who are respected and
thought important, whose work is most esteemed for its innovation
and beauty, become the most expensive.
Peter Watson, 19921
Many scholars categorically deny that art prices have any value as an indicator of genuine
artistic importance. A recent example of this attitude was provided by Richard Benson, the dean
of the Yale University School of Art, who told the New York Times that “We don’t consider
success in the marketplace has anything to do with being a successful artist.”2 Many critics share
Benson’s Olympian disdain for market outcomes. So for example Robert Hughes of Time once
declared that “the price of a work of art is an index of pure irrational desire.”3
Yet art prices have not been universally rejected by either scholars or critics. Some
scholars have recognized that the value of works of art inevitably affects how they are perceived.
Thus for example the eminent art historian Meyer Schapiro observed that “the enormous
importance given to a work of art as a precious object which is advertised and known in
connection with its price is bound to affect the consciousness of our culture.”4 Even more
narrowly there is a significant tradition in which critics and other observers of trends in modern
art have cited prices as evidence of artistic success, particularly in support of new challenges to
the entrenched artistic establishment. So for example one of the first champions of the
Impressionists, the critic Théodore Duret, argued in a famous early defense of their work in 1878
that its success in the market was a sign of its importance: “Because it is necessary that the public
who laughs so loudly over the Impressionists should be even more astonished! - this painting
sells.”5 In 1940 Virginia Woolf equally used prices as indicators of importance. Thus in her

4
biography of Roger Fry she wrote of the pain he had suffered when the Post-Impressionist
exhibition he presented in London in 1910 was so widely ridiculed, but she concluded that
“Time... vindicated Roger Fry, if money is any test. Shares in Cézanne have risen immeasurably
since 1910. That family, who... accumulated works by Matisse must today be envied even by
millionaires.”6 More recently, in1989 the critic Peter Schjeldahl conceded that “I must admit that
the artistic judgment of current big bucks is better than the average among, say, critics. (Like the
prospect of being hanged, shelling out millions may concentrate the mind wonderfully.)”7 And in
the same year, the former Director of the Tate Gallery, Sir Alan Bowness, explained that it is
only the most important artists whose work attains the highest prices: “It is only the museum
artists whose work begins to rise to exceptional prices.”8
It is hardly surprising that many artists pay close attention to the market for their work,
for a number of reasons. Auction outcomes directly affect artists’ reputations. Elizabeth Murray
acknowledged this in a recent interview: “Somebody told me once, when the auctions started to
be a big deal, ‘You’re never going to be anywhere until one of your paintings goes for over
$500K.’ I’m beginning to think there’s something to that at this point, it’s so much about
money.”9 Jeff Koons made a similar point more emphatically, telling a critic that his concern for
the price of his work did not stem from greed, but rather from his concern for its reception:
“What I’m saying is that the seriousness with which a work of art is taken is interrelated to the
value that it has. The market is the greatest critic.”10
This paper will use auction prices to identify the most important artists alive today.
Together with scholars’ assessments, this evidence will also serve as the basis for a systematic
assessment of the careers of these most important living artists. The analysis carried out here will

5
yield important new insights into the achievements of leading contemporary artists, and the
sources of their success. It can also point to some common patterns of these artists’ training and
their rise to artistic importance.
Price Lists
Lists seem trivial, but in fact they are crucial symptomatic indices
of underlying struggles over taste, evaluation and the construction
of a canon.
Peter Wollen, 200211
Table 1 presents an alphabetical listing of every living artist who has had at least one
work sell at auction for at least $1 million.12 The table has 39 entries. For present purposes, these
artists will be ranked in two ways. Table 2 ranks them by the single highest price for which any
of their works has sold at auction.13 Table 3 then ranks them by the number of times their works
have sold at auction for at least $1 million.
Before examining these lists, it is worth noting that these rankings based on the most
valuable works will be used in preference to other possible rankings, including the total value all
of an artist’s works have generated at auction. The reason for this is the concern here with artistic
importance. Greatness in art depends not on quantity but on quality. The greatest artists are
obviously not those who produce the most works, or even those who produce the most good
works, but rather those who produce the work of the greatest importance. Some great artists have
been extremely productive, but others have left only a handful of works. Two twentieth-century
artists clearly illustrate the extremes: Pablo Picasso was among the most prolific of modern
artists, while Marcel Duchamp created a very small body of work, but Picasso and Duchamp may
have been the two most important artists of the past century. Because of the irrelevance of the

6
volume of work an artist produces for his or her importance, the rankings here concentrate on the
most important works.
The rankings of Table 2 and 3 are not identical, but they are broadly similar. The top 10
artists in Table 2 are all among the top 17 in Table 3, and the top 11 in Table 3 are all among the
top 17 in Table 2. Thus in general it is the artists whose work has sold for the very highest prices
who have also had the most works sell for more than $1 million. Perhaps the most striking
difference between the two rankings occurs for Gerhard Richter, who ranks a respectable seventh
in Table 2, but stands alone at the top of Table 3 by a large margin over Jasper Johns. The large
number of Richter’s paintings that have sold for very high prices is a significant fact that will be
considered in analyzing his position in contemporary art.
Does the Market Work?
Perhaps the importance that we must attach to the achievement of
an artist or a group of artists may properly be measured by the
answer to the following question: Have they so wrought that it will
be impossible henceforth, for those who follow, ever again to act
as if they had not existed?
Walter Sickert, 191014
Before proceeding to more detailed analysis of the evidence presented in Tables 2 and 3,
it is useful to consider the reliability of these data for our purposes. Does the art market work?
Do the highest prices attach to the work of the “museum artists,” as Alan Bowness would have it,
or is the auction market so irrational that its outcomes bear no relation to the importance of
particular artists or their work, as Richard Benson and Robert Hughes appear to believe?
As Walter Sickert recognized, importance in art is determined by influence: the most
important artists are those whose influence is greatest, and thus those whose successors cannot

7
“act as if they had not existed.” Does the auction market identify these artists: are the artists who
stand at the top of Tables 2 and 3 those whose work has had the greatest impact on their
successors?
Even a brief survey can suffice to indicate the answer to these questions. Jasper Johns
ranks first in Table 2 and second in Table 3. His work is widely recognized as having played a
key role in producing a shift from the gestural abstraction that dominated advanced art during
most of the 1950s to the Pop art and Minimalism that would come to dominate the 1960s. So for
example looking back from late in the 1990s, Arthur Danto reflected that Johns’ early work
“opened up the present in which we all exist artistically.”15 One of the leading textbooks of
modern art recently observed that “The formal innovations of Jasper Johns had an even more farreaching influence than Rauschenberg’s in bringing on the radical new objective art of the
sixties.”16 It is not an accident that Johns is juxtaposed with Rauschenberg, for in different ways
both of them were responsible for overthrowing the visual art of Abstract Expressionism and
replacing it with a more conceptual approach that descended from Duchamp. Perhaps the most
distinctive element of Rauschenberg’s contribution was his invention of the “combine,” in which
the use of real objects reduced the role of painting, and thus contributed to the proliferation of
hybrid genres of art during the 1960s and beyond. It was in recognition of this trend toward
mixtures of different artistic media that Leo Steinberg observed that “on the New York art scene
the great shift came in Rauschenberg’s work of the early 1950s,” and that Arthur Danto would
write in 1997 that “the artistic mainstream today is very largely Rauschenbergian.”17
Gerhard Richter’s place at the top of Table 3 reflects his importance in producing a partial
counterbalance to the influence of Rauschenberg. In some respects Richter’s role parallels that of

8
Andy Warhol, for during the 1960s both pioneered new approaches to painting, based on
photography, that appealed to younger artists who did not want to abandon that traditional
medium.18 Like Warhol and other Pop artists, Richter and his friend Sigmar Polke developed
styles of painting that avoided what many of their contemporaries considered the excessive
emotional and philosophical claims of Abstract Expressionism, and pointed toward more ironic
and emotionally detached images. In the process, they became models for younger painters in
both Europe and the US who created a revival in painting during the 1980s. Looking back from
the vantage point of 1990, Peter Schjeldahl declared that “the four absolutely best artists, by my
own and many other people’s lights, to have emerged internationally since the ‘70s - Sigmar
Polke, Gerhard Richter, and Anselm Kiefer, along with the late Joseph Beuys - are German.”19
Bruce Nauman, who ranks second in Table 2, was a leader of the cohort that followed
that of Johns and Richter. Nauman’s highly conceptual approach to art produced contributions in
a wide variety of media. In 1990, Schjeldahl summarized his role: “Now 48, a dominant figure in
the generation of post-minimalism and vastly influential in Europe, he is a maverick who at one
time or another has affected the course of just about every visual medium except painting,
earning a prestige among serious younger artists like that of no one else since Jasper Johns.”20
Eight years later, the English critic Richard Cork testified to Nauman’s continuing role, noting
that “Nauman has influenced younger artists in all kinds of ways. Damien Hirst and Rachel
Whiteread are only the most prominent of the British practitioners to owe him debts.”21
From the next cohort, Jeff Koons ranks prominently in both Tables 2 and 3. Koons is
perhaps the most controversial and flamboyant American artist since Warhol. He has just turned
50, and art historians have not fully charted his role in contemporary art. Some critics have

9
weighed in, however. Thus in 1988 Schjeldahl declared that Koons “may be the definitive artist
of this moment.”22 Sixteen years later, Arthur Danto observed that “It is widely acknowledged
that Jeff Koons is among the most important artists of the last decades of the twentieth
century.”23
This discussion could be extended to more of the artists who figure prominently in Tables
2 and 3, situating them within what Bowness called the “chronological sequence of [museum]
artists, carrying forward an argument which forms the material of modern art.”24 This would
include recent views of Lucian Freud as a precursor of the Neo-Expressionist painting of the
1980s, of Cy Twombly as an inspiration for Neo-Expressionism and Graffiti art, and of Frank
Stella as a key link between Jasper Johns and Minimalism.25 Yet for present purposes it seems
unnecessary to extend this discussion. For examination of Tables 2 and 3 establishes beyond any
reasonable doubt that the auction market has assigned its highest values to those artists who have
been leaders of their generations. Sir Alan Bowness clearly understood this, noting that it is the
rarity of these key artists “that accounts for the phenomenal prices achieved today in the auction
houses.”26 But it is difficult to see how even Richard Benson or Robert Hughes could deny that
Johns, Rauschenberg, Richter, Nauman, Koons, and the other artists who head Tables 2 and 3 are
the most influential artists alive today.
Creative Careers
Each stylistic portion of an artist’s total time span constitutes a
separate sum of artifacts, and this is recognized by the art market in
the values it places upon certain “periods” of an artist’s work in
contrast to others.
Harold Rosenberg, 197427
Recent research has shown that there is a consistent relationship between an artist’s

10
methods and goals and the stage of his career in which he produces his most important work. To
provide a basis for examining this relationship for the artists considered in this study, Table 4
shows the ages of the artists when they executed the works listed in Table 2.
The ages in Table 4 cover virtually the entire adult life span, ranging from a minimum of
23 (Stella) to a maximum of 73 (Bourgeois). Yet their distribution is far from uniform, as young
ages appear much more frequently than older ones. The median age in Table 4 is 34. More than
three-fifths of these highest-priced works were produced by artists below the age of 40; less than
one-fifth were made at 50 or above. The median age of the top 10 artists when they made their
highest-priced works was just 32.5; the top two - Johns and Nauman - were both in their 20s
when they made the works that would later sell for millions of dollars.
The youth of many of these top artists when they produced their best work is not merely
an artifact of the auction market, but is confirmed by the judgments of art scholars. Six of the top
artists in Table 4 have entries below the age of 35. For these six artists, Table 5 presents their
ages in the single year from which their work was found to be most often illustrated in a search
of 13 art history textbooks published since 2000.28 The evidence of the textbooks yields ages very
similar to the auction results: for three of the six artists the two sources produce the same age,
and the median of the six ages from the textbooks, of 30, is virtually the same as the median of
29.5 obtained from the auction outcomes. Art scholars thus agree with collectors that many of
our greatest living artists have peaked at very early ages. Understanding why is critical for
understanding contemporary art.

11
Conceptual Innovation
We are living in a conceptual art world.
Arthur Danto, 200129
The preponderance in Table 2 of works made by young artists is a consequence of the fact
that from the late 1950s to the present advanced art has been dominated by conceptual
innovation.30 The artists who stand at the top of Tables 2 and 3 include some of those most
responsible for the transition to this conceptual era, as well as many of their most important
successors who have sustained it.
During the late 1940s and most of the 1950s, the leading artists worked experimentally,
by trial and error, as they proceeded in the pursuit of images they judged visually. For Jackson
Pollock, Willem de Kooning, Mark Rothko, and their friends in New York, as for Pierre
Soulages, Hans Hartung, Nicolas de Staël, and their colleagues in Paris, art was created not in the
mind but on the canvas: “One begins with a mark, another mark, a third mark - a splash, a
smudge, a drip - until the whole work energetically completes itself and the artist can then see
what has been achieved.” Gestures and actions were privileged over ideas, for “hand and eye
were everything, and for those who can remember that era, the intellect could hardly have been
more suspect.”31
In the late 1950s an abrupt change occurred. The turning point is often considered to have
been Jasper Johns’ first one-man exhibition at Leo Castelli’s gallery in 1958. There Johns
presented paintings of flags and targets that “invalidated the aesthetic - or part of the aesthetic of the most esteemed members of the advanced painting culture of the time... [I]t signaled the
end of an era.”32 Ever since Johns’ show, most leading artists have worked conceptually,

12
carefully planning their works prior to making them, in order to express ideas they had
formulated in advance. Preconception is so central to this art that Roy Lichtenstein, whose
cartoon images might have seemed to have little in common with Frank Stella’s early paintings
of black stripes, could remark in 1965 that a primary concern of his art was “the same kind of
thing that you find in Stella... that before you start painting the painting, you know exactly what
it’s going to look like.”33 In fact, because for many of these artists “all of the planning and
decisions are made beforehand and the execution is a perfunctory affair,” a number of them could
delegate the production of their works to assistants or other artisans, and a series of major artists,
from Warhol and LeWitt to Koons and Hirst, have executed little of their own work.34
With the transition from an experimental to a conceptual art, the currency of the advanced
art world shifted from the creation of striking images to the presentation of arresting ideas. This
change in product implied an equally radical change in methods of production, and consequently
in the gestation period of artistic innovation. The trademark images of the Abstract
Expressionists and Tachistes developed over the course of years, and often decades, of
experimentation, as the artists gradually explored the visual properties of their materials and their
own actions. Experience was necessary for mastery of their art. In contrast, the novel ideas of
their conceptual successors were typically formulated quickly, in momentary flashes of
inspiration. And the most radical new ideas were usually produced by artists who had not been
active long enough to become constrained by fixed habits of thought, and who could therefore
break away from conventions that more experienced artists automatically followed. Inexperience
consequently became a key ingredient for significant innovation in this conceptual era. For the
contributions that constituted the landmarks of contemporary art, the wise old master was

13
suddenly replaced by the brash young genius.
The careers of important conceptual innovators are normally marked by a major early
contribution. In many cases, the artist’s work deteriorates thereafter, as he either repeats the early
innovation or fails in attempts to produce others. In some cases however, conceptual innovators
go on to make other significant innovations. These are generally less important than their first
contribution, because they are usually more circumscribed by the artist’s accumulating
experience, but in any case they are likely to be very different from it, for the key to generating
new ideas is to tackle problems so different that the artist is forced to use new approaches. The
more radically the artist changes problems, the greater the chance to make an important new
contribution. The careers of conceptual innovators are therefore usually marked by precocity, and
those of great conceptual innovators are also often marked by diversity.
Young Geniuses and Old Masters
Falloffs in the later work of major artists are so far from unusual as
to be the rule in our mercurial culture.
Peter Schjeldahl, 200535
How do the theoretical schemes described above relate to the careers of the artists
considered in this study? Understanding this requires examination of the artists individually.
Space does not allow this for all 39 artists, but this section will consider the careers of eight of
the artists identified as the most important. These will be the seven highest-ranked artists in
Table 4, as well as the youngest artist who ranks in the top 20 in that table. In each case, the
analysis will consider the relationship between the particular artist’s most influential
contribution, or contributions, and his age when he executed the relevant work.
As noted earlier, Jasper Johns was a central figure in the transition from the experimental

14
art of Abstract Expressionism to the conceptual approaches of Pop and Minimalism. Johns’ most
important works were those he made during the late 1950s. Of the 38 illustrations of his work
included in the 13 recent textbooks referred to above, 10 were of paintings he made in 1955, four
each were of works from 1958 and 1959, and another five were of works from 1960. Thus more
than 60% of his illustrations are of work he produced by the age of 30, and no single later year
was represented by more than two illustrations. Johns’ paintings of flags and targets were the
result of a radical new idea formulated early in the career of a conceptual innovator.
Johns explained that he chose to paint the flag “because I didn’t have to design it. So I
went on to similar things like the targets - things the mind already knows.”36 And as Leo
Steinberg pointed out, it was the way Johns painted these objects that eliminated the need for
decisions: “Since they tend to constitute the whole subject of a particular work, Johns’s objects,
systems, or signs predetermined the picture’s shape and dimensions.”37 The clarity of Johns’
conceptual contributions meant that his innovations were immediately available to other artists.
So for example as a senior in college Frank Stella saw Johns’ 1958 show, was intrigued by “ the
idea of stripes... the idea of repetition,” and during he next year made his own paintings of
stripes. Exhibited at Castelli’s gallery in 1960, these Black paintings remain the most important
work the conceptual Stella has made in his long career; one of them places him among the top
ten artists in Table 2.38
During the 1960s many young artists turned away from painting, and Bruce Nauman
became a leader in the use of other genres. As Schjeldahl observed in 1982, “Artists in the late
1960s were optimistic about the aesthetic potential of technologies and systems, and Nauman
played with most of them - video, film, photography, light, sound, language, mathematics,

15
holography, and more - to memorable effect.”39 Nauman’s extremely diverse body of work is
considered to have influenced a series of younger artists in a wide variety of ways; these artists
include such prominent figures as Rachel Whiteread, Jenny Holzer, Matthew Barney, Kiki Smith,
Cindy Sherman, Vito Acconci, Tracey Emin, and Sarah Lucas.40 And Nauman’s most important
innovations tended to cluster early in his career; more than half of the illustrations of his art in
the textbooks surveyed for this study were of works he made between the ages of 24 and 27.
There is a common thread in Nauman’s work, in that he has persistently used his own
body and its actions as his subject.41 Yet from the beginning of his career, Nauman used the
history of art as the direct inspiration for his ideas. Kathry Hixson listed a few examples: “Many
of Nauman’s works could be interpreted as homages to Jasper Johns’s sign-paintings, Joseph
Beuys’s fat corners, Marcel Duchamp’s fountain, Michael Heizer’s masculine earth-movings, or
Dan Flavin’s fluorescent light tubes.”42 After seeing a retrospective exhibition, Schjeldahl
observed that “Nauman was never not Nauman... [H]e has made only ‘mature’ work.”43 This is
not surprising, for Nauman’s art has never been based on observation and analysis of the outside
world, or on the gradual development of techniques, but rather on the sudden production of new
ideas inspired by art history, filtered through the prism of introspection about his own body and
its immediate environs.
Lucian Freud is the lone experimental artist among the eight considered in this section.
His art requires observation: “I could never put anything into a picture that wasn’t actually there
in front of me. That would be a pointless lie, a mere bit of artfulness.” He considers his art a
search for an elusive goal, but recognizes that because this goal is unattainable, what is most
important is the process of the search:

16
A moment of complete happiness never occurs in the creation of a
work of art. The promise of it is felt in the act of creation but
disappears towards the completion of the work. For it is then that
the painter realizes that it is only a picture he is painting. Until then
he had almost dared to hope that the picture might spring to life.
Were it not for this, the perfect painting might be painted, on the
completion of which the painter could retire. It is this great
insufficiency that drives him on. Thus the process of creation
becomes necessary to the painter perhaps more than it is in the
picture. The process is in fact habit-forming.44
Freud’s avoidance of preconception is such that he not only makes no preliminary studies for his
paintings, but he does not even lay out the whole figure of the subject on his canvas as he begins
to paint: “I’d rather it ran off the edges than have to cramp the forms.”45 Freud paints only people
he knows well, for he wants his “portraits to be of the people, not like them. Not having the look
of the sitter, being them.”46
As Table 6 shows, Freud is the only one of the eight artists considered here who made the
majority of his highest-priced works after the age of 50. Freud’s method evolved over time. John
Russell reported that “whereas in earlier days Freud never over painted, he will now take the
image out and start all over, time and time again, till it has the inevitable look that he wants.”47
The power of Freud’s work has grown over time, for its strength lies in the progressive rejection
of artifice that occurred as the artist gained confidence in his ability to portray people without
stylization or pretense. His late work is both his most expressive and his most disconcerting, for
as Freud observed, “the task of the artist is to make the human being uncomfortable.”48
Leo Steinberg quoted Jasper Johns as saying that Robert Rauschenberg was “the man
who in this century had invented the most since Picasso.”49 Early in his career, Rauschenberg
produced a large number of innovations, all the embodiment of new ideas, and most of which

17
crossed the boundaries of traditional artistic genres. In a famous statement, Rauschenberg
declared: “Painting relates to both art and life. Neither can be made. I try to act in that gap
between the two.”50 Rauschenberg’s versatility meant that his influence spread widely. An early
example is the white paintings he made as a student at Black Mountain College in 1951, which
comprised a series of white panels. After seeing the white paintings the composer John Cage
wrote his famous 4'
33", in which a pianist sat in front of an audience for that length of time,
without playing a single note. What would prove to be one of Rauschenberg’s minor innovations
had thus inspired a work that a recent survey of modern American music described as a
“landmark” that “requested a new attitude toward listening, and toward the concept of music
itself.”51
Rebus, Rauschenberg’s entry in Table 4, was a 1955 painting that contained a variety of
collage elements. During that year Rauschenberg attached more and more real objects to his
canvases, until the works became three-dimensional and often free-standing, prompting to give
them a new name, of “combine.” As Table 7 shows, several of these are among the most
celebrated works by living artists, as Bed and Monogram are two of the five works by the 39
artists studied in this paper that appear most often in the art history textbooks surveyed.
Rauschenberg made Rebus, Bed, and Monogram before he turned 35, and he made all 14 of his
works represented in Table 3 before the age of 40. Although Rauschenberg has continued to
make large amounts of art throughout his long career, his significant contributions were made
early. As the English critic Richard Cork wrote in 1981, “No enfant was more terrible than
Rauschenberg in his heyday, but the trouble is that even the most precocious child has to grow
up.”52 Like his friend Jasper Johns, during the 1960s Rauschenberg was surpassed by a new

18
generation of young and iconoclastic innovators, who used his innovations for their own ends.
Cy Twombly was a less radical innovator than his contemporaries Johns and
Rauschenberg, and his art developed more gradually. He is nonetheless a conceptual artist, whose
trademark style is a synthesis of the art of a number of his predecessors. Twombly’s most
distinctive work began after he settled in Rome in the late 1950s, as he blended the gestural touch
of Abstract Expressionism with marks adapted from the work of Jean Dubuffet and Alberto Burri
to make images that are often considered as forms of writing or calligraphy.53
Twombly’s influence on other artists was less widespread than that of Johns and
Rauschenberg, and its impact was less sudden than theirs. But over time a number of younger
painters, both in Europe and the US, were influenced by his blending of primitive images with
sophisticated handling of color. So for example in 1962 the young artists Sigmar Polke and
Gerhard Richter incorporated a number of Twombly’s devices into their early development of a
German version of Pop art.54
Jeff Koons is a conceptual innovator who is often placed in a line of descent that includes
Marcel Duchamp and Andy Warhol.55 His art is based on ideas and images he draws from a
series of earlier artists, including Duchamp, the Surrealists René Magritte and Salvador Dali,
Man Ray, Jackson Pollock, Jasper Johns, and the Pop artists Roy Lichtenstein and James
Rosenquist, as well as from magazines and billboards.56 Koons produces his work systematically.
In making paintings, for example, he begins by using a computer to create composites from
photographs he has cut from magazines and books. “After I have an image on a computer file
that I like, we make a digital slide. And then the slide is projected and we draw out the image on
the canvas.”57 A staff of assistants then executes the painting according to Koons’ instructions. In

19
1999, while rushing to meet a deadline for an exhibition at the Deutsche Guggenheim Berlin,
Koons had a total of 47 artists working on a series of paintings, each more than 12 square meters
in size: “There were a lot of people mixing color. And we had two different shifts, so the studio
was going twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week, always with half the staff there working
to complete the paintings.”58
Arthur Danto has argued that Koons’ most important contribution is his creation of
objects that, in Koons’ language, have “the sense of ready-made inherent in them.” These are the
statues that resemble the cheap kitsch objects sold at gift shops and souvenir stands, but that are
in fact made by highly skilled craftsmen from original designs created by Koons. By designing
objects that might have been ready-mades but were in fact drawn from his own imagination,
Koons created “commonplace kinds of objects reimagined as surrealistic presences.”59 Both his
work and the public image he has created have been seen as influences on a number of younger
artists.60 So for example not only did Koons influence Damien Hirst in making his famous steel
and glass cases, but Hirst also explained that he admired Koons for deliberately constructing
“Jeff Koons, the Artist.”61 Another young British artist, Sarah Lucas, was influenced by Koons’
sexually explicit sculptures and photographs; her sculpture, Woman in a Tub, paid tribute to
Koons not only in its subject matter but by using the same title he had used earlier.62 Koons’
conceptual approach to art is reflected both in his eagerness to present works that have outraged
many in the art world, whether for their aesthetic qualities or their sexual explicitness, and in the
image he has carefully cultivated of the artist as a brash young iconoclast.
Since the early 1960s, Gerhard Richter has used photographs as the basis for many of his
paintings. He explained that this reduced the number of decisions he had to make: “When I paint

20
from a photograph, conscious thinking is eliminated.” Drawing an object by hand could lead to
distortion and stylization: “By tracing the outlines with the aid of a projector, you can bypass this
elaborate process of apprehension.” 63 Richter’s method and his embrace of preconceived images
clearly identify him as a conceptual artist. But his career path is an unusual one. As noted earlier,
his position at the top of Table 3 points to the large number of important works he has made.
Table 6 furthermore shows that he has made these over an extended period, with concentrations
in his 30s and 50s.
Richter is perhaps most noted for painting representational works based on photographs,
a practice he began in 1962. But he has made a number of other distinct contributions. These
include the color charts he began to make in 1966, which have been interpreted as a synthesis of
Pop art and of late Abstract Expressionism; abstract paintings, initially made by painting from
photographic enlargements of small sections of representational paintings, which he began to
make in 1970; and paintings with powerful albeit ambiguous political content, most notably the
15 paintings from photographs of members of the urban guerilla Baader-Meinhof group, three of
whom died in a German prison in 1977, which Richter made in 1988.64
The protean nature of Richter’s style recalls the practice of an earlier modern conceptual
master. In 1985, Meyer Schapiro reflected that “If the works of Pablo Picasso were not identified
directly with his name, if they were shown together in a big exhibition, it would be rather
difficult to say that they were the work of one man.” Schapiro was puzzled, and troubled, by
Picasso’s frequent shifts of style: “If you can work in any... way you please, then no one way has
a necessity; there is an element of caprice or arbitrariness of choice.”65 In 2002, Arthur Danto
remarked that visitors to Gerhard Richter’s retrospective exhibition then on display “are certain

21
to be baffled by the fact that he seems to vacillate between realism and abstraction, or even
between various styles of abstraction, often at the same time.” Danto recalled that “These
vacillations seemed to me so extreme when I first saw a retrospective of Richter’s work... that it
looked like I was seeing some kind of group show.” Danto noted that many artists would reject
Richter’s behavior: “To change styles too often inevitably would have been read as a lack of
conviction.”66
The frequent and rapid stylistic shifts of both Picasso and Richter are a phenomenon that
had long been understood by conceptual artists. So for example as early as 1921 the critic and
painter Amedeé Ozenfant wrote a commentary titled “Picasso’s Language,” in which he observed
that “When he paints a picture, he knows what he wants to say and what kind of picture will in
fact say it; his forms and colors are judiciously chosen to achieve the desired end, and he uses
them like the words of a vocabulary.” Ozenfant explained that consequently when Picasso
worked in one style, it didn’t mean he had abandoned any other: “Because Picasso nowadays
paints both cubist and representational works, it has been falsely claimed that he is giving up
Cubism; this had caused commotion in the studios and joy among diehards. Can such people not
understand that Cubism and figurative painting are two different languages, and that a painter is
free to choose either of them as he may judge it better suited to what he has to say?”67 Schapiro
and Danto failed to understand that changes in style mean very different things to experimental
and conceptual artists. Experimental artists seek for their one true style, and from their vantage
point any quick changes or alternation in styles can only be seen as insincere, but conceptual
artists can treat styles as languages, and can consequently shift from one to another as they find
appropriate for the occasion. As Picasso explained, “Whenever I have had something to say, I

22
have said it in the manner in which I have felt it ought to be said.”68
The large number and broad distribution of Richter’s most valuable works over an
extended period are testimony to the fact that he is considered to have made important
contributions at several stages of his career. Consistent with this, Amy Dempsey’s recent guide to
styles of modern art gives Richter main entries both under “Super-realism,” for the photopaintings he began to make in the early 1960s, and under “Neo-Expressionism,”illustrated by an
abstract painting he executed in 1999. Because of his artistic longevity and his versatility, Richter
has had an influence on many younger artists, including painters as different from each other as
Chuck Close, David Salle, and Zhang Xiaogang.69 Richter is widely respected as an artist who
has consistently found ways to make significant advances in painting during periods, in the late
1960s and the 1970s, when many young artists were turning away from painting, and he and
Sigmar Polke are routinely mentioned as central figures in inspiring the renewed popularity of
painting for young artists in both Europe and the US in the 1980s.
Damien Hirst’s meteoric rise to prominence began in 1988, when as a second-year art
student at Goldsmiths’ College he curated Freeze, a group show of the work of a number of
fellow students, at a vacant building in London’s Docklands. The show created immediate
interest and has become recognized as a landmark event for its announcement of the young
British artists, or YBAs, who are considered by many English observers to have become the
leaders of the international advanced art world of the 1990s.70 A series of group shows soon
followed Freeze, and from one of them in 1990 Charles Saatchi bought A Thousand Years, a
work of Hirst’s in mixed media: “steel, glass, flies, maggots, MDF, insect-o-cutor, cow’s head,
sugar, water.”71

23
Hirst’s approach to art is conceptual: “I like creating emotions scientifically.”72 His works
are direct: “Hirst’s most successful works have an immediate impact, physically communicating
a thought or feeling.”73 His declaration that he wants his paintings “to look like they’ve been
made by a person trying to paint like a machine” echoes Andy Warhol’s famous statement that
“The reason I’m painting this way is that I want to be a machine,” just as Hirst’s practice of
having his paintings made by assistants follows that of Warhol.74 The tanks in which Hirst
suspends dead animals echo the tanks in which Jeff Koons floated basketballs, just as Hirst’s
creation of a public persona that complements his work appears to follow Koons’ systematic
pursuit of personal and professional fame. Thus Hirst openly admits that his art and his public
image cannot be considered separately: “With me it’s really got to be about the personal life and
the art and the fame and how it connects.”75
Hirst’s art draws on a number of central influences. In addition to Koons, these include
Claes Oldenburg’s sculptures, the geometric art of Minimalism, and Francis Bacon’s paintings.76
Less than two decades into his career, it is still early to trace Hirst’s influence, but it is clear that
over time he has consolidated his early position as the leading member of the YBAs. In part this
is because he has become the archetypal member of the group in the perception of outside
observers, but it appears that in this role he has also affected how the other members of the group
perceive their own art. Admirers of the YBAs often argue that what distinguishes the new
English art of the 1990s, and raises it above the conceptual art being made elsewhere, is its
subject matter: instead of simply conducting intramural debates with earlier artists, the YBAs set
out “to engage instead with the broad and urgent concerns of everyday life,” and “to confront
even the most distressing, taboo aspects of existence.”77 And it has been claimed that none of

24
them engages with larger concerns than does Hirst, who “tackled head-on the eternal themes of
life, death, and regeneration, freedom and liberty, beauty and ugliness.”78
Like many other conceptual artists, Hirst has produced a diverse body of work in a
number of media. At 40, he is recognized as a leading artist, if not the leading artist, of his
generation. It is unlikely, however, that he will ever produce another series of works that will
have a greater impact on the art world than his preserved animals in tanks, or that he will ever
make an individual work that will be more widely identified as a trademark piece than his 1991
tiger shark, The Physical Impossibility of Death in the Mind of Someone Living.
As noted earlier, seven of the eight artists discussed in this section are conceptual
innovators, This is not an accident, for the artists considered in this study are overwhelmingly
conceptual. In addition to Freud, the only experimental exceptions to this conceptual
predominance are Bourgeois, Serra, Thiebaud and Zao. The one qualification that should be kept
in mind is that there may be other important experimental artists working today, already well into
their careers, who have not yet been recognized as great artists. Louise Bourgeois affords an
example of the late recognition of a great experimental innovator. In 1981, when Bourgeois was
70 years old, an Artnews critic wrote that “Perhaps Louise Bourgeois is an idiosyncratic choice
for an article on ‘emerging’ artists. Yet she was the first to come to mind when considering
artists of high caliber whose work came to my attention during the past season.”79 Bourgeois’
work first reached $1 million at auction in 2002, when she was 91; she had made the work in
question 18 years, before when she was 73.
Geography
The fact of working and living in New York constitutes a condition

25
favorable to [artistic] success on the highest level.
Raymonde Moulin, 200480
During the 1950s, it became a commonplace among American critics and scholars that
the center of the art world had shifted from Europe to the US, as New York replaced Paris not
only as the major market for advanced art, but also as the center of its production.81 And although
Europeans were less inclined to recognize this change, in 1983 a French scholar admitted that
after World War II the birth of an American avant-garde had in fact “succeeded in shifting the
cultural center of the West from Paris to New York,” though he contended that this had been
accomplished by more sinister means than Americans believed.82
In recent decades there has been a progressive reduction in New York’s dominant
position as the home of major artists: American artists have increasingly chosen to live elsewhere
in the US, and there has been an increase in the number of important European artists,
particularly in Germany and England, who have not chosen to move to the US. Overall, however,
the US remains the major country for important living artists. Thus 19 of the 39 artists listed in
Table 1 were born in the US, and several others, including Bourgeois, Hockney, Oldenburg, and
Prince, have spent much or most of their careers here. Eleven others were born in Europe and
have remained there, with Germany (Baselitz, Kiefer, Polke, Richter) and England (Freud, Hirst,
Ofili) the leading countries. Of the remaining five artists, Dumas was born in South Africa and
lives in Holland, Botero and Bravo were born in South America and spend much of their time in
Europe, Kusama lives in Japan, and Zao was born in China and lives in France.
An interesting fact about these greatest living artists may provide support for the view of
some Europeans that in recent decades there has been a new shift, in which the US has ceased to

26
be the vital center of the production of advanced art. As Koons turns 50 this year, there are five
artists in this group who are currently below the age of 50 (Barceló, Cattelan, Hirst, Ofili, and
Tuymans), and none is American. These numbers are not so great as to constitute overwhelming
support for a statement like that of Matthew Collings, who declared in 1998 that “young British
art now dominates the world.”83 Yet it may be suggestive that two of these five younger artists
are English, and that Ofili is the only one of the five who is currently below the age of 40.
Although there are some questions about the geographic center of the production of
advanced art, there is less uncertainty about the art world’s central marketplace, and the most
important geographic locus for the certification of artistic success. Damien Hirst expressed what
is probably a widespread attitude in 1996, when he was preparing for his first major New York
show. He was already famous in England: he had won the Turner Prize the previous year, and he
was making a film that was to be shown at London’s Hayward Gallery. As Gordon Burn
observed, “Not since the emergence of David Hockney in the early 1960s had a British artist’s
passage to fame been so rapid and spectacular.”84 Yet in spite of his position as what Burn called
“a figure of contemporary London legend,” Hirst felt that his resumé was incomplete. When
Burn asked him what a success in his forthcoming New York show would mean to him, Hirst
replied “It means I can relax. It means I can do it.” As the leader of the YBAs, Hirst went on to
state the Frank Sinatra Theorem for his followers: “I hope that people do realize that if you can
make it there you can make it anywhere. I hope that Angus [Fairhurst] realizes that; I hope that
Sarah [Lucas] realizes it.” Underlying Hirst’s recognition that the New York art world was the
most widely recognized arbiter of success, however, was a belief that it was prejudiced against
those who declined to become full-time members of it: “There’s an easy way to make it

27
worldwide: move to America. Look at Malcolm Morley and how he did in the 1980s... Malcolm
Morley would have been [nothing] if he’d stayed in England. I can’t help thinking if Gilbert and
George were American, they’d be much more significant.”85
Art Schools
Our generation was the first fully educated generation - everybody
went to graduate school.
Chuck Close, 199786
The experiences of the artists examined here reflect a number of other significant features
of today’s art world. One of these is a basic change that has occurred since 1960 in the early
career patterns of important artists. Until then, ever since the revolt of the Impressionists against
the Ecole des Beaux Arts, few important modern artists had attended formal degree-granting art
programs. But since then the situation has changed, as recent generations of conceptual artists
have often learned conceptual skills in graduate schools of art. Even casual inspection of the
careers of the artists listed in Table 1 reveals a number whose careers were significantly affected
by their experience in formal art schools.
Sigmar Polke and Gerhard Richter enrolled in the Düsseldorf Academy of Art in 1961,
the same year in which the flamboyant conceptual artist Joseph Beuys accepted a professorship
there. Richter recalled that Beuys not only introduced him to the work of Duchamp, but that he
challenged him: “he unsettled me, because he didn’t play by the rules. He followed different
criteria and employed different strategies; he was working for an ‘expanded definition of art,’
which was not so much a protection as a challenge; a challenge to me too.”87 Beuys was then
becoming Europe’s leading seer of conceptual art based on performance, and he told his students
that painting was a reactionary activity that they could no longer pursue. This prohibition was a

28
turning point in the early careers of the two young artists: “Polke and Richter thought long and
hard about whether they were ‘allowed to paint,’ decided they were not, and for that reason took
it up with a vengeance.”88 Although Polke and Richter did not become followers of Beuys’ work,
his example of rebelliousness inspired them to perform the most rebellious act they could think
of in the early 1960s, of returning to painting. It is also difficult not to see Beuys’ influence in the
fact that both Polke and Richter would become known for their frequent and rapid changes of
style throughout their careers.89
Chuck Close, Brice Marden, and Richard Serra are among a number of important
American artists who attended the Yale School of Art during the 1960s.90 Close explained how
the conceptual content of the school’s curriculum prepared students for the art world: “At Yale
we all learned to talk art before we could really make it. Not a bad skill actually. When you do
get a great idea at least you can recognize it, articulate it, and exploit it.”91 Ed Ruscha, who
attended art school in California, recalled that it was while he was in school that he realized that
his approach to art would be conceptual: “The time I did at Chouinard [Art Institute] was
helpful... I began to believe that it is not so much what you say that matters, but how you say it.
This ruled out so-called emotional painting. Everything should be preplanned.”92
The most celebrated recent group of art school students were Damien Hirst and the other
YBAs who participated in the Freeze exhibition in 1988: with the exception only of Rachel
Whiteread, who had graduated from the Slade School of Fine Art, all the artists in that show
were students at Goldsmiths’ College. One of their teachers there, who is often described as the
key influence on the YBAs, was Michael Craig-Martin, who had himself attended art school at
Yale. Craig-Martin recalled that it was at Yale that he learned that art “needed to be rooted in the

29
very experience of ordinary life I had thought it sought to escape; that contemporary art existed in
a context as complex as that any other historical period.”93 Craig-Martin recently argued that the
success of the YBAs was in part a product of their academic training: “I believe that one of the
principal reasons the generation of young artists who graduated from Goldsmiths in the late
eighties had such an immediate and profound impact on the international perception of British art
was that they continued the critical dialogue that had characterized their education into the art
world beyond the school. Every exhibition, every interview, every social event became an
opportunity to extend awareness and to discuss ideas, feelings, concerns and values. More and
more artists were drawn into this dialogue of work and words, and for the first time London
could be seen to be generating rather than just responding to the central discourse that
characterizes and propels contemporary art of international interest.”94
Group Work
Most truly original new art is the result of group activity. It appears
that the conjunction of several exceptional talents results in
something that is greater than the parts.
Alan Bowness, 198995
A notable fact about the life cycles of important modern artists is that at an early stage of
their careers nearly all have collaborated with other young artists who have also become
important artists. The artists considered here provide examples of these relationships.
Sigmar Polke and Gerhard Richter worked closely together as students in Düsseldorf. In
1963, with two other fellow students, they rented a condemned building for the first public
exhibition of their own art, which they announced as the unveiling of what they called “German
Pop Art,” or “Capitalist Realism.” Their press release for the show declared that “Pop Art has

30
rendered conventional painting - with all its sterility, its isolation, its artificiality, its taboos, and
its rules - entirely obsolete.” In notes written in 1964, Richter explained that “Contact with likeminded painters - a group means a great deal to me: nothing comes in isolation. We have worked
out our ideas largely by talking them through... One depends on one’s surroundings. And so the
exchange with other artists - and especially the collaboration with [Konrad] Lueg and Polke
matters a lot to me: it is part of the input that I need.” Nearly three decades later, in looking back
at that early collaboration, Richter put greater emphasis on a different stimulus he received from
his relationship with Lueg and Polke: “There were rare and exceptional moments when we were
doing a thing together and forming a kind of impromptu community; the rest of the time we were
competing with each other.”96
Early in his career, Robert Rauschenberg worked closely with a series of other artists,
influencing them, and being influenced by them. In 1952-53 Rauschenberg traveled with Cy
Twombly to Rome, and later to Morocco. Branden Joseph noted that in a work Rauschenberg
executed in 1954, he used black crayon to make marks similar to those Twombly had developed.
The following year, in Rebus he included a drawing by Twombly.97 Rauschenberg returned to the
US in 1953, where his paintings inspired his friend John Cage to compose 4'
33", discussed
above. In 1954 Rauschenberg met Jasper Johns, and the two spent most of the next seven years
living and working together. This period spanned the most important portion of both of their
careers, when they were making the key works that would revolutionize contemporary art.
Rauschenberg recalled that “He and I were each other’s first serious critics... Jasper and I literally
traded ideas. He would say, ‘I’ve got a terrific idea for you,’ and then I’d have to find one for
him.”98Johns later told an interviewer, “I was close to Bob’s working situation during those

31
years and certainly offered my opinion about anything I happened to see.” He freely
acknowledged Rauschenberg’s impact on him: “I suppose I learned more about painting from
Bob than I learned from any other artist or teacher, and working as closely as we did and more or
less in isolation, we developed a strong feeling of kinship.”99 And in a comment that stands for
the experiences of many advanced artists in these early alliances, Rauschenberg told a friend that
at a time when he and Johns were creating radically innovative art with little encouragement
from the art world at large, the two gave each other “permission to do what we wanted.”100
Conclusion
Getting seventeen million dollars for a single painting - this is
power.
Jeff Koons on the auction price of
Jasper Johns’ False Start101
I think people always buy good art, and I think I’ve always been
aware of that.
Damien Hirst, 1992102
Art scholars and critics often claim that markets for art are irrational, and that the value an
artist’s work brings at auction is unrelated to the real importance of that artist’s work. These
claims are wrong. Recent research has shown, for example, that auction outcomes sensitively
reflect the relative quality of artists’ work over the course of their careers.103 The present study
has shown that auction outcomes can systematically identify today’s greatest living artists. The
most valuable art is made by the greatest artists, and Jasper Johns, Bruce Nauman, Lucian Freud,
Robert Rauschenberg, Cy Twombly, Jeff Koons, and Gerhard Richter must figure prominently in
any account of those who have made the most important contributions to modern art in the past
half century.

32
This study has also underscored that fact that the most important art of the past fifty years
has overwhelmingly been conceptual. Unlike the visual art of Pollock, de Kooning, and the other
Abstract Expressionists, the art of Johns, Rauschenberg, and their successors has been based on
ideas. What this has meant in turn is that their most important work has generally been done early
in these artists’ careers: Pollock and his contemporaries were seekers whose greatest
contributions were made late in their lives, but the greatest artists alive today, who have
dominated advanced art since the late 1950s, have been finders who have confidently and
consciously made radical innovations at early ages.

33
Notes
I thank Robert Jensen for discussions, Chingyi Hwang for research assistance, and the National
Science Foundation for financial support.
1.

Peter Watson, From Manet to Manhattan: The Rise of the Modern Art Market (New
York: Random House, 1992), p. xxvi.

2.

Sandra Salmans, “The Fine Art of Yale,” New York Times, April 24, 2005.

3.

Robert Hughes, Nothing If Not Critical (New York: Penguin, 1990), p. 237.

4.

Meyer Schapiro, Modern Art: 19th and 20th Centuries (New York: George Braziller,
1982), p. 224.

5.

Robert Jensen, Marketing Modernism in Fin-de-Siècle Europe (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1994), p. 18.

6.

Virginia Woolf, Roger Fry (San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1968), p. 159.

7.

Peter Schjeldahl, The “7 Days” Art Columns, 1988-1990 (Great Barrington, MA: The
Figures, 1990), p. 93.

8.

Alan Bowness, The Conditions of Success: How the Modern Artist Rises to Fame (New
York: Thames and Hudson, 1989), p. 11.

9.

Greg Allen, “The X Factor: Is the Art Market Rational or Biased?” New York Times, May
1, 2005.

10.

Anthony Haden-Guest, True Colors: The Real Life of the Art World (New York: Atlantic
Monthly Press, 1996), p. 151.

11.

Peter Wollen, Paris Hollywood (London: Verso, 2002), p. 217.

12.

Auction prices were obtained from Le Guide Mayer (Lausanne: Sylvio Acatos, annual)
and from Artnet.com.

13.

All prices are nominal. Adjustments for changes in the price level would have little effect
on the rankings.

14.

Walter Sickert, The Complete Writings on Art (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000),
p. 253.

15.

Arthur Danto, The Madonna of the Future: Essays in a Pluralistic Art World , (Berkeley:
University of California Press), p. 236.

34
16.

Sam Hunter, John Jacobus, and Daniel Wheeler, Modern Art, 3e (Upper Saddle River,
NJ: Prentice Hall, 2004), p. 301.

17.

Leo Steinberg, Other Criteria: Confrontations with Twentieth-Century Art (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1972), p. 85; Danto, The Madonna of the Future, p. 273.

18.

Arthur Danto, Unnatural Wonders : Essays from the Gap Between Art and Life (New
York: Farrar, Straus, Giroux, 2005), pp. 184-85.

19.

Irving Sandler, Art of the Postmodern Era: From the Late 1960s to the Early 1990s (New
York: Harper Collins, 1996), p. 450.

20.

Schjeldahl, The “7 Days” Art Columns, p. 81.

21.

Richard Cork, Breaking Down the Barriers: Art in the 1990s (New Haven: Yale
University Press, 2003), p. 428.

22.

Schjeldahl, The “7 Days” Art Columns, p. 81.

23.

Danto, Unnatural Wonders, p. 286.

24.

Bowness, The Conditions of Success, p. 11.

25.

Edward Lucie-Smith, Movements in Art Since 1945, new edition (London: Thames and
Hudson, 2001), pp. 176-77; Nicola del Roscio, Writings on Cy Twombly (Munich:
Schirmer/Mosel, 2002), pp. 251-52; Jonathan Fineberg, Art Since 1940, second ed. (New
York: Harry N. Abrams, 2000), pp. 297-300. On Andrew Wyeth as a museum artist, see
Helen Franc, An Invitation to See: 150 Works from the Museum of Modern Art (New
York: Museum of Modern Art, 1992), p. 115.

26.

Bowness, The Conditions of Success, p. 11. For research supporting the existence of a
positive relationship between prices and artistic importance, see Bruno Frey and Werner
Pommerehne, Muses and Markets (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1989), p. 93; Olav Velthuis,
Talking Prices (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2005), p. 113.

27.

Harold Rosenberg, Art on the Edge (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1983), p. 80.

28.

The books used were all those that could be found that were published since 2000 and
included surveys of the history of art of the last 50 years.

29.

Danto, Unnatural Wonders, p. 99.

30.

For a more detailed discussion of conceptual and experimental innovation, see David W.
Galenson, Painting outside the Lines: Patterns of Creativity in Modern Art (Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 2001), Chapter 5.

35
31.

Danto, Unnatural Wonders, p. 98.

32.

Danto, The Madonna of the Future, p. 236.

33.

David Sylvester, Interviews with American Artists (New Haven: Yale University Press,
2001), p. 224.

34.

The quoted passage is from Adachiara Zevi, Sol LeWitt: Critical Texts (Rome: Inonia,
1994), p. 78.

35.

Peter Schjeldahl, “String Theory: Jasper Johns’s New Work” New Yorker (May 30,
2005), p. 96.

36.

Sylvester, About Modern Art, p. 222.

37.

Steinberg, Other Criteria, p. 37.

38.

William Rubin, Frank Stella (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1970), p. 12. For a
critical evaluation of Stella’s career, see David W. Galenson, “Was Jackson Pollock the
Greatest Modern American Painter? A Quantitative Investigation,” Historical Methods,
Vol. 35, No. 3 (Summer 2002), pp. 117-28.

39.

Robert Morgan, ed., Bruce Nauman (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2002),
p. 191.

40.

Morgan, Bruce Nauman, pp. 96-98; Amy Dempsey, Art in the Modern Era (New York:
Harry Abrams, 2002), p. 244; Charlotte Mullins, Rachel Whiteread (London: Tate
Publishing, 2004), pp. 72-73; Mandy Merck and Chris Townsend, eds., The Art of Tracey
Emin (London: Thames and Hudson, 2002), p. 76; Matthew Collings, Sarah Lucas
(London: Tate Publishing, 2002), pp. 446.

41.

Morgan, Bruce Nauman, p. 22.

42.

Morgan, Bruce Nauman, p. 109.

43.

Morgan, Bruce Nauman, p. 101.

44.

Andrea Rose, Lucian Freud Paintings (London: British Council, 1987), pp. 13, 17-18.

45.

Rose, Lucian Freud Paintings, p. 22.

46.

Fineberg, Art Since 1940, p. 162.

47.

Rose, Lucian Freud Paintings, p. 27.

48.

Rose, Lucian Freud Paintings, p. 19.

36
49.

Steinberg, Other Critera, p. 90.

50.

Danto, Madonna of the Future, pp. 276-77.

51.

Calvin Tomkins, Off the Wall: Robert Rauschenberg and the Art World of Our Time
(Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1980), p. 71; Kyle Gann, American Music in the Twentieth
Century (New York: Schirmer Books, 1997), p. 127.

52.

Richard Cork, New Spirit, New Sculpture, New Money: Art in the 1980s (New Haven:
Yale University Press, 2003), p. 253.

53.

E.g. see Del Roscio, Writings on Cy Twombly.

54.

Thomas Crow, The Rise of the Sixties (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1996), pp. 9899; Gerhard Richter, The Daily Practice of Painting: Writings and Interviews, 1962-1993
(Cambridge: MIT Press, 1995), p. 136.

55.

E.g. Danto, Unnatural Wonders, p. 287.

56.

Sylvester, Interviews with American Artists, pp. 331-57.

57.

Sylvester, Interviews with American Artists, p. 347.

58.

Sylvester, Interviews with American Artists, p. 349.

59.

Danto, Unnatural Wonders, pp. 298-99.

60.

E.g. see Jeff Koons, The Jeff Koons Handbook (New York: Rizzoli, 1992), p. 28.

61.

Louisa Buck, Moving Targets 2: A User’s Guide to British Art Now (London: Tate
Publishing, 2000), p. 28; Damien Hirst and Gordon Burn, On the Way to Work (New
York: Universe, 2002), p. 60.

62.

Matthew Collings, Sarah Lucas (London: Tate Publishing, 2002), pp. 96, 118-20.

63.

Richter, The Daily Practice of Painting, pp. 30, 35.

64.

Crow, The Rise of the Sixties, pp. 97-98; Robert Storr, Gerhard Richter: Forty Years of
Painting (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 2002).

65.

Meyer Schapiro, The Unity of Picasso’s Art (New York: George Braziller, 2000), p. 1.

66.

Danto, Unnatural Wonders, p. 182.

67.

Marilyn McCully, ed., A Picasso Anthology (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1981)pp. 146-48.

37
68.

Alfred Barr Picasso: Fifty Years of His Art (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1946),
pp. 270-71.

69.

Michael Kimmelman, Portraits (New York: Modern Library, 1999), p. 233; David
Thistlewood, ed., Sigmar Polke (Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 1996), p. 109;
David Barboza, “A Chinese Painter’s New Struggle: To Meet Demand,” New York Times
(August 31, 2005), p. B7.

70.

Rosie Millard, The Tastemakers: U.K. Art Now (London: Scriber, 2002), p. 43; Matthew
Collings, It Hurts: New York Art from Warhol to Now (London: 21 Publishing, 1998), p.
33.

71.

Henry Meyric Hughes, From Blast to Freeze: British Art in the 20th Century (Wolfsburg:
Hatje Cantz, 2002), p. 293.

72.

Hirst and Burn, On the Way to Work, p. 13.

73.

Virginia Button, The Turner Prize: Twenty Years (London: Tate, 2003), p. 114.

74.

Button, The Turner Prize, p. 116; Steven Madoff, ed., Pop Art (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1997), p. 104; Hirst and Burn, On the Way to Work, p. 82.

75.

Hirst and Burn, On the Way to Work, p. 95.

76.

Buck, Moving Targets 2, p. 28; Jerry Saltz, Seeing Out Loud (Great Barrington, MA: The
Figures, 2003), p. 324.

77.

Julian Stallabrass, High Art Lite: British Art in the 1990s (London: Verso, 1999), p. 8;
Richard Cork, Breaking Down the Barriers: Art in the 1990s (New Haven: Yale
University Press, 2003), p. 128.

78.

Hughes, Blast to Freeze, p. 294; Saltz, Seeing Out Loud, p. 220.

79.

Deborah Wye, Louise Bourgeois (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1982), p. 33.

80.

Katy Siegel and Paul Mattick, Art Works: Money (New York: Thames and Huson, 2004),
p. 88.

81.

For discussion see David W. Galenson, “The New York School versus the School of
Paris: Who Really Made the Most Important Art After World War II?” Historical
Methods, Vol. 35, No. 4 (Fall 2002), pp. 141-54.

82.

Serge Guilbaut, How New York Stole the Idea of Modern Art (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1983).

83.

Collings, It Hurts, p. 36.

38
84.

Hirst and Burn, On the Way to Work, p. 41.

85.

Hirst and Burn, On the Way to Work, pp. 40, 55.

86.

Robert Storr, Chuck Close (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1998), p. 86.

87.

Richter, The Daily Practice of Painting, p. 137, 166.

88.

Thistlewood, Sigmar Polke, p. 34.

89.

Thistlewood, Sigmar Polke, pp. 1-18.

90.

David W. Galenson, “Anticipating Artistic Success: Lessons from History,” World
Economics, Vol. 6, No. 2 (April-June 2005), pp. 11-26.

91.

Storr, Chuck Close, p. 30.

92.

Ed Ruscha, Leave Any Information at the Signal: Writings, Interviews, Bits, Pages
(Cambridge: MIT Press, 2002), p. 11.

93.

Buck, Moving Targets 2, p. 143.

94.

Michael Raeburn, ed., Vision: 50 Years of British Creativity (London: Thames and
Hudson, 1999), p. 145.

95.

Bowness, The Conditions of Success, p. 51.

96.

Richter, The Daily Practice of Painting, pp. 15-16, 24, 256.

97.

Branden Joseph, Random Order: Robert Rauschenberg and the Neo-Avant-Garde
(Cambridge: MIT Press, 2003), p. 112. Rebus was recently acquired by the Museum of
Modern Art, which placed it on display next to a large work by Twombly.

98.

Tomkins, Off the Wall, p. 118.

99.

Johns, Writings, Sketchbook Notes, Interviews, pp. 235, 280-81.

100.

Tomkins, Off the Wall, p. 118.

101.

Matthew Collings, “Jeff Koons,” in Writers on Artists (New York: DK Publishing, 2001),
p. 47.

102.

Hirst and Burn, On the Way to Work, p. 30.

103.

Galenson, Painting outside the Lines; Galenson, Old Masters and Young Geniuses: The
Two Life Cycles of Artistic Creativity (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2006).

Table 1: Alphabetical List of Living Artists Who Have Made At Least One Work that Has Sold
at Auction for $1 Million
Date of birth

Place of birth

Current age

Barceló, Miquel

1957

Spain

48

Baselitz, Georg

1938

Germany

67

Botero, Fernando

1932

Columbia

73

Bourgeois, Louise

1911

France

94

Bravo, Claudio

1936

Chile

69

Cattelan, Maurizio

1960

Italy

45

Close, Chuck

1940

US

65

Dumas, Marlene

1953

South Africa

52

Freud, Lucian

1922

Germany

83

Hirst, Damien

1966

England

39

Hockney, David

1937

England

68

Johns, Jasper

1930

US

75

Koons, Jeff

1955

US

50

Kelly, Ellsworth

1923

US

82

Kiefer, Anselm

1945

Germany

60

Kusama, Yayoi

1929

Japan

76

Le Brocquy, Louis

1916

Ireland

89

Marden, Brice

1938

US

67

Nauman, Bruce

1941

US

64

Noland, Kenneth

1924

US

81

Ofili, Chris

1968

England

37

Oldenburg, Claes

1929

Sweden

76

Polke, Sigmar

1941

Germany

64

Prince, Richard

1949

Panama

56

Rauschenberg, Robert

1925

US

80

Table 1, continued
Date of birth

Place of birth

Current age

Ray, Charles

1953

US

52

Richter, Gerhard

1932

Germany

73

Rosenquist, James

1933

US

72

Ruscha, Ed

1937

US

68

Ryman, Robert

1930

US

75

Serra, Richard

1939

US

67

Stella, Frank

1936

US

69

Tansey, Mark

1949

US

56

Thiebaud, Wayne

1920

US

85

Tuttle, Richard

1941

US

64

Tuymans, Luc

1958

Belgium

47

Twombly, Cy

1927

US

78

Wyeth, Andrew

1917

US

88

Zao Wou-Ki

1921

China

84

Source: Except where noted, this and subsequent tables are based on auction data obtained from
Le Guide Mayer (Lausanne: Sylvio Acatos, annual) and Artnet.com.

Table 2: Ranking of Artists by Their Single Highest-Priced Work
Artist, title, date

Price
(millions)

Sale date

$17.05

1988

1

Johns, False Start, 1959

2

Nauman, Henry Moore Bound to Fail (Back View),
1967

9.91

2001

3

Freud, Red Haired Man on a Chair, 1963

7.70

2005

4

Rauschenberg, Rebus, 1955

7.26

1991

5

Twombly, Untitled, 1970

5.62

2002

6

Koons, Michael Jackson and Bubbles, 1988

5.62

2001

7

Richter, Drei Kerzen, 1982

5.40

2001

8

Stella, Tomlinson Court Park, 1959

5.06

1989

9

Close, John, 1972

4.83

2005

10

Wyeth, Battle Ensign, 1987

3.82

2005

11

Ruscha, Damage, 1964

3.59

2004

12

Dumas, The Teacher (Sub a), 1987

3.34

2005

13

Hockney, Seated Woman Being Served Tea by Standing
Companion, 1963

3.28

2005

14

Thiebaud, Freeways, 1979

3.09

2002

15

Cattelan, La Nona Ora, 1999

3.03

2004

16

Kelly, Chatham XIII, 1971

2.92

2004

17

Marden, 10 (Dialog 2), 1988

2.47

2003

18

Zao, Juin-Octobre 1985, 1985

2.32

2005

19

Ryman, Summit, 1978

2.31

1989

20

Hirst, The Fragile Truth, 1998

2.23

2004

21

Ray, Male Mannequin, 1990

2.21

2000

22

Noland, Empyrean, 1960

2.04

1989

23

Le Brocquy, Traveling Woman with Newspaper, 1948

1.73

2000

24

Polke, Bavarian, 1965

1.70

2005

Table 2, continued
Artist, title, date

Price
(millions)

Sale date

25

Baselitz, Partisan, 1965

1.65

2005

26

Botero, La Casa de las Gemelas Arias, 1973

1.54

1992

27

Tuymans, Sculpture, 2000

1.47

2005

28

Oldenburg, Sewing Machine, 1961

1.46

2004

29t

Bourgeois, Blind Man’s Buff, 1984

1.44

2002

29t

Bravo, Paquete Marfil, 1967

1.44

2002

31

Barceló, Autour du Lac Noir, 1990

1.44

2002

32

Rosenquist, Be Beautiful, 1964

1.25

2005

33

Tansey, The Key, 1984

1.24

2004

34

Serra, Untitled, 1984

1.22

2001

35

Kusama, No. B, 3, 1962

1.19

2005

36

Kiefer, Athanov, 1991

1.16

2001

37

Tuttle, Letters, 1966

1.05

2002

38

Prince, A Nurse Involved, 2002

1.02

2005

39

Ofili, Afrodizzia, 1996

1.00

2005

Table 3: Ranking of Artists by Total Number of Works Sold at Auction for $1 Million or More
Artist

N

Artist

N

1

Richter

53

18t

Polke

3

2

Johns

39

18t

Ryman

3

3

Twombly

28

18t

Thiebaud

3

4

Koons

20

24t

Botero

2

5

Freud

16

24t

Bourgeois

2

6

Rauschenberg

14

26t

Kiefer

1

7

Marden

9

26t

Kusama

1

8

Ruscha

8

26t

Le Brocquy

1

9

Hockney

7

26t

Noland

1

10t

Kelly

6

26t

Ofili

1

10t

Wyeth

6

26t

Oldenburg

1

12t

Cattelan

5

26t

Prince

1

12t

Close

5

26t

Ray

1

12t

Stella

5

26t

Rosenquist

1

15t

Barceló

4

26t

Serra

1

15t

Hirst

4

26t

Tansey

1

15t

Nauman

4

26t

Tuttle

1

18t

Baselitz

3

26t

Tuymans

1

18t

Bravo

3

26t

Zao

1

18t

Dumas

3

Table 4: Ages of Artists When They Executed Works Listed in Table 2
Artist

Age

Artist

Age

1

Johns

29

21

Ray

37

2

Nauman

26

22

Noland

36

3

Freud

41

23

Le Brocquy

32

4

Rauschenberg

30

24

Polke

24

5

Twombly

43

25

Baselitz

27

6

Koons

33

26

Botero

41

7

Richter

50

27

Tuymans

42

8

Stella

23

28

Oldenburg

32

9

Close

32

29t

Bourgeois

73

10

Wyeth

70

29t

Bravo

31

11

Ruscha

27

31

Barceló

33

12

Dumas

34

32

Rosenquist

31

13

Hockney

26

33

Tansey

35

14

Thiebaud

59

34

Serra

45

15

Cattelan

39

35

Kusama

33

16

Kelly

48

36

Kiefer

46

17

Marden

50

37

Tuttle

25

18

Zao

64

38

Prince

53

19

Ryman

48

39

Ofili

28

20

Hirst

32

Table 5: Ages of Six Artists When They Executed Their Most
Valuable Work and in the Year in Which their Work is Most Often
Illustrated in Textbooks
Artist

Age:

Most valuable
work

Most
textbook
illustrations

Johns

29

25

Nauman

26

30

Rauschenberg

30

30

Koons

33

33

Stella

23

23

Close

32

39

Source: Age at most valuable work: Table 4.
Age at most illustrations: Cory Bell, Modern Art (New
York: Watson-Guptill, 2000); Jonathan Fineberg, Art Since
1940, second ed. (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 2000);
David Hopkins, After Modern Art, 1945-2000 (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2000); Martin Kemp, ed., The
Oxford History of Western Art (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2000); Bernard Blistène, A History of 20th-Century
Art (Paris: Flammarion, 2001); Edward Lucie-Smith,
Movements in Art Since 1945, new ed. (London: Thames
and Hudson, 2001); Klaus Richter, Art (Munich: Prestel,
2001); Michael Archer, Art Since 1960, new ed. (London:
Thames and Hudson, 2002); Amy Dempsey, Art in the
Modern Era (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 2002); Hugh
Honour and John Fleming, The Visual Arts: A History,
sixth ed. (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 2002); H. H.
Arnason, A History of Modern Art, fifth ed. (Upper Saddle
River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2004); Sam Hunter, John Jacobus,
and Daniel Wheeler, Modern Art, third ed. (New York:
Vendome Press, 2004); Pascale Le Thorel-Daviot, Nouveau
Dictionnaire des Artistic Contemporains (Paris: Larousse,
2004).

Table 6: Percentage Distributions of Ages of Artists When They
Executed Works That Later Sold at Auction for at Least $1 Million
Artist

2
09

3
09

4
09

5
09

6
09

7
09

8
09

Total

Johns

28

38

18

13

3

0

-

100

Nauman

25

0

75

0

0

-

-

100

Freud

6

13

19

25

26

6

6

100

Rauschenberg

7

93

0

0

0

0

-

100

Twombly

4

37

59

0

0

0

-

100

Koons

5

75

20

-

-

-

-

100

Richter

0

42

8

42

8

0

-

100

Hirst

25

75

-

-

-

-

-

100

Table 7: Ranking of Individual Works by 39 Artists that Are Most
Often Illustrated in Textbooks Surveyed for this Study
Artist, title, date

n

1t

Rauschenberg, Bed, 1955

8

30

1t

Serra, Tilted Arc, 1981

8

42

3

Johns, Target with Plaster
Casts,1955

6

25

4t

Nauman, Self Portrait as Fountain,
1967

5

26

4t

Rauschenberg, Monogram, 1959

5

34

Source: see Table 5 for textbooks surveyed.

Artist’s age
when work
executed

