                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                ASSESSING HIGH HOUSE PRICES:
                                  BUBBLES, FUNDAMENTALS
                                    AND MISPERCEPTIONS

                                          Charles Himmelberg
                                           Christopher Mayer
                                              Todd Sinai

                                          Working Paper 11643
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11643


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2005




Himmelberg: Senior Economist, Research and Statistics Group, Federal Reserve Bank of New York (email:
charles.himmelberg@ny.frb.org). Mayer: Paul Milstein Professor of Real Estate and Director of the Paul
Milstein Center for Real Estate, Columbia Business School, Columbia University (email:
cm310@columbia.edu).          Sinai:    Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania (email:
sinai@wharton.upenn.edu). A shorter version of this paper is forthcoming in the Fall, 2005 Journal of
Economic Perspectives. The authors would like to especially thank Steven Kleiman and Reed Walker for
extraordinary research support and Joseph Gyourko, James Hines, Steven Kleiman, Jonathan McCarthy,
Richard Peach, Allen Sinai, Timothy Taylor, Michael Waldman, Neng Wang, and seminar participants at
Columbia Business School for many helpful comments. The Paul Milstein Center for Real Estate at
Columbia and the Zell/Lurie Real Estate Center at Wharton provided funding. The views expressed in the
paper are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the position of the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York or the Federal Reserve System. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Charles Himmelberg, Christopher Mayer and Todd Sinai. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Assessing High House Prices: Bubbles, Fundamentals, and Misperceptions
Charles Himmelberg, Christopher Mayer and Todd Sinai
NBER Working Paper No. 11643
September 2005
JEL No. R21, R31, G10

                                            ABSTRACT




We construct measures of the annual cost of single-family housing for 46 metropolitan areas in the
United States over the last 25 years and compare them with local rents and incomes as a way of
judging the level of housing prices. Conventional metrics like the growth rate of house prices, the
price-to-rent ratio, and the price-to-income ratio can be misleading because they fail to account both
for the time series pattern of real long-term interest rates and predictable differences in the long-run
growth rates of house prices across local markets. These factors are especially important in recent
years because house prices are theoretically more sensitive to interest rates when rates are already
low, and more sensitive still in those cities where the long-run rate of house price growth is high.
During the 1980s, our measures show that houses looked most overvalued in many of the same cities
that subsequently experienced the largest house price declines. We find that from the trough of 1995
to 2004, the cost of owning rose somewhat relative to the cost of renting, but not, in most cities, to
levels that made houses look overvalued.


Charles Himmelberg                                     Todd M. Sinai
Federal Reserve Bank of New York                       University of Pennsylvania, Wharton School
 33 Liberty Street                                     1465 Steinberg Hall - Dietrich Hall
 New York, NY 10045                                    3620 Locust Walk
charles.himmelberg@ny.frb.org                          Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
                                                       and NBER
Christopher J. Mayer                                   sinai@wharton.upenn.edu
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall #808
New York, NY 10025
and NBER
cm310@columbia.edu
Introduction

House-price watching has become a national pastime. By 2004, 68 percent of households
owned their own homes and, for most of them, housing equity will make up nearly all of
their non-pension assets at retirement (Venti and Wise, 1991). Many of the 32 percent
who rent are younger households, owners-in-waiting who watch housing markets with
great interest (or concern). The preoccupation with housing markets has been
particularly strong of late because recent house price growth has been rampant, especially
in certain cities. Between 1975 and 1995, real single-family house prices in the United
States increased an average of 0.5 percent per year, or 10 percent over the course of two
decades. By contrast, from 1995 to 2004, national real house prices grew 3.6 percent per
year, a more than seven-fold increase in the annual rate of real appreciation, and totaling
nearly 40 percent in one decade. In some individual cities, such as San Francisco and
Boston, real home prices grew about 75 percent from 1995 to 2004, almost double the
national average.

How does one tell when rapid growth in house prices is caused by fundamental factors of
supply and demand, and when it is an unsustainable bubble? Stiglitz (1990) provided a
general definition of asset bubbles: “[I]f the reason that the price is high today is only
because investors believe that the selling price is high tomorrow -- when ‘fundamental’
factors do not seem to justify such a price -- then a bubble exists. At least in the short
run, the high price of the asset is merited, because it yields a return (capital gain plus
dividend) equal to that on alternative assets.” The “dividend” portion of the return from
owning a house comes from the rent the owner saves by living in the house rent-free, and
the capital gain from house price appreciation over time. We think of a housing bubble
as being driven by home buyers who are willing to pay inflated prices for houses today
because they expect unrealistically high housing appreciation in the future.1

In this paper, we explain how to assess the state of house prices – both whether there is a
bubble, and what underlying factors support housing demand – in a way that is grounded
in economic theory. In doing so, we correct four common fallacies about the costliness
of the housing market. First, the price of a house is not the same as the annual cost of
owning, so it does not necessarily follow from rising prices of houses that ownership is
becoming more expensive. Second, high price growth is not evidence per se that housing
is overvalued. In some local housing markets, house price growth can exceed the
national average rate of appreciation for very long periods of time. Third, differences in
expected appreciation rates and taxes can lead to considerable variability in the price-to-
rent ratio across markets. Finally, the sensitivity of house prices to changes in
fundamentals is higher at times when real, long-term interest rates are already low and in
cities where expected price growth is high, so accelerating house price growth and
outsized price increases in certain markets are not intrinsically signs of a bubble.

For all of the above reasons, conventional metrics for assessing pricing in the housing
market such as price-to-rent ratios or price-to-income ratios generally fail to reflect

1
    Case and Shiller (2004) also use this definition.


                                                        1
accurately the state of housing costs. To the eyes of analysts employing such measures,
housing markets can appear “exuberant,” even when houses are in fact reasonably priced.

We construct a measure for evaluating the cost of home owning that is standard for
economists – the imputed annual rental cost of owning a home, a variant of the user cost
of housing – and apply it to 25 years of history across a wide variety of housing markets.
This calculation enables us to estimate the time pattern of housing costs within a market.
Given the relatively short time series, it is hard to say just how costly a market must
become before it is unsustainably expensive. However, we can determine how expensive
a market is currently relative to its own history.

As of the end of 2004, our analysis reveals little evidence of a housing bubble. In high-
appreciation markets like San Francisco, Boston, and New York, current housing prices
are not cheap, but our calculations do not reveal large price increases in excess of
fundamentals. For such cities, expectations of outsized capital gains appear to play, at
best, a very small role in single-family house prices. Rather, recent price growth is
supported by basic economic factors such as low real, long-term interest rates, high
income growth, and housing price levels that had fallen to unusually low levels during
the mid-1990s. The growth in price-to-rent ratios – especially in cities where this ratio
was already high – can be explained by the fact that house prices are more sensitive to
real, long-term interest rates when interest rates are already low, and even more sensitive
in cities where house price growth is typically high. During the late 1980s, our metrics
indicate that house prices in many cities were, in fact, overvalued (e.g., Boston, Los
Angeles, New York, and San Francisco), and prices in these cities subsequently fell.
Thus, we do not find that housing prices are always close to equilibrium levels. Still, in
2004, prices looked reasonable. Only a few cities, such as Miami, Fort Lauderdale,
Portland (Oregon), and to a degree, San Diego, had valuation ratios approaching those of
the 1980s.

Of course, just because the data do not indicate bubbles in most cities in 2004 does not
mean that prices cannot fall. Deterioration in underlying economic fundamentals, such as
an unexpected future rise in real, long-term interest rates or a decline in economic
growth, could easily cause a fall in house prices. Indeed, because real, long-term interest
rates are currently so low, our calculations suggest that housing costs are more sensitive
to changes in real, long-term interest rates now than any other time in the last 25 years.
Finally, our data do not cover and hence do not allow us to comment on the
condominium market, which due to its lower transaction costs and higher liquidity may
be more vulnerable to overvaluation and overbuilding arising from investor speculation.



How Not to Judge the Sustainability of Housing Prices

To assess whether house prices are unsustainably high, casual observers often begin by
looking at house price growth. Figure 1 shows that between 1980 and 2004, real house
prices at the national level grew 39 percent, or 1.4 percent annually. To compute these
numbers, we use data from the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight


                                             2
(OFHEO), which produces the most widely quoted single-family house price index. The
OFHEO price index is based on multiple observations of the price of a given house, so
unlike a conventional price index, it controls to some extent for the changing quality in
the mix of houses sold at any given time, although changes in quality due to home
renovations will not be normalized using this index. This housing price data is available
for over 100 metropolitan areas since 1980. An index cannot be used to compare price
levels across cities, but it can be used to calculate growth rates and to compare prices
over time. The major drawbacks of this data are that it is subject to biases due to changes
in the quality of existing houses, and it covers only those houses with so-called
“conventional” mortgages that have been purchased by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.
Since the current maximum lending limit for such mortgages in 2005 is $359,650 for
states in the continental United States, high-priced houses are underrepresented in the
OFHEO index.2

Over the last quarter century, run-ups in house prices are common, but so are subsequent
declines. The national average real house price fell by 7.2 percent from 1980 to 1982;
rose by 16.2 percent from 1982 to 1989; fell by 8 percent from 1989 to 1995; and then
rose by 40 percent from 1995 to 2004. About one-third of the increase in real housing
prices since 1995 reflects the return of house prices to their previous real peak of 1989.
Housing prices in 2004 have since risen to levels 29 percent over the previous 1989 peak.
Of course, these summary descriptions and graphs of prices do not reveal whether
fundamental factors or a price bubble are at work in the first half of the 2000s; we shall
return to this question.

The national average masks considerable differences across metropolitan statistical areas.
Table 1 presents index values that are standardized so that a value of 1.0 corresponds to
the average, price level in a metropolitan statistical area over the 1980 to 2004 time
period. We include all 46 metropolitan areas with available data on house price changes,
rents, and per-capita income for the comparisons that follow. Over that time period,
metro area house prices have followed one of three patterns. In about one-half of the
cities, including Boston, New York, and San Francisco, house prices peaked in the late
1980s, fell to a trough in the 1990s, and rebounded by 2004. Prices in 18 more
metropolitan areas, including Miami and Denver, have a “U” shaped history: high in the
early 1980s and high again by the end of the sample. A few cities, such as Houston and
New Orleans, follow a third pattern; real house prices have declined since 1980 and have
not fully recovered. The first three columns of Table 1 report the value of the house price
index at three points in time: the most recent house price peak, the subsequent trough,
and as of 2004.

Of the cities in the first category, a few have exhibited extraordinary appreciation since
their mid-1990s trough. For example, by 2004 single-family house prices in Boston and
seven California cities had risen more than 85 percent (adjusted for inflation), with San
2
  This is a potentially important caveat because markets for high-priced houses may behave differently.
Mayer (1993), for example, shows that the prices of high-priced houses are more volatile than the values of
lower-priced properties. The National Association of Realtors (NAR) produces an index that is not subject
to the cap, but which does not control for changes in the mix of houses that sell over time. Our conclusions
are unchanged if we use the NAR index for our analysis instead of the OFHEO index.


                                                     3
Diego prices going up almost 120 percent to a level 83 percent above their 25-year
average. Much of this increase had merely offset prior house price declines, which were
as much as 34 percent in Los Angeles and 25 percent or more in seven other cities (from
peak to trough). But even relative to their prior peak house prices, most of these cities
(excluding the two in Texas) have appreciated considerably. House prices in San Diego,
Boston and New York, for example, were up 83, 38 and 22 percent above their respective
prior peaks.3

Real house prices in the middle group -- for example, Austin, Cincinnati, Cleveland,
Memphis, Kansas City, Pittsburgh, and St. Louis -- all exceeded their 25-year average by
2004, with Miami and Fort Lauderdale more than 50 percent above average. Real
housing values in a few markets had even declined, as in Dallas, Fort Worth, Houston,
New Orleans, San Antonio, with real annual house prices in Houston falling 1.2 percent a
year, on average. (Figure 1 in the appendix plots house price indexes for all of the 46
MSAs in our data.)
A second commonly-cited measure used to assess housing valuations is the house price-
to-rent ratio, which is akin to a price-to-earnings multiple for stocks. This metric is
intended to reflect the relative cost of owning versus renting. Intuitively, when house
prices are too high relative to rents, potential home buyers will choose instead to rent,
thus reducing the demand for houses and bringing house prices back into line with rents.
A common argument is that when price-to-rent ratios remain high for a prolonged period,
it must be that prices are being sustained by unrealistic expectations of future price gains
rather than the fundamental rental value, and hence contain a “bubble.”

We obtained data on metro area rents between 1980 and 2004 from REIS, a real estate
consulting firm. REIS provides annual average rents for a “representative” two-bedroom
apartment in each metro area listed in Table 1. As with the OFHEO house price indexes,
the rent data attempt to hold the quality of the rental unit constant over time. Again, we
cannot compare rent levels across markets because our rent indices are not standardized
to the same representative apartment across markets.. We can, however, construct a
metro area index of real house prices relative to real rents and compare movements in this
index over time. As before, we standardize the price-to-rent index so that a value of 1.0
corresponds to the average value between 1980 and 2004.

Figure 1 shows that, initially, the price-to-rent ratio closely tracked the overall house
price movement. After 1989, the price-to-rent ratio slowly declined, reaching a trough in
2000. In the succeeding four years, the price-to-rent ratio grew 27 percent, leaving the
ratio 15 percent above its previous peak (in 1989). By way of comparison, the prior
trough-to-peak swing, from 1985 to 1989, was less than one-half the growth in the price-
to-rent ratio from 2000-2004. The 1989 peak occurred right before a housing price
decline, lending weight to the view that the price-to-rent ratio is an indicator of
overheating in the housing market.



3
 House prices in these cities appear more volatile in booms and busts, a point emphasized by Case and
Shiller (2004). We discuss this point in more detail, below.


                                                    4
At the metropolitan statistical area level, many of the markets with a high growth rate of
price-to-rent since their prior trough are the same markets that saw large price
appreciation (for example, cities in California and the northeast).4 San Jose and Detroit
experienced a doubling of their price-to-rent ratios since their prior troughs, and Portland,
Oregon, experienced 95 percent growth.

More striking is the fact that the price-to-rent ratio in 2004 exceeds the 25-year average
everywhere except for four cities in Texas, and surpasses the prior peak in 80 percent of
the cities. Column 6 (Table 1) shows the ratio of price-to-rent in 2004 relative to its
average value from 1980-2004. In three of those cities, the price-to-rent ratio in 2004
exceeded its average value by more than 50 percent. San Francisco is only 14 percent
above its prior peak, and New York is 12 percent below.

A third measure that is commonly used to assess whether housing prices are “too high” is
the price-to-income ratio. Unlike the price-to-rent ratio, which measures the relative cost
of owning and renting, the price-to-income ratio provides a measure of local housing
costs relative to the local ability to pay.

Figure 1 shows the price-to-income ratio computed as the OFHEO price index divided by
an index of median per-capita income based on data from the U.S. Bureau of Economic
Analysis. At the national level, this ratio declined in the early 1980s, partially recovered
to peak in 1987, and then declined again over the next decade, bottoming out 23 percent
below its 1980 level. After 1998, the price-to-income ratio began to rise again, and by
2003 had exceeded its 1988 peak. Despite growing 21 percent over the last six years, it
has not yet returned to its 1980 level. The decline in this ratio during most of the 1990s
reveals that the growth in real house prices nationally was outpaced by the high growth in
incomes (McCarthy and Peach, 2004).

At the metro area level, as shown in the last three columns in Table 1, price-to-income
ratios have generally increased the most in cities where house price growth has been
highest. Price-to-income is above its peak value in many of these cities (though not by
nearly as much as the price-to-rent ratio), and as much as 40-50 percent above its 25-year
average (the last column of Table 1). Yet there is a lot of heterogeneity in this measure
of house price excess. In Houston, Dallas and other southern cities, price-to-income is
well below its 25-year average.

If high growth rates of house prices, price-to-rent ratios, and price-to-income ratios were
reliable indicators of a rising cost of obtaining housing, then these recent trends would
indeed provide reasons to suspect overvaluation in many housing markets. However, as
this paper will explain, these measures are inadequate to assess whether the housing
market is the grip of a speculative bubble.




4
  A few other markets such as Miami, Milwaukee, Minneapolis, and Portland saw their price-to-rent ratio
rise by more than 50 percent. These all are markets that experienced economic declines in the 1970s and
1980s, but have recovered appreciably since then.


                                                    5
The User Cost of Housing

The key mistake committed by the conventional measures of overheating in housing
markets is that they erroneously treat the purchase price of a house as if it were the same
as the annual cost of owning. But consider purchasing a house for $1 million. The cost
of living in that house for one year is not $1 million. Nor is the financial return on the
house equal to just the capital gain or loss on that property. A correct calculation of the
financial return associated with an owner-occupied property compares the value of living
in that property for a year -- the “imputed rent”, or what it would have cost to rent an
equivalent property -- with the lost income that one would have received if the owner had
invested the capital in an alternative investment -- the “opportunity cost of capital.” This
comparison should take into account differences in risk, tax benefits from owner-
occupancy, property taxes, maintenance expenses, and any anticipated capital gains from
owning the home.

This line of reasoning is the basis for an economically justified way of evaluating
whether the level of housing prices is “too high” or “too low.” We calculate the true one-
year cost of owning a house (the “user cost”), which can then be compared to rental costs
or income levels to judge whether the cost of owning is out of line with the cost of
renting, or unaffordable at local income levels. This section reviews the most commonly
used procedure for calculating the annual cost of homeownership, discusses its
implications for house prices, and then reviews the assumptions that enter the calculation.
In this framework, a house price bubble occurs when homeowners have unreasonably
high expectations about future capital gains, leading them to perceive their user cost to be
lower than it actually is, and thus pay “too much” to purchase a house today.

         A Formula

The formula for the annual cost of home ownership, also known in the housing literature
as the “imputed rent,” is the sum of six components representing both costs and offsetting
benefits (Hendershott and Slemrod, 1983; Poterba, 1984).5 The first component is the
cost of foregone interest that the homeowner could have earned by investing in
something other than a house. This one-year cost is calculated as the price of housing Pt
times the risk-free interest rate rtrf. The second component is the one-year cost of
property taxes, calculated as house price times the property tax rate ωt. The third
component is actually an offsetting benefit to owning, namely, the tax deductibility of
mortgage interest and property taxes for filers who itemize on their federal income taxes.6
This can be estimated as the effective tax rate on income times the estimated mortgage

5
  These items should be viewed in opportunity cost terms. For example, an owner might make annual
maintenance expenditures or else allow his home to slowly depreciate in value; either way, a cost is
incurred.
6
  We use the mortgage rate when computing the tax benefit of owning a house as opposed to the Treasury
rate used for the opportunity cost of capital. Mortgage rates are typically 1-2 percent above risk-free rates
of equivalent duration because borrowers typically have the options to “refinance” if interest rates go down
and to default on the mortgage if property prices fall. Homeowners can deduct from their taxable income
the additional expense associated with both of these options, but they still receive their financial benefits.
Thus, the U.S. government subsidizes the purchase of mortgages with prepayment and default options.


                                                      6
and property tax payments: Ptτt(rtm+ωt).7 The fourth term reflects maintenance costs
expressed as a fraction δt of home value. Finally, the fifth term, gt+1, is the expected
capital gain (or loss) during the year, and the sixth term, Ptγt, represents an additional risk
premium to compensate homeowners for the higher risk of owning vs. renting. The sum
of these six components gives the total annual cost of home ownership:

Annual Cost of Ownership = Pt rtrf + Pt ωt − Pt τt ( rtm + ωt ) + Pt δt – Pt gt+1 + Pt γt

Equilibrium in the housing market implies that the expected annual cost of owning a
house should not exceed the annual cost of renting. If annual ownership costs rise
without a commensurate increase in rents, house prices must fall to convince potential
home buyers to buy instead of renting. The converse happens if annual ownership costs
fall. This naturally correcting process implies a “no arbitrage” condition which states that
the one-year rent must equal the sum of the annual costs of owning.8 Using the above
equation, we can summarize this logic by equating annual rent with the annual cost of
ownership. We can re-arrange the annual cost of ownership by moving the price term in
front of everything else on the right-hand side to get:

Rt = Ptut,

where the fraction ut is known as the user cost of housing, defined as:

ut = rtrf + ωt − τt (rtm + ωt ) + δt – gt+1 + γt .

The user cost uit is just a restatement of the annual total cost of ownership defined above,
but expressed in terms of the cost per dollar of house value. Expressing the user cost in
this way is particularly useful because rearranging the equation Rt = Ptut as Pt/Rt = 1/ut
allows us to see that the equilibrium price-to-rent ratio should equal the inverse of the
user cost. Thus, fluctuations in user costs (caused, for example, by changes in interest
rates and taxes) lead to predictable changes in the price-to-rent ratio that reflect
fundamentals, not bubbles. Comparing price-to-rent ratios over time without considering
changes in user costs is obviously misleading.




7
  While it is widely recognized that mortgage payments are tax deductible, the equity-financed portion of a
house is usually tax-subsidized as well. Owners do not pay income taxes on imputed rent (the money they
“pay themselves” as owners of a property) or capital gains taxes for all but the largest gains. Under current
tax law, gains from the sale of owner-occupied property (first and second homes) are free of taxation as
long as the gain does not exceed $250,000 for an individual or $500,000 for a married couple and the
owner has lived in the house two of the last five years. For a deeper analysis of the tax subsidy to owner-
occupied housing, see Hendershott and Slemrod (1983) and Gyourko and Sinai (2003).
8
  Poterba (1984) writes the formula for the imputed rental value of housing as
                1 − δ it
Rit = Pit −                 Eit [Pit +1 ] + (1 − τit )ωit Pit − τit rt Pit .
              1 + rt + γ it
The rental formula in the text is an approximation of this formula.


                                                               7
         An Illustration

For the purpose of illustrating how the user cost model works, suppose the following: (i)
the risk-free 10-year interest rate rrf is 4.5 percent; (ii) the mortgage rate rm is 5.5 percent;
(iii) the annual depreciation rate is δ = 2.5 percent (Harding, Rosenthal and Sirmans
(2004); (iv) the marginal tax rate of the typical home buyer is τ = 25 percent; (v) the
property tax rate is ω = 1.5 percent; (vi) the risk premium is γ = 2.0 percent9; and (vii)
the long-run appreciation rate of housing prices is 3.8 percent (expected inflation of 2.0
percent plus a real expected appreciation rate of housing of 1.8 percent, the average from
1980-2004 for the metro areas in our sample for this paper).

Under these assumptions, the predicted user cost is 5.0 percent: that is, for every dollar of
price, the owner pays 5 cents per year in cost. Leaving aside other differences between
renting and owning, people should be willing to pay up to 20 times (1/0.05) the market
rent to purchase a house.10 Hence, for example, a two-bedroom apartment that rents for
$1,000/month ($12,000/year) should sell for up to $240,000. This price-to-rent ratio
provides a ceiling against which housing prices can be judged “too high” or “too low.” If
price multiplied by the user cost exceeds the market rent, housing is relatively costly.

         House Prices are More Sensitive to Changes in Real Interest Rates When Rates
         are Already Low

The real interest rate is a key determinant of the user cost of housing. (Below we explain
why real long-term rather than short-term interest rates that are especially important). A
lower real interest rate reduces the user cost because the cost of debt financing is lower,
as is the opportunity cost of investing equity in a house. In practical terms, when the real
interest rate is low, homeownership is relatively attractive because mortgage payments
are low and alternative investments do not yield much. Given that mortgage interest is
tax-deductible and the opportunity cost of the equity in the house is a taxable return, a
percentage point decline in the real interest rate reduces the user cost by 1-τ. In our
example, dropping the 10-year rate and mortgage rates from 4.5 and 5.5 percent to 4 and
5 percent, respectively, would cause the user cost to drop from 5 to 4.6 percent and cause
the maximum price-to-rent multiple to rise from 20 to 21.9.

Similarly, raising the income tax rate lowers the user cost of housing (Poterba, 1990),
making housing less expensive than renting. In the above example, changing the
assumed income tax rate from 25 percent to 35 percent in the base case example raises


9
 We obtain this estimated risk premium from Flavin and Yamashita (2002). This risk premium may be too
high because it ignores important factors such as the insurance value of owning a house in hedging risk
associated with future changes in rents. (Sinai and Souleles, 2005) However, choosing alternative values
has little effect on the time series behavior of user costs, which is the focus of this paper. A more general
model than ours would allow the relative risk of owning vs. renting to vary over time.
10
  They may not have to pay that amount. If housing is elastically supplied, and price is above the cost of
construction, builders will create more housing at a lower multiple to rents.



                                                     8
the sustainable price-to-rent ratio from 20 to 23.5.11 The reason is that higher income
taxes make the tax subsidy to owner-occupied housing worth more, which lowers the cost
of housing relative to other goods.

It is apparent from these calculations that the lower the user cost, the higher the
sensitivity of the rent multiple to changes in interest rates or the tax subsidy. For
example, suppose real, one-year interest rates fall by one percentage point, or 0.75
percent after taxes. In a typical metropolitan area today with a 5 percent user cost, the
user cost falls to 4.25 and the price-to-rent ratio could rise from 20 to 23.8, an increase of
19 percent. If the user cost were 7 percent, as it was at times during the early 1980s, the
same one percentage point decline in real interest rates would cause a smaller 12 percent
rise in the justifiable price-to-rent ratio. Thus, in the current low real interest rate
environment, a given decrease in real rates induces a larger potential percentage increase
in house prices than the same decrease in real rates would cause starting from a high
interest rate. Of course, the reverse is true, too: an unexpected rise in long-term real
interest rates from their current low base would cause a disproportionately large
percentage decline in the house price ceiling, assuming rents stay constant.

         House Prices are More Sensitive to Changes in Real Interest Rates in High
         Appreciation Rate Cities

We have thus far downplayed one of the most critical and least understood determinants
of the user cost of housing -- the expected growth rate of housing prices. Expected price
appreciation is central to the debate over whether a housing bubble exists, and if so,
where.

Evidence suggests that expected rates of house price appreciation may differ across
markets. Because expected appreciation is subtracted from the user cost, metropolitan
areas where expected house price appreciation is high have lower user costs than areas
where expected house price appreciation is low. If in the above example we had
assumed that the expected real rate of appreciation on housing was 2.8 percent rather than
1.8 percent, the predicted user cost would have been 4 percent instead of 5, and the
potential price-to-rent ratio would have been 25 instead of 20. If we had assumed an
even higher rate of expected price growth, say 3.8 percent, the implied price-to-rent ratio
would have been 33.3. Lest this seem incredible, that is about equal to the price-to-rent
ratio in the San Francisco metropolitan area, calculated as the ratio of the mean house
value divided by the mean rent in the 2000 Census.

A large degree of variation across cities in expected growth rates is plausible, given what
we know about land price dynamics in cities. Of course, if the long-run supply of
housing were perfectly elastic, house prices would be determined solely by construction
costs, and expected appreciation would be the expected growth rate in real construction

11
  Of course, this calculation does not account for the fact that higher taxes would presumably cause rents
to fall, the net effect of which may or may not cause housing prices to fall. As Poterba (1990) explains,
whether this happens or not depends on the extent to which the increased tax differential between and
housing and non-housing causes consumers to choose more housing.



                                                     9
costs (Muth, 1960). At the national level, real construction costs have fallen over the past
25 years, yet over the same time period, real constant-quality house prices have grown.
When we looked at construction costs in different metropolitan areas using data from
R.S. Means Company,12 we found that house prices grew relative to construction costs in
most of the metropolitan statistical areas in our analysis. Changes in construction costs
explain neither the overall rise in real house prices nor cross-sectional differences in
appreciation rates across markets.

The long-run growth of house prices in excess of construction costs suggests that the
underlying land is appreciating faster than the structures. This finding is consistent with
classic theories of urban development in which the growth of cities is accompanied by (or
driven by) benefits of increasing density and agglomeration. Since the supply of land
near urban centers (either a city center or suburban subcenters) is in short supply, the
demand for housing generated by such economic growth is capitalized into land prices.13

Indeed, some metropolitan areas have persistently high rates of house price appreciation
over very long periods of time. Gyourko, Mayer, and Sinai (2004) refer to cities with
high long-run rates of house price growth as “superstar cities.” They argue that because
of tight supply constraints combined with an increasing number of households who want
to live in the area, a city can experience above-average house price growth over a very
long horizon. They present evidence from the U.S. Census since 1940 showing that real
house price appreciation in superstar cities such as San Francisco, Boston, New York,
and Los Angeles has exceeded the national average by one to three percentage points per
year over a 60-year period. In addition, the average growth rate of housing prices over
the 30-year period 1940-1970 has a correlation of 0.40 with the subsequent 30-year
average over 1970-2000. This fact suggests that differences in appreciation rates of
housing across metropolitan statistical areas are persistent over long periods and reflect
more than just secular changes in industrial concentration (like the high technology
boom ) or household preferences.

A related finding is that price-to-rent differences across cities are persistent over time:
cities with high price-to-rent ratios tend to remain high, and those with low price-to-rent
ratio remain low. This fact is predicted by the user cost theory if purchasers in these
“superstar” markets are correctly anticipating sustained future appreciation since buyers
in superstar cities should be willing to pay more for a house if they expect rents to rise in
the future. Indeed, Sinai and Souleles (2005) find statistical evidence using data from 44
metropolitan areas that the cities with the highest price-to-rent ratios also have the highest
expected growth rates of prices and rents.14



12
   See Glaeser and Gyourko (2004) for more information on RS Means data and a detailed discussion of the
issues involved in measuring construction costs across cities.
13
   See the Spring 1998 “Symposium on Urban Agglomeration” in the Journal of Economic Perspectives for
more detail on these arguments, especially the papers by Edward Glaeser (1998) and John Quigley (1998).
14
   We have found a similar persistence of price-to-rent ratios across markets using data from the 1980 and
2000 Integrated Public Use Microsample from the U.S. Decennial Census to compute the price/income
ratio at the household level for homeowners and the rent/income ratio at the household level for renters.


                                                   10
         Calculating the User Cost

To examine how these cost factors are related to house price changes, we compute the
user cost of housing for each of the 46 metro areas in our sample. As is often true with
theoretical constructs, solving for the user cost in practice poses a number of difficult
challenges.

First, theory suggests that we measure the risk-free interest rate using a representative
rate like the yield on a one-year U.S. Treasury bill. In practice, however, it is important
to consider simultaneously the impact of expected future real interest rates on the
expected appreciation rate of future house prices (the fifth term in our user cost equation).
For example, in 2004, real short-term interest rates were well below real long-term rates,
suggesting that the bond market anticipated that real short-term interest rates would rise
in the future. When short-term rates are expected to rise, potential homeowners should
also anticipate (assuming that land will be inelastically supplied in the market) that the
annual cost of ownership will also rise, implying that future house prices should fall (or
rise less than they otherwise would). Thus, a higher real interest rate “spread” -- the
long-term minus short-term rate -- suggests a relatively lower expected growth rate of
future house prices. This predictable decline in the future growth rate of house prices
should roughly equal the spread. Hence, if we plug the spread into our user cost formula
in place of gt+1, the short-term rate drops out, and all that remains is the long-term rate.
In sum, when a constant rate of future price appreciation is assumed for the user cost
formula, it is probably more sensible to measure the opportunity cost of funds using a
real, long-term interest rate. This subtle point is often ignored in empirical research. In
our calculations below, we use the constant yield to maturity on 10-year Treasuries and
convert this to a real rate by subtracting the 10-year expected inflation rate from the
Livingston Survey. If we were to substitute the one-year Treasury rate into our user cost
calculations instead of the 10-year rate, it would make housing in 2004 look even less
costly in every market in our sample.

A second, closely related challenge is that we cannot observe households’ expected
growth rate of housing prices. By using long-term instead of short-term real interest rates
in the user cost, we already account for predictable changes in house prices arising from
predictable changes in short-term interest rates. But house prices also rise in response to
higher rents. We assume that user costs do not change over long horizons, and that hence
rents at the level of a metropolitan area grow at the same rate as real housing prices in
that metro area. We therefore measure expected future rent growth using the average real
growth rate of house prices from 1940-2000 from Gyourko, Mayer, and Sinai (2004).

Finally, it is important to recognize that metro areas also differ in their typical federal
income taxes and local property tax rates. Cities with higher per-capita income have
higher effective marginal income tax rates, which lead to higher price-to-rent ratios due
to the greater value of the tax subsidy to owner-occupied housing. We use average
property tax rates from Emrath (2002) and income tax rates which we collect from the


We then took the average of each ratio by metropolitan statistical area and decade. Price-to-rent at the
metropolitan area -decade level is then calculated as MEAN(price/income)/MEAN(rent/income).


                                                     11
TAXSIM model of the National Bureau of Economic Research.15 However, data from
the Internal Revenue Service shows that 65 percent of tax-filing households do not
itemize their tax deductions and, if they are homeowners, do not benefit from the tax
deductibility of mortgage interest and property taxes.16 To account at least roughly for
the higher cost of owning for the non-itemizers, we reduce the tax subsidy in our
calculations by 50 percent.

Table 2 shows how user cost can vary across cities and within cities over time. The
average user costs in the highest growth rate markets are less than half as big as they are
in the highest user cost markets – for example, 3.3 percent in San Jose vs. 7.1 percent in
Pittsburgh. This range of user costs implies average potential price-to-rent ratios ranging
from 33 to 14, respectively. By 2004, user costs had fallen significantly below the long-
run average – 2.0 percent in San Jose versus 5.7 percent in Pittsburgh. That is, the price-
to-rent ratio could have risen to 50 in San Jose but just 18 in Pittsburgh. To illustrate
how much a low initial user cost matters for price swings, San Francisco experienced a
user cost decline from an average of 3.7 percent to 2.4 percent in 2004, implying a
multiple expansion from 27 to 42. In some cities, user cost has declined more than 40
percent since the previous house price peak, while in other cities the decline has been as
low as 10 percent. Since the user cost is just the inverse of the price-to-rent ratio, these
examples demonstrate how heterogeneous changes in user cost can help explain the
heterogeneity of price and price-to-rent growth across cities. More formally, the cross-
sectional correlation between the percentage change in user costs (the second column of
Table 2) and the percentage change in price-to-rent (the third column of Table 1) between
1995 and 2004 is -0.6.

Finally, it is worth noting that these computations do not account for all factors that could
affect the spread in user costs between high and low appreciation rate cities. In high-
priced cities, the value of structures is generally small relative to the value of the land on
which they sit, which suggests that physical depreciation is small as a fraction of total
property value. Lower depreciation rates (relative to value) in high land cost markets
such as San Francisco and New York would lower their user costs and further increase
their price-to-rent ratios relative to other cities. Our calculations do not allow for this.

At the same time, lower depreciation rates in cities like San Francisco might be offset by
higher house price risk. Some research has argued that housing in high-priced cities is
riskier because the standard deviation of house prices is much higher (Case and Shiller
2004; Hwang and Quigley, 2004), while other research argues that homeowners can
15
   While the net benefits of services financed by local property taxes presumably benefit owners and renters
equally, a higher property tax nevertheless lowers the price-to-rent ratio because the tax is implicitly
included in rents but not home prices.
16
   Sources: IRS Statistics of Income, Table 1 -- Individual Income Tax, All Returns: Sources of Income and
Adjustments, and Table 3 -- Individual Income Tax Returns with Itemized Deductions, for 2002. Available
at <http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-soi/02in01ar.xls> and <http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-soi/02in03ga.xls>. Even
without itemizing, all homeowners benefit from some tax subsidy. If a homeowner were to rent his
property out, he would have to report the rent received as taxable income. A homeowner does not need to
report the “imputed rent” he pays himself as taxable income and thus saves the income tax he would have
otherwise paid the government. Gyourko and Sinai (2003) show that the mortgage interest and property tax
deduction component comprises about one-third of the total subsidy.


                                                    12
partially hedge this rent and price risk (Sinai and Souleles, 2005).17 Since this hedge is
imperfect, however, we would still expect risk premiums would be somewhat higher in
the highest price-to-rent markets, narrowing the predicted cross-sectional difference in
user costs between cities like San Francisco and Milwaukee, say. Our calculations do not
allow for this effect, either.



Are Current House Prices Too High?

One way to assess whether house prices are too high is to calculate the imputed rent on
housing and compare it to actual rents available in the market. The imputed rent is the
user cost times the current level of house prices obtained from the OFHEO price index.

We create an index of the imputed-to-actual-rent ratio by dividing the imputed rent index
by the index of market rents. This index lets us assess whether the imputed cost of
owning a house relative to renting the same unit has changed within each metropolitan
area over time and whether the index in 2004 is at or near its previous peak level. We
cannot make comparisons of imputed-to-actual-rent levels across cities, nor can we
explicitly calculate whether the index is “too high” at any given point in time, but we can
come close by comparing the index to its 25-year average.

We set the within-city 25-year average of the index equal to 1.0 in each city. Figure 2
plots the imputed-to-actual-rent index for 12 representative cities. (Figure 2 in the
appendix plots house price indexes for all 46 MSAs in our data.) We also include the
equivalent price-to-rent index for these cities to highlight the times that the price-to-rent
index differs from the imputed-to-actual-rent ratio. In Figure 2, Houston represents the
small group of cities that have been experiencing declining prices and imputed rent ratios
over 25 years. Chicago, Detroit, Miami, and Indianapolis are indicative of the middle
panel cities that have U-shaped prices and imputed rent ratios. The remaining cities are
representative of the cyclical first panel and include some of the highest profile markets
on the east and west coasts. Table 3 reports the value of the imputed-to-actual-rent index
for all 46 cities at some key dates.
We highlight two important results. First, the imputed-to-actual-rent ratio does not
suggest widespread or historically large mispricing of owner-occupied properties in 2004.
For all three groups of cities, the imputed rent associated with buying a house in 2004 is
not nearly as high relative to actual rents as it was in the past. Only seven cities have an
imputed-to-actual-rent ratio that is within 20 percent of its previous peak and, of those,
Detroit, Milwaukee, and Minneapolis are the closest. By contrast, 12 cities have
imputed-to-actual-rent ratios 40 percent or more below their historical peak levels. In
fact, the 2004 levels of imputed-to-actual-rent are hardly atypical. In Portland, Oregon,
the 2004 imputed-to-actual-rent ratio exceeds the value of the ratio in prior years about

17
  Davidoff (2005) shows that the demand for owned housing decreases as the covariance between labor
income and house prices rises. By that logic, the price-to-rent ratio also should be lower in markets where
the typical homebuyer's wage income is closely tied to the local economy -- in one-company towns, for
instance, or cities with a high concentration in a single industry.


                                                    13
75 percent of the time (88 percent in Detroit). But in high price growth cities like Orange
County and San Francisco, the imputed-to-actual-rent ratio in the previous 24 years was
higher than its 2004 value about half the time. While owner-occupied housing is not
nearly as expensive relative to renting as it has been at times over the past 24 years,
housing in a few markets appears somewhat expensive relative to the recent past.

A second key observation is that deviations between the imputed rent and actual rent
appear strongest when real interest rates were unusually high (early 1980s) or unusually
low (2001-2004). A comparison of Figures 2 and 3 makes this point quite clear.
Another, unrelated factor that explains the strong 1980s deviation was that the U.S. tax
code subsidized the construction of rental properties between 1981 and 1987, leading to a
decline in rents and temporarily out-of-equilibrium price-to-rent ratios. Thus the recent
run-up in house prices appears to be primarily driven by fundamental economic changes.
Of course, in Boston, New York, Los Angeles, San Diego and San Francisco in the late
1980s and Denver, Miami, and Houston in the mid-1980s, a high imputed-to-actual-rent
ratio was a prelude to sizable housing downturns. Hence, our methodology successfully
identifies prior periods of excessive valuations in the housing market.

The imputed rent-to-income ratio provides an alternative measure of housing valuations.
While the imputed-to-actual-rent ratio would be high if there were a housing bubble,
house prices could still fall if current housing costs were unsustainable given households’
abilities to pay. The ratio of imputed rent to income provides a better indicator of
whether house prices are supported by underlying demand. In particular, rising housing
prices or rising user costs need not imply that households are being priced out of the
market if incomes are rising, too. In a bubble market, by contrast, we would expect to see
the annual cost of homeownership rising faster than incomes, thus raising imputed rent-
to-income to unsustainable levels.

Figure 4 reports the ratio of the imputed rent of owner-occupied housing to income for 12
cities, with a matching panel in Table 3. (Figure 3 in the appendix plots house price
indexes for all 46 MSAs in our data.) For comparison, Figure 4 also shows the more-
commonly used metric of house price-to-income. These ratios were calculated in the
same way as the imputed-to-actual-rent ratio, except that we now divide imputed rent by
an index of mean income per capita at the level of the metropolitan statistical area
constructed from BEA data. We set the index value of 1.0 to correspond to the 25-year
average for each metropolitan area of each ratio.

These calculations lead us to similar conclusions as in the previous section. None of the
metropolitan areas that we have featured appears to be at a peak level of costliness in
2004 (relative to the past 25 years). In fact, only nine of our 46 cities have housing costs
above their average historical levels relative to per capita income. Even so, the range
across cities in the 2004 imputed rent-to-income measure, which varies from 1.12 in
Miami to 0.62 in San Antonio, is much tighter than the within-city variation over time.
Indeed, in Miami, the imputed rent-to-income ratio has a historical peak-trough range of
more than 50 percent. One might object to these historical comparisons on the grounds
that prices during the 1980s were unusually higher. If remove the 1980s data, it is still
the case that only southern California and south Florida look relatively expensive.


                                             14
Outliers for the ratios of imputed-rent-to-income or price-to-income are most pronounced
in years when real interest rates are historically high or historically low. Just as with our
imputed-to-actual-rent ratio, a high imputed-rent-to-income ratio has been a prelude to
subsequent price declines. Despite having been corrected to recognize differences in user
costs, the imputed rent-to-income ratio comes with an important caveat. Households at
the median income may be poorer than the marginal buyers of median-priced homes. For
example, Gyourko, Mayer, and Sinai (2004) argue that the marginal home buyers in
“superstar” cities are high-income households who have moved from other parts of the
country. This pattern would imply that the median homes in such cities are purchased by
new residents whose income exceeds that of the median income. Also, Ortalo-Magne
and Rady (2005) argue that homeowners whose incomes do not grow as fast as house
prices in an area can remain homeowners since their housing wealth rises
commensurately with prices. Thus they can appear to be low-income, but that is because
the implicit income from their housing wealth is not reflected in the denominator of the
imputed rent-to-income ratio. For these reasons, our measure of the imputed rent-to-
income ratio in high price growth markets is likely to be higher than the true underlying
concept. Ideally, we would also want to consider wealth ratios when assessing the extent
of housing market excess.

But even given this caveat, housing prices at the end of 2004 did not look particularly out
of line with past patterns of rents or incomes. This conclusion holds true even in cities
like Boston, New York, and San Francisco where housing prices were high and rose even
higher from 2000 to 2004. Only a handful of cities, namely Miami, Fort Lauderdale,
Portland, and San Diego, had imputed-to-actual-rent and imputed rent-to-income ratios
that both were higher relative to the recent past, but even they had not yet risen to
approach previous historical peak levels.



What Might Be Missing in these Calculations?

One obviously important factor over the past 25 years that we have omitted from our
analysis is cost-reducing innovations in the mortgage market. Data from the Federal
Housing Finance Board suggests that in 1980, initial fees and “points” (a point is an up-
front fee equal to one percent of the loan amount) were typically about 2 percent of the
value of a loan; by 2004, they were less than one-half of 1 percent. Lower origination
costs may be a factor in the greater willingness of homeowners to refinance their
mortgage in response to decreases in interest rates (Bennett, Peach and Peristiani, 1998).
Since lower origination costs are likely a permanent change in the mortgage market,
demand for housing may be permanently higher, lowering the imputed rent associated
with owning a house in the latter portion of our sample period.

An alternative hypothesis sometimes advanced for the recent rapid growth in housing
prices is that it has become easier to borrow, so that overall demand for home-owning has
risen. Certainly average mortgage amounts have risen much faster than inflation or
incomes, growing by over $120,000 since 1995 to a record high of over $261,000 in
2003. Yet average down payments amounts have grown even faster. The average new


                                             15
first mortgage in 2003 had a down payment that exceeded 25 percent of the house value,
nearly five percentage points higher than in 1995. Lest one fear that these aggregate
statistics mask a number of liquidity constrained households, the percentage of household
with a loan-to-value ratio at or above 90 percent fell from 25 percent to 20 percent of all
borrowers between 1997 and 2003. In addition, down payment percentages are the
highest (and thus loan-to-value ratios are lowest) in the most expensive cities. Down
payments for buyers in San Francisco and New York averaged 39 and 34 percent of their
house value, respectively. We suspect that this occurs in part because existing
homeowners use large capital gains to put more money down on their next house. One
caveat: if homeowners are extracting equity using second mortgages, and doing so
disproportionately in the most expensive cities, our data would underestimate their true
leverage. However, it would take considerable borrowing through that channel to offset
the increase in down payments we observe.

A related concern is that if many people have borrowed using adjustable rate mortgages,
they may be especially vulnerable to an in increase in interest rates. From 2001-2003,
adjustable rate mortgages made up fewer than 20 percent of all new mortgages, a rate that
is lower than all but one year in the 1990s. However, the use of adjustable rate
mortgages did rise to 34 percent of new mortgages in 2004. While buyers in high-priced
cities are more likely than average to take out adjustable rate mortgages, the use of
adjustable rate mortgages also fell disproportionately in the most expensive cities, with
declines from 1995-2003 of 21 and 16 percent in San Francisco and New York,
respectively (the decline in Boston was smaller).

Even so, if any of the above considerations were actually spurring spending in the
housing market, our analysis should pick it up as more costly homeownership. Demand
driven by looser restrictions on obtaining credit, for example, should lead to higher house
prices. In our analysis, the higher price would raise the imputed rent, and the imputed-to-
actual-rent and imputed rent-to-income ratios would rise. We do not observe this, at least
by the end of 2004. The last time such factors (anecdotally, at least) affected the housing
market was in the late 1980s, and that mispricing is very apparent in our data.

Yet another potential shortcoming of our analysis is that we assume low-cost arbitrage
between owning and renting. In reality, mortgage origination fees, broker commissions
and moving costs make it expensive to switch back and forth between owning and
renting. These transaction costs imply a range within which imputed rents may deviate
from actual rents before market forces work to close the gap. Arbitrage arguments may
also fail because the characteristics of rental units and owned homes may differ
substantially, in which case imputed rent comparisons are less meaningful.

Finally, our valuation ratios may be biased due to trends in unmeasured quality
differences between owned and rented units. We have no reason to believe that the
quality of owner-occupied housing has systematically declined relative to that of rental
housing. If anything, the reverse is likely true due to the strong growth in home
renovation expenditures. If the quality of existing single-family homes is rising, the
OFHEO price index might overstate housing appreciation rates for a constant quality
house.


                                            16
Conclusion

We have discussed how to calculate the local annual cost of owner-occupied housing and
how to construct measures of home values by comparing this cost to local incomes and
rents. Doing so reveals past periods like the late 1980s when the costs of owning looked
quite high relative to incomes or the cost of renting. In 2004, however, these same
measures show little evidence of housing bubbles in almost any of the markets we have
studied. Constant-quality data on house prices and rents exist for less than three decades,
cover only two house price booms, and are not comparable across different cities. Hence,
it is impossible to state definitively whether or not a housing bubble exists. However, we
can say that most housing markets did not look much more expensive in 2004 than they
looked over the past 10 years, and in most major cities our valuation measures are
nowhere near their historic highs.

We hope the following insights emerge from our analysis: First, house price dynamics
are a local phenomenon, and national-level data obscure important economic differences
among cities. Moreover, one cannot draw conclusions about house prices by comparing
cities: price-to-income and price-to-rent ratios that would be considered “high” for one
city may be typical for another. Second, when considering local house prices, the
economically relevant basis for comparison is the annual cost of ownership. Without
accounting for changes in real, long-term interest rates, expected inflation, expected
house price appreciation and taxes, one cannot accurately assess whether houses are
reasonably priced. Third, changes in underlying fundamentals can affect cities
differently. In particular, in cities where housing supply is relatively inelastic, prices will
be higher relative to rents, and house prices will typically be more sensitive to changes in
interest rates.

Our evidence does not suggest that house prices cannot fall in the future if fundamental
factors change. An unexpected rise in real interest rates that raises housing costs, or a
negative shock to a local economy, would lower housing demand, slowing the growth of
house prices, and possibly even leading to a house price decline. However, this fact does
not mean that today houses are systematically mispriced.




                                              17
References

Ayuso, Juan and Fernando Restoy (2003), “House Prices and Rents: An Equilibrium
       Approach,” working paper no.0304, Banco de España.

Bennett, Paul, Richard Peach, and Stavros Peristiani (1998). “Structural Change in the
       Mortgage Market and the Propensity to Refinance,” Federal Reserve Band of New
       York Staff Reports, 45, September.

Brueckner, Jan K (1987). “The Structure of Urban Equilibria: A Unified Treatment of the
      Muth-Mills Model,” in Edwin S. Mills, ed., Handbook of Regional and Urban
      Economics, 2, North Holland, pp. 821-845.

Case, Karl E. and Robert J. Shiller (1988), “The Behavior of Home Prices in Boom and
       Post-Boom Markets”, New England Economic Review, November, pp. 29-46.

_____ (1989) “The Efficiency of the Market for Single Family Homes”, American
       Economic Review (March 1989), 79(1): 125–37.

_____ (2004), “Is There a Bubble in the Housing Market”, Brookings Papers on
       Economic Activity, 2, 299-342.

Cocco, Joao (2000), “Hedging House Price Risk with Incomplete Markets,” London
       Business School working paper.

Cocco, Joao F. and John F. Campbell (2003), “Household Risk Management and Optimal
       Mortgage Choice,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, November, 1449-1494.

Davidoff, Thomas (2003), “Labor Income, Housing Prices and Homeownership,” UC
      Berkeley mimeo.

Emrath, Paul. “Property Taxes in the 2000 Census,” Housing Economics, 2002
      (December), 16-21.

Engelhardt, Gary (1994), “House Prices and the Decision to Save for Down Payments,”
      Journal of Urban Economics 36:2 (September), 209-237.

Engelhardt, Gary (1996), “Consumption, Down Payments, and Liquidity Constraints,”
      Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 28:2 (May), 255-271.

Flavin, Marjorie and Takashi Yamashita (2002), “Owner-Occupied Housing and the
        Composition of the Household Portfolio.” American Economic Review, March,
        345-62.

Genesove, David and Christopher Mayer (1997). “Equity and Time to Sale in the Real
      Estate Market.” The American Economic Review 87(3), 255-69.


                                          18
_____ (2001). “Loss Aversion and Seller Behavior: Evidence from the Housing Market.”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(4), 1233-1260.

Glaeser, Edward L. (1998), “Are Cities Dying?,” Journal of Economic Perspectives
       12(2), 139-60.

Glaeser, Edward L. and Joseph Gyourko (2005), “Durable Housing and Urban Decline,”
       Journal of Political Economy 113(2), 345-75.

Glaeser, Edward L., Joseph Gyourko, and Raven E. Saks (2004), “Why Have Housing
       Prices Gone Up?” working paper.

Glaeser, Edward L. and Albert Saiz (2003), “The Rise of the Skilled City,” NBER
       Working Paper 10191.

Gyourko, Joseph, Christopher Mayer, and Todd Sinai (2004), “Superstar Cities”,
      Columbia Business School and Wharton School working paper.

Gyourko, Joseph and Todd Sinai (2003). “The Spatial Distribution of Housing-Related
      Ordinary Income Tax Benefits.” Real Estate Economics, vol. 31, number 4
      (Winter), pp. 527-576.

Hanushek, Eric A. and John M. Quigley (1980). “What is the Price Elasticity of Housing
      Demand?” Review of Economics and Statistics 62(3), pp. 449-54.

Harding, John P., Stuart S. Rosenthal and C. F. Sirmans (2004), “Depreciation of
      Housing Capital and the Gains from Homeownership,” working paper, Syracuse
      University, http://faculty.maxwell.syr.edu/rosenthal.

Hendershott, Patric and Joel Slemrod (1983). “Taxes and the User Cost of Capital for
      Owner-Occupied Housing,” AREUEA Journal, Winter, 10 (4), 375-393.

Henderson, J. V. (1977), Economic Theory and the Cities, New York: Academic Press.

Hurst, Erik and Frank Stafford (2005), “Home is Where the Equity Is: Liquidity
       Constraints, Refinancing and Consumption”, Journal of Money, Credit and
       Banking, forthcoming.

Hwang, Min and John M. Quigley (2004), Economic Fundamentals in Local Housing
     Markets: Evidence from U.S. Metropolitan Regions, UC Berkeley mimeo,
     February.

Lamont, Owen and Jeremy Stein (1999), “Leverage and House Price Dynamics in U.S.
      Cities”, Rand Journal of Economics 30, Autumn, pp. 466-486.




                                           19
Mayer, Christopher (1993). “Taxes, Income Distribution and the Real Estate Cycle: Why
       All Houses Don’t Appreciate at the Same Rate.” New England Economic Review,
       May/June, 39-50.

Meese, Richard and Nancy Wallace (1993). Testing the Present Value Relation for
       Housing Prices: Should I Leave My House in San Francisco? Journal of Urban
       Economics 35(3), 245-66.

Mayo, Stephen (1981). “Theory and Estimation in the Economics of Housing Demand.”
      Journal of Urban Economics 10, pp. 95-116.

McCarthy, Jonathan and Richard W. Peach (2004). “Are Home Prices the Next Bubble?”
      Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review 10(3), pp. 1-17.

Merlo, Antonio and Francois Ortalo-Magne (2004). “Bargaining over Residential
       Properties: Evidence from England,” Journal of Urban Economics 56, September,
       192-216.

Moretti, Enrico (2004). “Workers’ Education, Spillovers and Productivity: Evidence from
       Plant-Level Production Functions,” American Economic Review, 94(3), pp. 656-
       690.

Muth, R. F. (1960), “The Demand for Nonfarm Housing,” in A. C. Harberger, ed., The
      Demand for Durable Goods. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

_____ (1969), Cities and Housing. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Ortalo-Magne, Francois and Sven Rady (1999). “Boom in, Bust Out: Young Households
       and the Housing Cycle,” European Economic Review 43, April, 755-766.

_____ (2001). “Housing Market Dynamics: On the Contribution of Income Shocks and
       Credit Constraints,” Discussion Paper 470, CESIfo.

Piazzesi, Monika, Martin Schneider, and Selale Tuzel (2003), “Housing, Consumption
       and Asset Pricing,” working paper.

Poterba, James (1984), “Tax Subsidies to Owner-occupied Housing: An Asset Market
       Approach,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 99, 729-52.

_____ (1990). “House Price Dynamics: The Role of Tax Policy and Demography”
       Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1991(2), pp. 143-183.

Quigley, John M. (1998), “Urban Diversity and Economic Growth,” Journal of Economic
       Perspectives 12(2), 127-38.




                                          20
Rosenthal, Stuart S. and William C. Strange, “Evidence on the Nature and Sources of
      Agglomeration Economies,” in J.V. Henderson and J.-F. Thisse, eds., Handbook
      of Urban and Regional Economics, Volume 4 (Amsterdam: Elsevier), 2004,
      2119-2172.

Shiller, Robert J. (1993), Macro Markets: Creating Institutions for Managing Society’s
        Largest Economic Risks, Oxford University Press.

Sinai, Todd and Nicholas Souleles (2005). “Owner Occupied Housing as a Hedge
        Against Rent Risk,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1990). “Symposium on Bubbles,” Journal of Economic Perspectives
        4(2), Spring, pp. 13-18.

Stein, Jeremy (1995). “Prices and Trading Volume in the Housing Market: A Model with
        Downpayment Effects,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 110, May, pp. 379-406.

Terrones, Marcos (2004). “The Global House Price Boom” in The World Economic
       Outlook: The Global Demographic Transition Chapter 2 (Three Current Policy
       Issues), pp. 71-89.

Venti, Steven and David Wise (1991). “Aging and the Income Value of Housing
       Wealth,” Journal of Public Economics (44), pp. 371-397.




                                           21
                                                     Table 1
                        Conventional Measures of House Price Dynamics
                                        1         2        3         4         5       6        7         8       9
                                          Real Price Index           Price-to-Rent Ratio       Price-to-Income Ratio
                                     at prior at prior            at prior at prior          at prior at prior
                                      peak     trough in 2004      peak     trough in 2004    peak     trough in 2004
Markets where house prices peaked in the late 1980s and had a trough in the 1990s:
   Atlanta,GA                         1.04     0.91     1.20       1.04      0.89     1.15    1.22      0.87   1.07
   Austin, TX                         1.23     0.92     1.13       1.42      0.86     1.05    1.31      0.78   0.94
   Baltimore, MD                      1.08     0.96     1.41       1.03      0.97     1.25    1.11      0.86   1.17
   Boston, MA                         1.21     0.86     1.67       1.19      0.90     1.36    1.28      0.85   1.36
   Dallas, TX                         1.23     0.84     0.99       1.26      0.85     0.96    1.38      0.77   0.88
   District of Columbia, DC           1.14     0.92     1.50       1.11      0.96     1.31    1.12      0.85   1.27
   Jacksonville, FL                   1.05     0.89     1.34       1.06      0.90     1.25    1.22      0.84   1.16
   Los Angeles, CA                    1.27     0.83     1.59       1.21      0.98     1.41    1.23      0.84   1.48
   Nashville, TN                      1.04     0.89     1.17       1.05      0.95     1.14    1.24      0.92   0.95
   New York, NY                       1.26     0.91     1.54       1.36      0.82     1.19    1.29      0.85   1.34
   Norfolk, VA                        1.08     0.94     1.30       1.09      0.97     1.16    1.16      0.88   1.14
   Oakland, CA                        1.11     0.85     1.68       1.14      0.87     1.51    1.17      0.84   1.38
   Orange County, CA                  1.20     0.82     1.68       1.18      0.90     1.49    1.18      0.83   1.56
   Philadelphia, PA                   1.18     0.95     1.36       1.14      0.97     1.25    1.19      0.86   1.14
   Phoenix, AZ                        1.09     0.84     1.25       1.04      0.91     1.25    1.23      0.89   1.12
   Portland, OR                       1.24     1.23     1.40       1.06      0.72     1.41    1.18      1.04   1.25
   Raleigh-Durham, NC                 1.05     0.93     1.11       1.11      0.96     1.08    1.26      0.88   0.98
   Richmond, VA                       1.04     0.96     1.22       1.04      0.95     1.15    1.23      0.90   1.08
   Sacramento, CA                     1.16     0.86     1.63       1.20      0.88     1.34    1.20      0.83   1.47
   San Bernadino-Riverside, CA        1.19     0.80     1.55       1.13      0.90     1.37    1.16      0.84   1.52
   San Diego, CA                      1.11     0.84     1.83       1.12      0.90     1.52    1.14      0.84   1.55
   San Francisco, CA                  1.15     0.87     1.65       1.26      0.82     1.44    1.21      0.87   1.37
   San Jose, CA                       1.11     0.86     1.62       1.22      0.81     1.62    1.21      0.87   1.32
   Seattle, WA                        1.04     1.01     1.45       1.04      0.95     1.35    1.08      0.99   1.23
Markets where house prices were high in the early 1980s and rebounded in the 2000s:
   Charlotte, NC                      1.02      0.95    1.14       1.05     0.97      1.10    1.28      0.89   0.97
   Chicago, IL                        1.00      1.00    1.37       1.04     0.98      1.29    1.06      0.94   1.23
   Cincinnati, OH                     1.06      0.95    1.17       1.14     0.90      1.14    1.30      0.92   0.98
   Cleveland, OH                      1.04      0.86    1.18       1.09     0.87      1.20    1.23      0.97   1.06
   Columbus, OH                       0.99      0.95    1.18       1.03     0.95      1.19    1.24      0.92   1.00
   Denver, CO                         1.00      0.75    1.39       1.01     0.87      1.22    1.21      0.93   1.17
   Detroit, MI                        1.00      0.72    1.39       0.98     0.70      1.42    1.21      0.91   1.19
   Fort Lauderdale, FL                1.05      0.88    1.51       1.11     0.86      1.43    1.25      0.84   1.40
   Indianapolis, IN                   1.03      0.97    1.10       1.03     1.03      1.17    1.27      0.88   0.93
   Kansas City, KS                    1.16      0.87    1.18       1.28     0.92      1.17    1.39      0.87   1.02
   Memphis, TN                        1.06      1.03    1.06       1.10     0.95      1.01    1.32      0.86   0.86
   Miami, FL                          1.05      0.94    1.58       0.99     0.98      1.45    1.24      0.91   1.46
   Milwaukee, MN                      1.07      0.85    1.32       1.10     0.82      1.36    1.25      0.95   1.13
   Minneapolis, MN                    1.02      0.87    1.48       1.00     0.97      1.45    1.27      0.86   1.25
   Orlando, FL                        1.05      0.89    1.26       1.13     0.88      1.18    1.23      0.84   1.13
   Pittsburgh, PA                     1.07      1.03    1.17       1.06     1.04      1.20    1.26      0.88   0.98
   St. Louis, MO                      1.08      0.92    1.22       1.01     0.99      1.23    1.33      0.88   1.05
   Tampa, FL                          1.04      0.88    1.38       1.04     0.90      1.28    1.22      0.83   1.22
Markets where house prices have declined since the early 1980s and never fully rebounded:
   Fort Worth, TX                     1.23     0.85     0.97       1.25      0.85     0.95    1.45      0.75   0.86
   Houston, TX                        1.38     0.82     1.02       1.30      0.84     0.96    1.50      0.76   0.87
   New Orleans, LA                    1.24     0.80     1.16       1.08      0.86     1.19    1.42      0.89   0.96
   San Antonio, TX                    1.30     0.83     0.97       1.40      0.83     0.95    1.47      0.72   0.81

   Notes: 24-year within-MSA average is normalized to 1.00. Values are not comparable across markets.
    2004 figures are in bold when they exceed their prior peak values.
                                              Table 2
            How User Cost Varies Across Cities and Over Time
                                          1              2                3                 4
                                                                    % change in       % change in
                                      Average        User cost     user cost since   user cost since
                                      user cost       in 2004        prior peak       prior trough
Markets where house prices peaked in the late 1980s and had a trough in the 1990s:
   Atlanta,GA                           5.3%           3.9%              -31%               -26%
   Austin, TX                           6.0%           4.5%              -42%               -22%
   Baltimore, MD                        5.7%           4.3%              -29%               -22%
   Boston, MA                           5.3%           4.0%              -34%               -21%
   Dallas, TX                           6.4%           4.9%              -17%               -18%
   District of Columbia, DC             5.6%           4.4%              -28%               -22%
   Jacksonville, FL                     4.9%           3.4%              -23%               -25%
   Los Angeles, CA                      4.4%           3.1%              -38%               -27%
   Nashville, TX                        5.5%           4.0%              -31%               -21%
   New York, NY                         6.0%           4.8%              -29%               -20%
   Norfolk, VA                          5.6%           4.2%              -33%               -23%
   Oakland, CA                          4.2%           2.9%              -39%               -30%
   Orange County, CA                    3.7%           2.5%              -41%               -33%
   Philadelphia, PA                     6.6%           5.2%              -27%               -19%
   Phoenix, AZ                          4.7%           3.3%              -23%                -6%
   Portland, OR                         6.0%           4.7%              -11%               -20%
   Raleigh-Durham, NC                   5.2%           3.8%              -19%               -20%
   Richmond, VA                         6.1%           4.7%              -27%               -21%
   Sacramento, CA                       4.7%           3.5%              -28%               -25%
   San Bernadino-Riverside, CA          4.6%           3.3%              -36%               -26%
   San Diego, CA                        4.1%           2.9%              -40%               -30%
   San Francisco, CA                    3.7%           2.4%              -41%               -34%
   San Jose, CA                         3.3%           2.0%              -46%               -33%
   Seattle, WA                          4.9%           3.4%              -38%               -25%
Markets where house prices were high in the early 1980s and rebounded in the 2000s
   Charlotte, NC                        5.2%            3.8%           -35%                  -6%
   Chicago, IL                          6.3%            4.9%           -30%                 -24%
   Cincinnati, OH                       6.5%            5.1%           -14%                 -22%
   Cleveland, OH                        6.4%            5.0%           -14%                 -36%
   Columbus, OH                         6.2%            4.8%           -15%                 -23%
   Denver, CO                           5.1%            3.7%           -42%                 -28%
   Detroit, MI                          6.6%            5.2%           -11%                 -41%
   Fort Lauderdale, FL                  5.8%            4.3%           -42%                 -23%
   Indianapolis, IN                     6.0%            4.5%           -16%                 -25%
   Kansas City, KS                      5.7%            4.2%           -16%                  -7%
   Memphis, TN                          6.0%            4.5%           -29%                 -23%
   Miami, FL                            6.2%            4.8%           -15%                 -21%
   Milwaukee, MN                        7.0%            5.7%            -5%                 -33%
   Minneapolis, MN                      5.6%            4.3%           -10%                 -18%
   Orlando, FL                          5.9%            4.4%           -42%                 -23%
   Pittsburgh, PA                       7.1%            5.7%           -12%                 -18%
   St. Louis, MO                        6.1%            4.7%           -15%                  -7%
   Tampa, FL                            6.1%            4.6%           -18%                 -22%
Markets where house prices have declined since the early 1980s and never fully rebounded:
   Fort Worth, TX                      6.2%             4.7%           -15%                 -19%
   Houston, TX                         6.7%             5.2%           -38%                 -20%
   New Orleans, LA                     5.3%             3.9%           -17%                 -28%
   San Antonio, TX                     6.9%             5.4%           -42%                 -23%
                                                               Table 3
                             User Cost-Based Assessments of House Price Levels
                                         1           2           3          4                  5          6           7         8
                                              Imputed-to-Actual-Rent Ratio                         Imputed-Rent-to-Income Ratio
                                     at sample at sample                % of years         at sample at sample             % of years
                                        peak      trough     in 2004 below 2004               peak     trough     in 2004  below 2004
Markets where the imputed rent-rent ratio peaked in the late 1980s and had a trough in the 1990s:
   Boston, MA                          1.37         0.67        1.02        60%             1.40         0.72     1.03       60%
   District of Columbia, DC            1.24         0.76        1.02        56%             1.32         0.76     0.99       56%
   Los Angeles, CA                     1.42         0.68        1.03        56%             1.43         0.74     1.07       60%
   New York, NY                        1.52         0.62        0.95        52%             1.43         0.69     1.07       72%
   Oakland, CA                         1.35         0.72        1.08        64%             1.37         0.72     0.98       48%
   Orange County, CA                   1.42         0.69        1.00        52%             1.39         0.72     1.05       60%
   Philadelphia, PA                    1.27         0.78        0.99        52%             1.32         0.76     0.89       32%
   Portland, OR                        1.27         0.75        1.13        76%             1.26         0.77     1.00       48%
   San Bernadino-Riverside, CA         1.37         0.76        1.05        48%             1.35         0.74     1.12       68%
   San Diego, CA                       1.33         0.70        1.08        68%             1.35         0.73     1.10       64%
   San Francisco, CA                   1.52         0.71        0.97        48%             1.45         0.72     0.92       44%
   San Jose, CA                        1.51         0.67        1.04        64%             1.46         0.70     0.84       20%
Markets where the imputed rent-rent ratio was high in the early 1980s and flat or rising by the 2000s:
   Baltimore, MD                       1.34         0.78         0.96        36%               1.36      0.73     0.89       32%
   Chicago, IL                         1.31         0.81         1.01        56%               1.27      0.83     0.96       48%
   Cincinnati, OH                      1.34         0.78         0.91        24%               1.40      0.71     0.77       8%
   Cleveland, OH                       1.25         0.82         0.96        36%               1.29      0.78     0.84       8%
   Columbus, OH                        1.22         0.81         0.93        28%               1.43      0.71     0.77       8%
   Denver, CO                          1.46         0.70         0.90        28%               1.60      0.66     0.85       24%
   Detroit, MI                         1.28         0.70         1.16        88%               1.31      0.76     0.95       28%
   Fort Lauderdale, FL                 1.45         0.73         1.07        60%               1.61      0.71     1.04       64%
   Jacksonville, FL                    1.53         0.73         0.88        32%               1.68      0.67     0.80       28%
   Kansas City, KS                     1.46         0.74         0.88        28%               1.55      0.68     0.75       16%
   Miami, FL                           1.31         0.77         1.12        80%               1.52      0.74     1.12       72%
   Milwaukee, MN                       1.15         0.79         1.14        88%               1.28      0.83     0.93       32%
   Minneapolis, MN                     1.23         0.79         1.14        88%               1.45      0.73     0.97       56%
   New Orleans, LA                     1.46         0.71         0.88        16%               1.76      0.61     0.69       12%
   Phoenix, AZ                         1.46         0.71         0.89        28%               1.66      0.66     0.78       20%
   Pittsburgh, PA                      1.22         0.84         0.97        32%               1.41      0.73     0.78       8%
   Sacramento, CA                      1.46         0.76         0.99        56%               1.39      0.73     1.09       68%
   Seattle, WA                         1.37         0.77         0.96        40%               1.35      0.75     0.87       20%
   St. Louis, MO                       1.21         0.84         0.96        28%               1.46      0.71     0.80       20%
   Tampa, FL                           1.43         0.78         0.98        56%               1.55      0.72     0.92       48%
Markets where the imputed rent-rent ratio has declined since the early 1980s and never rebounded:
   Atlanta,GA                          1.44         0.76        0.86         24%           1.55          0.70     0.79       20%
   Austin, TX                          1.55         0.72        0.79         16%           1.71          0.66     0.70       8%
   Charlotte, NC                       1.34         0.73        0.81         12%           1.54          0.64     0.71       8%
   Dallas, TX                          1.50         0.67        0.74          8%           1.71          0.62     0.66       12%
   Fort Worth, TX                      1.55         0.66        0.72          8%           1.71          0.60     0.64       8%
   Houston, TX                         1.76         0.68        0.74         12%           1.81          0.62     0.66       16%
   Indianapolis, IN                    1.22         0.81        0.90         20%           1.48          0.66     0.70       4%
   Memphis, TN                         1.37         0.70        0.76          8%           1.56          0.60     0.64       4%
   Nashville, TX                       1.32         0.75        0.84         12%           1.55          0.63     0.69       8%
   Norfolk, VA                         1.49         0.73        0.88         20%           1.49          0.69     0.86       24%
   Orlando, FL                         1.50         0.75        0.88         36%           1.58          0.72     0.84       36%
   Raleigh-Durham, NC                  1.26         0.72        0.80         12%           1.56          0.65     0.72       12%
   Richmond, VA                        1.40         0.78        0.90         24%           1.44          0.72     0.84       20%
   San Antonio, TX                     1.61         0.67        0.74         12%           1.83          0.59     0.62       8%

   Notes: 24-year within-MSA average is normalized to 1.00. Values are not comparable across markets.
                               Figure 1
                Real US House Price Index,
          Price-to-Rent & Price-to-Income Ratios
                  (Ratios normalized to 24-yr average)
1.4
1.2




                                                   Real Price


                                    Price/Rent
1




                                             Price/Income
.8




      1980        1985         1990     1995             2000         2005
                                   Year


Source: OFHEO Price Index, REIS Inc., BEA, BLS CPI Index-All Urban Consumers
                                                  Figure 2
                   Imputed-to-Actual-Rent Ratio vs Price-to-Rent Ratio
                                  (Ratios normalized to 24-yr average)
               BOSTON                             CHICAGO                               DENVER
  2




                                     2




                                                                         2
  1.5




                                     1.5




                                                                         1.5
  1




                                     1




                                                                         1
  .5




                                     .5




                                                                         .5
        1980    1990       2000            1980     1990     2000              1980     1990     2000
                  Year                                Year                                Year


               DETROIT                            HOUSTON                             LOS_ANGELES
  2




                                     2




                                                                         2
  1.5




                                     1.5




                                                                         1.5
  1




                                     1




                                                                         1
  .5




                                     .5




                                                                         .5
        1980    1990       2000            1980     1990     2000              1980     1990     2000
                  Year                                Year                                Year

Source: Authors' Calculations

                           Imputed Rent/Actual Rent                 Price/Actual Rent
                                            Figure 2, Continued
                     Imputed-to-Actual-Rent Ratio vs Price-to-Rent Ratio
                                   (Ratios normalized to 24-yr average)

                MIAMI                             MINNEAPOLIS                            NEW_YORK
  2




                                     2




                                                                          2
  1.5




                                     1.5




                                                                          1.5
  1




                                     1




                                                                          1
  .5




                                     .5




                                                                          .5
        1980    1990       2000            1980     1990     2000               1980      1990     2000
                  Year                                Year                                  Year


               PORTLAND                           SAN_DIEGO                            SAN_FRANCISCO
  2




                                     2




                                                                          2
  1.5




                                     1.5




                                                                          1.5
  1




                                     1




                                                                          1
  .5




                                     .5




                                                                          .5
        1980    1990       2000            1980     1990     2000               1980      1990     2000
                  Year                                Year                                  Year

Source: Authors' Calculations


                            Imputed Rent/Actual Rent                 Price/Actual Rent
                                           Figure 3
                             Real 10 Year Interest Rates


       10
       7.5
Interest Rate
      52.5
       0




                  1980         1985         1990     1995             2000         2005
                                                Year

                Source: Federal Reserve Bank H.15 Release, Federal Reserve Bank Livingston
                        Survey: 10 yr expected inflation
                                                    Figure 4
                 Imputed-Rent-to-Income Ratio vs. Price-to-Income Ratio
                                    (Ratios normalized to 24-yr average)

               BOSTON                               CHICAGO                               DENVER
  2




                                       2




                                                                           2
  1.5




                                       1.5




                                                                           1.5
  1




                                       1




                                                                           1
  .5




                                       .5




                                                                           .5
        1980    1990       2000              1980    1990      2000              1980     1990     2000
                  Year                                 Year                                 Year


               DETROIT                              HOUSTON                             LOS_ANGELES
  2




                                       2




                                                                           2
  1.5




                                       1.5




                                                                           1.5
  1




                                       1




                                                                           1
  .5




                                       .5




                                                                           .5
        1980    1990       2000              1980    1990      2000              1980     1990     2000
                  Year                                 Year                                 Year

Source: Authors' Calculations


                                  Imputed Rent/Income                 Price/Income
                                             Figure 4, Continued
                   Imputed-Rent-to-Income Ratio vs. Price-to-Income Ratio
                                    (Ratios normalized to 24-yr average)

                MIAMI                              MINNEAPOLIS                            NEW_YORK
  2




                                      2




                                                                           2
  1.5




                                      1.5




                                                                           1.5
  1




                                      1




                                                                           1
  .5




                                      .5




                                                                           .5
        1980    1990       2000             1980     1990     2000               1980      1990     2000
                  Year                                 Year                                  Year


               PORTLAND                            SAN_DIEGO                            SAN_FRANCISCO
  2




                                      2




                                                                           2
  1.5




                                      1.5




                                                                           1.5
  1




                                      1




                                                                           1
  .5




                                      .5




                                                                           .5
        1980    1990       2000             1980     1990     2000               1980      1990     2000
                  Year                                 Year                                  Year

Source: Authors' Calculations


                                  Imputed Rent/Income                Price/Income
                                 Appendix Figure 1
                               Real House Price Index
                          (Index normalized to 24-year average)

              ATLANTA                          AUSTIN                        BALTIMORE
2




                                 2




                                                                2
1.5




                                 1.5




                                                                1.5
1




                                 1




                                                                1
.5




                                 .5




                                                                .5
      1980     1990     2000           1980     1990     2000         1980     1990     2000
                 Year                             Year                           Year


              BOSTON                          CHARLOTTE                      CHICAGO
2




                                 2




                                                                2
1.5




                                 1.5




                                                                1.5
1




                                 1




                                                                1
.5




                                 .5




                                                                .5
      1980     1990     2000           1980     1990     2000         1980     1990     2000
                 Year                             Year                           Year


             CINCINNATI                       CLEVELAND                       DALLAS
2




                                 2




                                                                2
1.5




                                 1.5




                                                                1.5
1




                                 1




                                                                1
.5




                                 .5




                                                                .5




      1980     1990     2000           1980     1990     2000         1980     1990     2000
                 Year                             Year                           Year


                 DC                            DENVER                         DETROIT
2




                                 2




                                                                2
1.5




                                 1.5




                                                                1.5
1




                                 1




                                                                1
.5




                                 .5




                                                                .5




      1980     1990     2000           1980     1990     2000         1980     1990     2000
                 Year                             Year                           Year
                            Appendix Figure 1, continued
                                Real House Price Index
                           (Index normalized to 24-year average)

      FORT_LAUDERDALE                          FORT_WORTH                       HOUSTON
2




                                  2




                                                                  2
1.5




                                  1.5




                                                                  1.5
1




                                  1




                                                                  1
.5




                                  .5




                                                                  .5
      1980      1990     2000           1980      1990     2000         1980      1990     2000
                  Year                              Year                            Year


             INDIANAPOLIS                  JACKSONVILLE                        KANSAS_CITY
2




                                  2




                                                                  2
1.5




                                  1.5




                                                                  1.5
1




                                  1




                                                                  1
.5




                                  .5




                                                                  .5
      1980      1990     2000           1980      1990     2000         1980      1990     2000
                  Year                              Year                            Year


             LOS_ANGELES                        MEMPHIS                           MIAMI
2




                                  2




                                                                  2
1.5




                                  1.5




                                                                  1.5
1




                                  1




                                                                  1
.5




                                  .5




                                                                  .5




      1980      1990     2000           1980      1990     2000         1980      1990     2000
                  Year                              Year                            Year


             MILWAUKEE                         MINNEAPOLIS                      NASHVILLE
2




                                  2




                                                                  2
1.5




                                  1.5




                                                                  1.5
1




                                  1




                                                                  1
.5




                                  .5




                                                                  .5




      1980      1990     2000           1980      1990     2000         1980      1990     2000
                  Year                              Year                            Year
                            Appendix Figure 1, Continued
                                Real House Price Index
                           (Index normalized to 24-year average)

         NEW_ORLEANS                           NEW_YORK                       NORFOLK
2




                                  2




                                                                2
1.5




                                  1.5




                                                                1.5
1




                                  1




                                                                1
.5




                                  .5




                                                                .5
      1980      1990     2000           1980    1990     2000         1980     1990     2000
                  Year                            Year                           Year


               OAKLAND                   ORANGE_COUNTY                        ORLANDO
2




                                  2




                                                                2
1.5




                                  1.5




                                                                1.5
1




                                  1




                                                                1
.5




                                  .5




                                                                .5
      1980      1990     2000           1980    1990     2000         1980     1990     2000
                  Year                            Year                           Year


             PHILADELPHIA                      PHOENIX                       PITTSBURGH
2




                                  2




                                                                2
1.5




                                  1.5




                                                                1.5
1




                                  1




                                                                1
.5




                                  .5




                                                                .5




      1980      1990     2000           1980    1990     2000         1980     1990     2000
                  Year                            Year                           Year


              PORTLAND                   RALEIGH-DURHAM                      RICHMOND
2




                                  2




                                                                2
1.5




                                  1.5




                                                                1.5
1




                                  1




                                                                1
.5




                                  .5




                                                                .5




      1980      1990     2000           1980    1990     2000         1980     1990     2000
                  Year                            Year                           Year
                          Appendix Figure 1, Continued
                              Real House Price Index
                         (Index normalized to 24-year average)

             RICHMOND                        SACRAMENTO                     SAN_ANTONIO
2




                                2




                                                               2
1.5




                                1.5




                                                               1.5
1




                                1




                                                               1
.5




                                .5




                                                               .5
      1980    1990     2000           1980     1990     2000         1980      1990     2000
                Year                             Year                            Year


      SAN_BERN-RIVERSIDE                     SAN_DIEGO                 SAN_FRANCISCO
2




                                2




                                                               2
1.5




                                1.5




                                                               1.5
1




                                1




                                                               1
.5




                                .5




                                                               .5
      1980    1990     2000           1980     1990     2000         1980      1990     2000
                Year                             Year                            Year


             SAN_JOSE                         SEATTLE                        ST_LOUIS
2




                                2




                                                               2
1.5




                                1.5




                                                               1.5
1




                                1




                                                               1
.5




                                .5




                                                               .5




      1980    1990     2000           1980     1990     2000         1980      1990     2000
                Year                             Year                            Year


              TAMPA
2
1.5
1
.5




      1980    1990     2000
                Year



Source: OFHEO, BLS Consumer Price Index—All Urban Consumers
                                   Appendix Figure 2
        Imputed-to-Actual-Rent Ratio vs Price-to-Rent Ratio
                           (Ratios normalized to 24-year average)
              ATLANTA                             AUSTIN                         BALTIMORE
2




                                   2




                                                                    2
1.5




                                   1.5




                                                                    1.5
1




                                   1




                                                                    1
.5




                                   .5




                                                                    .5
      1980     1990      2000            1980      1990     2000          1980     1990     2000
                 Year                                Year                            Year


             CHARLOTTE                           CINCINNATI                      CLEVELAND
2




                                   2




                                                                    2
1.5




                                   1.5




                                                                    1.5
1




                                   1




                                                                    1
.5




                                   .5




                                                                    .5
      1980     1990      2000            1980      1990     2000          1980     1990     2000
                 Year                                Year                            Year


               DALLAS                                DC                   FORT_LAUDERDALE
2




                                   2




                                                                    2
1.5




                                   1.5




                                                                    1.5
1




                                   1




                                                                    1
.5




                                   .5




                                                                    .5




      1980     1990      2000            1980      1990     2000          1980     1990     2000
                 Year                                Year                            Year


             FORT_WORTH                         INDIANAPOLIS                 JACKSONVILLE
2




                                   2




                                                                    2
1.5




                                   1.5




                                                                    1.5
1




                                   1




                                                                    1
.5




                                   .5




                                                                    .5




      1980     1990      2000            1980      1990     2000          1980     1990     2000
                 Year                                Year                            Year




                        Imputed Rent/Actual Rent                   Price/Actual Rent
                             Appendix Figure 2, Continued
        Imputed-to-Actual-Rent Ratio vs Price-to-Rent Ratio
                            (Ratios normalized to 24-year average)

             KANSAS_CITY                         MEMPHIS                        MILWAUKEE
2




                                    2




                                                                   2
1.5




                                    1.5




                                                                   1.5
1




                                    1




                                                                   1
.5




                                    .5




                                                                   .5
      1980      1990      2000            1980    1990     2000          1980     1990     2000
                  Year                              Year                            Year


              NASHVILLE                      NEW_ORLEANS                         NORFOLK
2




                                    2




                                                                   2
1.5




                                    1.5




                                                                   1.5
1




                                    1




                                                                   1
.5




                                    .5




                                                                   .5
      1980      1990      2000            1980    1990     2000          1980     1990     2000
                  Year                              Year                            Year


               OAKLAND                     ORANGE_COUNTY                         ORLANDO
2




                                    2




                                                                   2
1.5




                                    1.5




                                                                   1.5
1




                                    1




                                                                   1
.5




                                    .5




                                                                   .5




      1980      1990      2000            1980    1990     2000          1980     1990     2000
                  Year                              Year                            Year


             PHILADELPHIA                        PHOENIX                        PITTSBURGH
2




                                    2




                                                                   2
1.5




                                    1.5




                                                                   1.5
1




                                    1




                                                                   1
.5




                                    .5




                                                                   .5




      1980      1990      2000            1980    1990     2000          1980     1990     2000
                  Year                              Year                            Year

                         Imputed Rent/Actual Rent                 Price/Actual Rent
                              Appendix Figure 2, Continued
        Imputed-to-Actual-Rent Ratio vs Price-to-Rent Ratio
                             (Ratios normalized to 24-year average)

       RALEIGH-DURHAM                            RICHMOND                       SACRAMENTO
2




                                    2




                                                                   2
1.5




                                    1.5




                                                                   1.5
1




                                    1




                                                                   1
.5




                                    .5




                                                                   .5
      1980      1990       2000           1980    1990     2000          1980     1990     2000
                  Year                              Year                            Year


             SAN_ANTONIO                  SAN_BERN-RIVERSIDE                     SAN_JOSE
2




                                    2




                                                                   2
1.5




                                    1.5




                                                                   1.5
1




                                    1




                                                                   1
.5




                                    .5




                                                                   .5
      1980      1990       2000           1980    1990     2000          1980     1990     2000
                  Year                              Year                            Year


               SEATTLE                           ST_LOUIS                         TAMPA
2




                                    2




                                                                   2
1.5




                                    1.5




                                                                   1.5
1




                                    1




                                                                   1
.5




                                    .5




                                                                   .5




      1980      1990       2000           1980    1990     2000          1980     1990     2000
                  Year                              Year                            Year



                         Imputed Rent/Actual Rent                 Price/Actual Rent


  Source: OFHEO, BLS Consumer Price Index—All Urban Consumers
                                 Appendix Figure 3
  Imputed-Rent-to-Income Ratio vs. Price-to-Income Ratio
                           (Ratios normalized to 24-yr average)

              ATLANTA                           AUSTIN                        BALTIMORE
2




                                 2




                                                                 2
1.5




                                 1.5




                                                                 1.5
1




                                 1




                                                                 1
.5




                                 .5




                                                                 .5
      1980     1990     2000           1980      1990     2000         1980     1990     2000
                 Year                              Year                           Year


             CHARLOTTE                         CINCINNATI                     CLEVELAND
2




                                 2




                                                                 2
1.5




                                 1.5




                                                                 1.5
1




                                 1




                                                                 1
.5




                                 .5




                                                                 .5
      1980     1990     2000           1980      1990     2000         1980     1990     2000
                 Year                              Year                           Year


               DALLAS                              DC                  FORT_LAUDERDALE
2




                                 2




                                                                 2
1.5




                                 1.5




                                                                 1.5
1




                                 1




                                                                 1
.5




                                 .5




                                                                 .5




      1980     1990     2000           1980      1990     2000         1980     1990     2000
                 Year                              Year                           Year


             FORT_WORTH                       INDIANAPOLIS                JACKSONVILLE
2




                                 2




                                                                 2
1.5




                                 1.5




                                                                 1.5
1




                                 1




                                                                 1
.5




                                 .5




                                                                 .5




      1980     1990     2000           1980      1990     2000         1980     1990     2000
                 Year                              Year                           Year



                         Imputed Rent/Income                     Price/Income
                            Appendix Figure 3, Continued
  Imputed-Rent-to-Income Ratio vs. Price-to-Income Ratio
                            (Ratios normalized to 24-yr average)

             KANSAS_CITY                       MEMPHIS                       MILWAUKEE
2




                                  2




                                                                2
1.5




                                  1.5




                                                                1.5
1




                                  1




                                                                1
.5




                                  .5




                                                                .5
      1980      1990     2000           1980    1990     2000         1980     1990     2000
                  Year                            Year                           Year


              NASHVILLE                    NEW_ORLEANS                        NORFOLK
2




                                  2




                                                                2
1.5




                                  1.5




                                                                1.5
1




                                  1




                                                                1
.5




                                  .5




                                                                .5
      1980      1990     2000           1980    1990     2000         1980     1990     2000
                  Year                            Year                           Year


               OAKLAND                   ORANGE_COUNTY                        ORLANDO
2




                                  2




                                                                2
1.5




                                  1.5




                                                                1.5
1




                                  1




                                                                1
.5




                                  .5




                                                                .5




      1980      1990     2000           1980    1990     2000         1980     1990     2000
                  Year                            Year                           Year


             PHILADELPHIA                      PHOENIX                       PITTSBURGH
2




                                  2




                                                                2
1.5




                                  1.5




                                                                1.5
1




                                  1




                                                                1
.5




                                  .5




                                                                .5




      1980      1990     2000           1980    1990     2000         1980     1990     2000
                  Year                            Year                           Year

                         Imputed Rent/Income                    Price/Income
                            Appendix Figure 3, Continued
  Imputed-Rent-to-Income Ratio vs. Price-to-Income Ratio
                            (Ratios normalized to 24-yr average)

       RALEIGH-DURHAM                          RICHMOND                      SACRAMENTO
2




                                  2




                                                                2
1.5




                                  1.5




                                                                1.5
1




                                  1




                                                                1
.5




                                  .5




                                                                .5
      1980      1990     2000           1980    1990     2000         1980     1990     2000
                  Year                            Year                           Year


             SAN_ANTONIO                SAN_BERN-RIVERSIDE                    SAN_JOSE
2




                                  2




                                                                2
1.5




                                  1.5




                                                                1.5
1




                                  1




                                                                1
.5




                                  .5




                                                                .5
      1980      1990     2000           1980    1990     2000         1980     1990     2000
                  Year                            Year                           Year


               SEATTLE                         ST_LOUIS                        TAMPA
2




                                  2




                                                                2
1.5




                                  1.5




                                                                1.5
1




                                  1




                                                                1
.5




                                  .5




                                                                .5




      1980      1990     2000           1980    1990     2000         1980     1990     2000
                  Year                            Year                           Year



                         Imputed Rent/Income                    Price/Income


Source: OFHEO, BLS Consumer Price Index—All Urban Consumers
