                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                TRUSTING THE STOCK MARKET

                                             Luigi Guiso
                                            Paola Sapienza
                                            Luigi Zingales

                                         Working Paper 11648
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11648


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2005




We thank Raghu Suryanarayanan for truly excellent research assistance. Owen Lamont, Annette Vissing-
Jørgensen, as well as participants at seminars at Columbia University, the NBER Capital Markets and the
Economy summer meeting, New York University, MIT, Northwestern University, University of Texas at
Austin, and the University of Chicago have provided helpful comments. Luigi Guiso thanks MURST and
the EEC, Paola Sapienza the Center for International Economics and Development at Northwestern
University, and Luigi Zingales the Stigler Center at the University of Chicago for financial support. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Luigi Guiso, Paola Sapienza and Luigi Zingales. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Trusting the Stock Market
Luigi Guiso, Paola Sapienza and Luigi Zingales
NBER Working Paper No. 11648
September 2005
JEL No. D1, D8

                                             ABSTRACT




We provide a new explanation to the limited stock market participation puzzle. In deciding whether
to buy stocks, investors factor in the risk of being cheated. The perception of this risk is a function
not only of the objective characteristics of the stock, but also of the subjective characteristics of the
investor. Less trusting individuals are less likely to buy stock and, conditional on buying stock, they
will buy less. The calibration of the model shows that this problem is sufficiently severe to account
for the lack of participation of some of the richest investors in the United States as well as for
differences in the rate of participation across countries. We also find evidence consistent with these
propositions in Dutch and Italian micro data, as well as in cross country data.


Luigi Guiso                                             Luigi Zingales
Visiting Professor of Economics                         Harvard University
University of Chicago GSB                               Littauer Center
1101 East 58th Street                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
Chicago, IL 60637                                       and NBER
lguiso@gsb.uchicago.edu                                 luigi.zingales@chicagogsb.edu

Paola Sapienza
Finance Department
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2001
and NBER
paola-sapienza@northwestern.edu
   The decision to invest in stocks requires not only an assessment of the risk-return trade-off
given the existing data, but also an act of faith (trust) that the data in our possession are
reliable, that the overall system is fair. Episodes like the collapse of Enron may change not only
the distribution of expected payoffs, but the fundamental trust in the system that delivers those
payoffs. Most of us will not enter a three-card game played on the street, even after observing
a lot of rounds (and thus getting an estimate of the “true” distribution of payoffs). The reason
is that we do not trust the fairness of the game (and the person playing it). In this paper
we claim that for many people (especially people unfamiliar with finance), the stock market is
not intrinsically different from the three-card game. They need to have trust in the fairness
of the game and in the reliability of the numbers to invest in it. We focus on trust to explain
differences in stock market participation across individuals and across countries.
   We define trust as the subjective probability individuals attribute to the possibility of being
cheated. This subjective probability is partly based on objective characteristics of the financial
system (the quality of investor protection, its enforcement, etc.) that determine the likelihood of
frauds such as Enron and Parmalat. But trust reflects also the subjective characteristics of the
person trusting. Differences in educational background rooted in past history (Guiso, Sapienza,
and Zingales (GSZ), 2004a) or in religious upbringing (GSZ, 2003) can create considerable
differences in levels of trust across individuals, regions, and countries. This difference between
subjective and objective beliefs can persist because learning about the true probability of a very
rare event takes very long time.
   These individual priors play a bigger role when investors are unfamiliar with the stock
market or lack data to assess it. But they are unlikely to fade away even with experience and
data. If trust is sufficiently low, very few will participate and accumulate enough information
to update a (possibly wrong) prior. Furthermore, when mistrust is deeply rooted, people may
be doubtful about any information they obtain and disregard it in revising their priors. For
example, data from a 2002 Gallup poll show that roughly 80 percent of respondents from some
Muslim countries (Pakistan, Iran, Indonesia, Turkey, Lebanon, Morocco, Kuwait, Jordan, and
Saudi Arabia) do not believe that Arabs committed the September 11 attacks (Gentzkow and
Shapiro, 2004).



                                                1
   To assess the explanatory power of a trust-based explanation we start by modelling the
impact of trust on portfolio decisions. Not only does the model provide testable implications,
but it also gives us a sense of the economic importance of this phenomenon. In the absence of
any cost of participation, a low level of trust can explain why a large fraction of individuals do
not invest in the stock market. In addition, the model shows that lack of trust amplifies the
effect of costly participation. For example, if an investor thinks that there is a 3% probability
that he will be cheated, the threshold level of wealth beyond which he invests in the stock
market will increase five folds. The calibration of the model shows that the existing level of
mistrust among investors is sufficiently severe to account for the lack of participation of some
of the richest investors in the United States as well as for differences in the rate of participation
across countries.
   To test the model’s predictions we use a sample of Dutch households. In the Fall of 2003
we included some specific questions on trust, attitudes towards risk, ambiguity aversion, and
optimism to a sample of 1,943 Dutch households as part of the annual Dutch National Bank
(DNB) Household survey. These data were then matched with the 2003 wave of the DNB
Household Survey, which has detailed information on households’ financial assets, income, and
demographics. We measured the level of generalized trust by asking our sample the same
question asked in the World Values Survey (a well-established cross country survey): “Generally
speaking, would you say that most people can be trusted or that you have to be very careful in
dealing with people?”.
   We find that trusting individuals are significantly more likely to buy stocks and risky assets
and, conditional on investing in stock, they invest a larger share of their wealth in it. This effect
is economically very important: trusting others increases the probability of buying stock by
50% of the average sample probability and raises the share invested in stock by 3.4 percentage
points (15.5% of the sample mean).
   These results are robust to controlling for differences in risk aversion and ambiguity aversion.
We capture these differences by asking people their willingness to pay for a purely risky lottery
and an ambiguous lottery. We then use these responses to compute an Arrow-Pratt measure of
individual risk aversion and a similar measure of ambiguity aversion.



                                                 2
   Since these measures are not statistically significant, however, one can still wonder whether
trust is not just a better measured proxy of risk tolerance. To dispel this possibility we look at
the number of stocks people invest in. In the presence of a per-stock cost of investing, our model
predicts that the optimal number of stocks is decreasing with an individual risk tolerance but
increasing in the level of trust. When we look at the Dutch sample, we find that the number of
stocks is increasing in trust, suggesting that trust is not just a proxy for low risk aversion.
   Trust is also not just a proxy for loss aversion, which in Ang et al.’s (2004) framework can
explain lack of participation. First, more loss-averse people should insure more, but we find
that less trusting people insure themselves less. Second, Osili and Paulson (2005) shows that
immigrants in the United States, facing the same objective distribution of returns, invest or not
in stock as a function of the quality of institutions of the country they are coming from. This
is consistent with the evidence (GSZ 2004a and 2005) that individuals tend to extrapolate the
trust of the environment where they are born to the new environment in which they live. It is
not clear why loss aversion should follow this pattern.
   We also want to ascertain that trust is not a proxy for other determinants of stock market
participation. For example, Puri and Robinson (2005) find that more optimistic individuals
(individuals who expect to live more) invest more in stock, while Dominitz and Manski (2005)
finds, consistent with Biais et al. (2004), that an individual’s subjective expectations about
stock market performance is also an important determinant.
   We control for differences in optimism across individuals by using the answers to a general
optimism question we borrowed from a standard Life Orientation Test (Scheier et al., 1994).
We control for differences in expectations thanks to a specific question on this topic that was
asked to a subsample of the households. When we insert these controls, the effect of trust is
unchanged.
   The measure of trust that we elicit in the DNB survey is a measure of generalized trust.
But stock market participation can be discouraged not only by general mistrust, but also by a
mistrust in the institutions that should facilitate stock market participation (brokerage houses,
etc.). To assess the role of this specific trust we use a customer survey conducted by a large
Italian bank, where people were asked their confidence towards the bank as a broker. Also in



                                                 3
this case we find that trust has a positive and large effect on stock market participation as well
as on the share invested in stocks.
   That lack of trust - either generalized or personalized – reduces the demand for equity
implies that companies will find it more difficult to float their stock in countries characterized
by low levels of trust. We test this proposition by using cross country differences in stock
participation and ownership concentration. We find that trust has a positive and significant
effect on the stock market participation and a negative effect on the dispersion of ownership.
These effects are present even when we control for law enforcement, legal protection, and legal
origin. Hence, cultural differences in trust appear to be a new additional explanation for cross
country differences in stock market development.
   We are obviously not the first ones to deal with limited stock market participation. Doc-
umented in several papers (e.g., Mankiw and Zeldes, 1991; Poterba and Samwick, 1995, for
the US, and Guiso et. al., 2001, for various other countries), this phenomenon is generally
explained with the presence of fixed participation costs (e.g. Haliassos and Bertaut, 1995;
Vissing-Jørgensen, 2003). The finding that wealth is highly correlated with participation rates
in cross-section data supports this explanation. But “participation costs are unlikely to be the
explanation for nonparticipation among high-wealth households.” (Vissing-Jørgensen, 2003 p.
188, see also Curcuru et al., 2004).
   While independent from fixed costs, our trust-based explanation is not alternative to it. In
fact, the two effects compound. The main advantage of the trust-based explanation is that it is
able to explain the significant fraction of wealthy people who do not invest in stocks. Accounting
for this phenomenon would require unrealistic level of entry costs. By contrast, since mistrust
is pervasive even at high level of wealth (the percentage of people who do not trust others
drops only from 66% in the bottom quartile of the wealth distribution to 62% at the top), the
trust-based explanation can easily account for lack of participation even among the wealthiest.
   Furthermore, as Table 1 documents, the fraction of wealthy people who do not participate
varies across countries. Explaining these differences only with the fixed cost of entry would
require even more unrealistic differences in the level of entry costs. By contrast, we will show
that trust varies widely across countries and in a way consistent with these differences.



                                                4
    Our trust-based explanation is also related to recent theories of limited stock market par-
ticipation based on ambiguity aversion (e.g. Knox, 2003). When investors are ambiguity averse
and have Gilboa-Schmeidler “max-min” utility, they may not participate even if there are no
other market frictions, such as fixed adoption costs (Dow et al., 1992, and Routledge and Zin,
2001). The two explanations, however, differ both from a theoretical and a practical point of
view.
    ¿From a theoretical point of view, the different nature of the two explanations can be appre-
ciated from brain experiments (Camerer, Loewenstein and Prelec, 2004; McCabe et al., 2001;
Rustichini et. al., 2002). This evidence shows that when individuals are faced with a standard
trust game, the part of the brain that is activated is the “Brodmann area 10”; while when they
have to choose among ambiguous and unambiguous lotteries, the part activated is the “insula
cortex.” The “Brodmann area 10” is the area of the brain related to people’s ability to make
inferences from the actions of others about their underlying preferences and beliefs, and is thus
the one that rests on culture. The “insula cortex” is a part of the brain that activates during
experiences of negative emotions, like pain or disgust, and is mostly related to instinct.
    At the practical level, our trust-based explanation has several advantages. First, if we are
interested in predicting stock market participation, models based on ambiguity aversion are
less promising. Ambiguity aversion is a parameter of the utility function, which is very hard
to measure and hard to explain on the basis of other factors. Other interesting explanations
of limited participation in the stock market share similar limits. For example, Ang et al.
(2004) provide an explanation based on Disappointment Aversion Preferences. Unfortunately,
measuring the degree of disappointment aversion in large samples is difficult. By contrast,
an individual level of trust is a prior that has been measured for several decades in sociological
surveys and has been linked to the individual personal history and the community the individual
lives in.
    Second, even if measures of ambiguity aversion or disappointment aversion could be obtained
and used to explain differences in participation across individuals, in the literature there is no
study showing that aversion to ambiguity or disappointment aversion differ systematically across
countries. While it is possible that preferences are affected by cultural heritage (see GSZ, 2005),



                                                5
evidence of differences across country of these preference parameters do not exist. To the
contrary, trust, being partly determined by cultural differences, can vary systematically across
countries (as it actually does) and can thus potentially explain international differences in stock
market participation.
      Third, since trust is the necessary act of faith we have to do when we are not properly
informed or we do not understand what is going on, the need for trust is negatively correlated
with information and education. More informed people rely less on trust and so do more
educated people. There is not an analogous implication in the literature based on ambiguity
aversion.
      Last but not least, our model based on trust seems to capture in a simpler and more realistic
way the reluctance some people show toward investing in the stock market.
      Finally, our trust-based explanation provides a new way to interpret the growing evidence
that familiarity breeds stock market investments. Empirically, there is evidence that investors
have a bias to invest in stocks of companies they are more familiar with. For example, Huberman
(2001) shows that shareholders of a Regional Bell Operating Company (RBOC) tend to live
in the area served by the RBOC. Similarly, Cohen (2005) documents that employees bias the
allocation of their 401-K plan in favor of their employer’s stock, possibly because they view their
employer’s stock as safer than a diversified portfolio (Driscoll et al., 1995). Traditionally, these
findings have been interpreted as evidence of Merton’s (1987) model of investors with limited
information. An alternative interpretation, consistent with our model and several papers in the
literature (Coval and Moskowitz, 1999, 2001) is that there is a strong correlation between trust
and local knowledge. This correlation can be the result of a causal link flowing both ways. On
the one hand, more knowledge, as we show in this paper, overcomes the barrier created by lack
of trust. Hence, mistrust will be less of an obstacle in investing in local stocks. On the other
hand, trust facilitates the collection of information and dissemination of information, as the
famous Paul Revere example demonstrates.1 Accordingly, our model is consistent with Hong,
  1
      When Paul Revere took the midnight ride in 1775 to inform his fellow citizens that the British were coming,
he mounted enough support to defeat them in Concord and begin the Revolutionary War. At the same moment
another Bostonian, William Dawes tried to convey the same message but he was unsuccessful even though he met
more people during his nocturnal ride (see Hackett Fisher, 1995). The difference between the Paul Revere and



                                                        6
Kubrick, and Stein (2004)’s findings that more social individuals (who go to church, visit their
neighbors, etc.) are more likely to hold stocks, since social individuals exhibit more generalized
trust (GSZ, 2003).
    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 shows the implications of introducing a
problem of trust in a standard portfolio model. It also derives the different implications trust
and risk aversion have when it comes to choosing the optimal number of stocks in a portfolio.
Section 2 describes the various data sources we use and the measures of trust, risk aversion,
ambiguity aversion, and optimism in the DNB survey. Section 3 presents the main results on
the effect of generalized trust obtained using the DNB survey. Section 4 discriminates between
trust and risk aversion, while Section 5 focuses on the effects of trust toward an intermediary.
Cross country regressions are presented in Section 6. Section 7 concludes.


1     The model

To illustrate the role of trust in portfolio choices, we start with a simple two-asset model. The
first one is a safe asset, which yields a certain return rf . The second asset, which we call stock,
is risky along two dimensions. First, the money invested in the company has an uncertain
return re, distributed with mean r > rf and variance σ 2 . Second, there is a positive probability
that the stock might become worthless for reasons that are orthogonal to the return of its real
investment. We are purposefully vague on what this event might be: the possibility the company
is just a scam, that the manager steal all the proceeds, or that the broker absconds with the
money instead of investing it. For simplicity, we collectively refer to all these possible events
as “the firm cheats” and we label with p the subjective perceived probability this might occur.
Consequently, we identify the complementary probability (1 − p) with the degree of trust an
investor has in the stock. While p is clearly individual-specific, for simplicity in our notation we
omit the reference to the individual. Finally, to highlight the role of trust we start by assuming
zero costs of participation.
William Dawes was that Paul Revere was a well connected silversmith, known and trusted by all to be highly
involved in his community. Thus, people trusted his message and followed him while ignored Dawes’ message
(see Gladwell, 2000).



                                                    7
   Given an initial level of wealth W , an individual will choose the share α to invest in stocks
to maximize his expected utility:

                   M axα (1 − p)EU (αe
                                     rW + (1 − α)rf W ) + pU ((1 − α)rf W ).

where the two terms reflect the investor’s utility if respectively no cheating or cheating occurs.
The first order condition for this problem is given by

                (1 − p)EU 0 (αe                  r − rf ) ≤ pU 0 ((1 − α)rf W )rf .
                              rW + (1 − α)rf W )(e                                             (1)

The LHS is the expected marginal utility of investing an extra dollar in the risky asset, which
yields an excess return re − rf with probability (1 − p). This must be less or equal to the cost of
losing all the investment if cheating occurs. If at α = 0 the cost exceeds the benefit, than it is
optimal to stay out of the stock market. This will happen if p > p where p, the threshold of p
above which an individual does not invest in stocks, is defined as p = (r − rf )/r. It follows that



Proposition 1 Only investors with high enough trust ((1 − p) > (1 − p)) will invest in the
stock market.

   An interesting feature of this model is that the necessary condition for stock market partic-
ipation does not directly depend on wealth. Hence, provided that trust is not highly correlated
with wealth (a condition we will verify), this model can explain lack of participation even at
high levels of wealth.
   Suppose that p is below p = (r − rf )/r, then (1) will hold as an equality and will define
the optimal share α∗ > 0. Lowering trust marginally (i.e., increasing p), will reduce the left
hand side of (1) and increase the right-hand side. To re-establish optimality the optimal share
invested in stocks should adjust. Since, given concavity of the utility function, the left-hand
side of (1) is decreasing in α while the right-hand side is increasing, α has to decline. Hence,
we have

Proposition 2 The more an investor trusts, the higher his optimal portfolio share invested in
stocks conditional on participation.


                                                8
   This result can be seen more clearly if we assume investors have an exponential utility with
coefficient of absolute risk aversion θ and re ∼ N (r, σ 2 ). In this case, their optimal α would be


                                             ( r − rf )         prf
                                    α∗ =                −
                                               θW σ 2     (1 − p)AθW σ 2
                     ∗ rW −θ(α∗ W )2 σ 2 )
   where A = e−θ(α
   Note that the first term of this equation is the optimal α when there is no fear of being
cheated (p = 0). Since A is a strictly decreasing function of α∗ , as p increases (trust decreases),
the optimal level of investment in stock drops.


1.1   Calibration

The previous section shows that lack of trust can theoretically explain the lack of stock-market
participation of many investors. But is this explanation realistic? To address this question we
calibrate the model, first without any cost of participation and then with it.
   Without any cost of participation, the condition for participation is provided by (1). If we
plug the U.S. values of this parameters (the average rate of return on stocks in the post war
period has been about 12% and that on government bonds about 5%) an individual will not
participate if his subjective probability of being cheated is greater than (r − rf )/r = (1.12 −
1.05)/1.12, about 6.25%.
   Is this a realistic figure? Though we have no direct estimate of the perceived probability of
being cheated, we can try to infer it from the trust they exhibit towards large companies. This
information is available through the World Value Survey, where individuals are asked how much
confidence they have in major companies. Survey participants can answer in one of four ways:
“Great deal”, “Quite a lot”, “Not very much” and “Not at all”.
   Column (1) in Table 2 reports the fraction of individuals who do not have confidence at all
in major corporations. In the United States this proportion is 7.2% in Sweden only 6%, while
in Italy 18.6%. These figures alone cannot account for all the people who do not invest in the
stock market in these countries (34% in Sweden, 51% in the United States, and 92% in Italy).
If we assume, however, that also the second group (i.e., people who state they do not have
“very much” confidence in major corporations) attributes at least a 6.25% probability of being


                                                      9
cheated, then the magnitudes are much more comparable. In Sweden the fraction of people
with limited trust is 46%, in the United States 49%, and in Italy 50%.
   Alternatively, if we accept the view that the lack-of-participation puzzle exists only for the
very wealthy people, we should focus on the top 5% of the wealth distribution. Here, the
magnitudes are much more comparable. In Sweden only 2% of the more wealthy people do not
trust “at all” major corporations and correspondingly only 4% of the rich does not invest in
the stock market, similarly for the United States (respectively, 6% and 4%). But in Italy where
29% of the richest people do not trust major corporations, 35% of them does not invest in the
stock market!
   The above results suggest that mistrust alone can explain much of all the lack of participation
puzzle. The combination of trust and fixed cost of participation, can do even better. As Table 2
shows these explanations are not mutually exclusive. While in most countries richer people tend
to trust large companies a little more, even among the top income deciles there is a substantial
proportion of individuals who do not trust at all large companies. In fact, in Italy the fraction of
people who do not trust large corporations at all is even larger among the wealthy than among
the poor.
   To assess the impact of combining the two explanations, we introduce trust in a fixed cost
of participation model à la Vissing-Jørgensen (2003). Hence, we assume that if an individual
wants to invest in stocks he has to pay a fixed cost f and allocate between the two assets only
the remaining wealth W − f . If p exceeds p = (r − rf )/r the investor will not participate,
whatever the value of the participation cost, but now the level of trust required to participate
is higher the higher the participation costs because investing in stocks becomes relatively less
attractive, as f increases.
   Introducing trust in a model with cost of participation changes the wealth threshold for
investing too. The perceived risk of being cheated decreases the return on the stock investment,
making participation less attractive. To see this effect, suppose 0 < p < p and let α∗ be the
optimal share invested in stocks if the investor decides to pay the fixed cost. It is worthwhile
for an investor to pay f and invest in stock if participation yields a higher expected utility than




                                                10
staying out of the stock market and investing the whole wealth in the safe asset, i.e. if

      (1 − p)EU (α∗ re(W − f ) + (1 − α∗ )rf (W − f )) + pU ((1 − α∗ )rf (W − f )) > U (rf W )

Let αp∗ denote the optimal portfolio share if the investor participates when the probability of
being cheated is p ∈ [0, 1] and rbp the certainty equivalent return on equity defined implicitly by
EU (αp∗ re(W − f ) + (1 − αp∗ )rf (W − f )) = U (αp∗ rbp (W − f ) + (1 − αp∗ )rf (W − f )). Then, we have

Proposition 3 For any probability of being cheated p, there exists a wealth threshold Wp that
triggers participation given by
                                               αp∗ rbp + (1 − αp∗ )rf
                                      Wp = f
                                                     αp∗ (rbp − rf )
and Wp is increasing in p.

   Proof: See Appendix.
   The intuition behind Proposition 3 is very simple. When an investor perceives a probability
of being cheated, the effect of a fixed cost increases because he has to pay the participation
cost in advance, but expects a positive return only with probability 1 − p. Hence, the actual
                                            1
participation cost becomes inflated by     1−p .

   Introducing trust, thus, amplifies the effect of participation costs. But how sensitive is the
wealth threshold to (small) deviations from the full trust hypothesis? To answer this question in
Table 3a we report how much the threshold level of wealth has to increase, when the perceived
probability of being cheated changes. The calculations have been made by assuming an investor
with exponential utility, an initial wealth level equal to 1, a relative risk aversion of 5, a fixed
cost of participation equal to 0.1 percent of wealth and r = 1.12 and rf = 1.05.
   Even a perceived probability of being cheated as small as 0.5 percent raises the wealth
threshold by 25 percent of its value when trust is full. If the perceived probability of being
cheated is 2 or 3 percent, the wealth threshold for participating is respectively 2.7 times and
5.2 times larger than if individuals perceived no risk of cheating.
   To assess the practical impact on participation of an increase in the threshold level of wealth,
in Table 3, Panel B, we report the ratio of the 75th and 90th percentile of the distribution of
financial assets to its median in four countries for which we have micro data (United States,


                                                   11
France, Italy and the Netherlands). The way to use this information is as follows. Based on
Table 2, it is plausible to assume that when p = 0 the costs of participation are such that
every investor with wealth below the median never participate in the stock market. In a high-
trust country such as the United States, roughly 50% of household invests in the stock market
(Table 1). By contrast, in a low-trust country such as Italy only 8.2% of the population invests
in stock. So to explain why more than 90% of the population in Italy does not invest in stock
we need to argue that lack of trust increases the threshold of wealth to participate from the
median (like in the States) to above the 90th percentile. By looking at Table 3B we know this
implies almost a seven fold increase. Is this plausible? By looking at Table 3A we see that a
seven fold increase requires an increase in the probability of being cheated going from zero to
4%. Given that the percentage of Italians who do not have any trust in major companies is
almost 2.5 times bigger than in the States, this difference in the perceived probability of being
cheated is very reasonable.
   This result is very important and suggests that our model explains why people with a lot
of wealth in the United States do not participate. Table 3a shows that the people who have
8.6 times the median wealth non-participation will occur if the probability of being cheated for
these individuals is above 5%. The fraction of wealthy people in the United States that have no
confidence in large companies (Table 2) is well in the range of 5%.
   In summary, lack of trust always reduces stock market participation, but the strength of
this effect depends upon the presence of participation costs. In the absence of any participation
cost, lack of trust discourages stock investments only because it reduces their expected return.
When participation is costly, lack of trust reduces the return on equity investments in two
additional ways: it lowers the optimal share invested in stocks conditional on participation and
it lowers the expected utility from participating because it reduces the expected return of stock
investments. Thus, paying the fixed costs to enjoy the equity premium becomes less rewarding
in the presence of mistrust.




                                               12
1.2       Diversification, trust, and risk aversion

Given the difficulties in obtaining a reliable measure of individual risk aversion, it will be im-
portant to establish in the empirical analysis that trust is not just a proxy for risk tolerance.
To do so, we need to devise some theoretical implications where the effect of trust differs from
the effect of risk aversion. This is the case for the optimal number of stocks held.


1.2.1       The two stock case

Suppose there are just two risky stocks (1 and 2) in the economy (hence in this example for
simplicity we assume away the risk free asset), which are equally and independently distributed
with returns re1 ∼ N (r, σ 2 ) and re2 ∼ N (r, σ 2 ). Each stock also has a probability p of “cheat-
ing” and yielding a zero return. The probability of “cheating” is equal for the two stock but
independent of each other.
       To make the problem interesting, we assume that there is a cost c per stock that investors
have to incur.2 If an investor puts all his money in the first stock his expected utility will be

                                                     f1 ) + pU (0) − c
                                          (1 − p)EU (W                                                         (2)

       Since there is another stock, he can diversify by investing part of the money also in the
second stock. Given that the two stocks are identically distributed, if he invests in both the
optimal allocation is half of his wealth in each. The investor’s expected utility from investing
in both assets is:

                       1f    1f                            1f                  1f
          (1 − p)2 EU ( W             2
                          1 + W2 ) + p U (0) + p(1 − p)EU ( W1 ) + p(1 − p)EU ( W2 ) − 2c                      (3)
                       2     2                             2                   2

Subtracting (2) from (3), the investor will buy the second stock if

                                               (1 − p)[D + pV ] > c                                            (4)

where
                   f1 + 1 W
       D = EU ( 12 W      f         f
                        2 2 ) − EU (W1 )
   2
       As Curcuru et al. (2004) argues the lack of diversification remains a puzzle. One way to explain this puzzle
is to posit some per stock cost of diversification.


                                                         13
                   f1 ) + EU ( 1 W
      V = [EU ( 21 W             f            1f     1f
                               2 2 )] − [EU ( 2 W1 + 2 W2 ) + U (0)]

      The term D measures the standard benefit of diversifying the idiosyncratic risk, which
materializes regardless of any possibility of cheating. For a risk-averse investor this term is
strictly positive and increasing with his degree of risk aversion. By contrast, the term V can be
thought of as the benefit of diversifying away the risk of being cheated. Notice that in (4) V is
multiplied by the probability of being cheated. Hence, V is the benefit of having invested in two
stocks rather than one if cheating in at least one stock (but not both) occurs. The first term
in squared brackets is the payoff an investor receives if he has diversified the risk of cheating
                                                                          f1 ), while if it occurs
across the two stocks. If cheating occurs only in stock 1 he gets EU ( 21 W
                                f2 ). By contrast, if an investor is diversified with respect to the
only in stock 2 he gets EU ( 21 W
idiosyncratic risk but not with respect to the risk of cheating (this could occur if the investor
buys a mutual fund which is diversified and the risk of cheating is at the mutual fund level),
                     f1 + 1 W
then he gets EU ( 21 W      f                                                  3
                          2 2 ) half of the times and U (0) the remaining half.

      The investor will diversify into the second stock if the LHS of (4) exceeds the cost of buying
the second stock (assuming that he has already invested in the first, so that (1) is positive). It
is easy to see that an increase in risk aversion increases the term D and thus makes it more
likely that the investor buys the second stock.
      But we are also interested in how a change in trust affects the decision. Since (1−p)(D +pV )
represents the total expected benefits from diversification, when trust increases (the probability
of being cheated p decreases) we have two effects. First, the importance of the total benefits
from diversification increases (since all the benefit are multiplied by (1 − p)), but the benefit of
diversifying the risk of being cheated (V ) becomes less important (because it is multiplied by
p). Hence, we have

Proposition 4 Diversification will always be non decreasing in trust if D > V .

      Proof : The derivative of the LHS of (4) is −D + (1 − 2p)V , which is always negative for
D >V.
      The intuition is straightforward. When we increase p (decrease trust) we lose some benefit
  3
      In the event both stocks cheat, the payoff is U (0) regardless of the diversification strategy.



                                                           14
of diversification (pD) and gain others ((1 − p)pV ). If D > V the benefits of diversification are
always decreasing in p and hence higher trust will always lead to more diversification.
                                                                                                 00 (0)σ 2
      Taking a second order approximation around W = 0, it is easy to show that D ' − U            4         >
0 (from concavity) and V ' 0. Hence, while it is possible, in extreme situations, that diversifi-
cation my decrease in trust, in general a higher level of trust makes it more likely to invest in
the second stock.
      Another sufficient condition for diversification being always increasing in trust is that the
benefit from the standard diversification is bigger than the cost:

Proposition 5 The incentives to diversify will always non decrease with trust if an investor
would have diversified in the absence of any trust issue (i.e., D > c).

      Proof : If D > c, the LHS of (4) will be greater than c at p = 0. Since the LHS of (4) is a
concave function, if it starts above c at p = 0, it will cross c at most once as p increases. Hence,
the investor will go from diversifying (for low values of p) to not diversifying (for high values of
p).


1.2.2     The general case


We can now extend this line of reasoning to the case where there are n stocks. Suppose utility
is exponential as before. Each of the n stocks an investor can pick yields the same return which
is iid with rei ∼ N (r, σ 2 ). As before there is a diversification cost: adding one stock costs c in
utility terms, so that if an investor buys n stocks he pays a total diversification cost of nc.
      Each stock will pay out only with probability (1 − p), where p is equal across stocks and
independent from stock to stock. If the investor decides to invest in n stock he will put 1/n of
his wealth W in each stock and solve the problem:

                               n
                               X
                                                         
                                                             −θ(W/n)
                                                                        g    
                                                                             ri
                                                                                  

                       M axn         Cng pg (1 − p)n−p E −e           i=1         − cn                 (5)
                               g=0

where g is the number of stocks on which he has invested and that paid out and Cng = g!(n−g)!
                                                                                         n!
                                                                                              is
                                                                              n−g
                                                                               P
the probability that g stocks pay out (where we adopt the convention that         rei = 0 when
                                                                                           i=1


                                                    15
g = n,). The above expression already reflects the fact that if an investor is cheated on stock j
, he loses all the money invested in that stock.
    Since re is normally distributed, the above problem can be written as
                          n
                          X                      h            1 2 2      2 2
                                                                             i
                  M axn         Cng pg (1 − p)n−p −egθ(W/n)r+ 2 g θ (W/n) σ − cn.
                          g=0

The coefficient multiplying the square bracket term is the coefficient of a binomial term raised
to the n power. Hence, we can rewrite this expression as

                            h                         1 2
                                                                 i
                                                              2 2 n
                    M axn − p + (1 − p)e−θ(W/n)r+ 2 θ (W/n) σ       − cn.
           h                      1 2      2 2
                                               i
    Let Z = p + (1 − p)e−θ(W/n)r+ 2 θ (W/n) σ    , then the first order condition for (5)can be
written as

                                                        
                                n    Z −p W      2 W 2 2
                          −Z log Z +     (θ r − θ ( ) σ ) = c
                                       Z   n       n
    As we show in Appendix, this equation has a solution, since the limit of the LHS tends to
∞ as n −→ 0 and tends to 0 as n −→ ∞. Since the function is continuous, the intermediate
value theorem ensures that the first-order condition has at least one interior solution.
    Unfortunately, this condition is sufficiently complex that it is not easy to do comparative
static analytically. We can, however, resolve it numerically for different values of the parameters
and plot the solution. This is what we did in Figure 1. The graph plots the optimal number
of stocks as a function of the level of trust, measured by 1 − p, for different values of the risk
aversion parameter. Not surprisingly, the optimal number of stocks increases for higher levels of
risk aversion. More importantly, the optimal number of stocks also increases with trust. Trust
and risk tolerance, thus, have the opposite prediction in terms of number of stocks. Hence, we
can try to distinguish them empirically.


2    The main data

Our main data source is the 2003 wave of the DNB Household Survey, which collects informa-
tion on a sample of 1,943 Dutch households (about 4,000 individuals). The survey, sponsored


                                                  16
by the Dutch National Bank, is administered and run by Center at Tilburg University. The
purpose of this survey is to collect household level data to study the economic and psychological
determinants of households savings behavior.4 All members of the households at least 16 years
old are interviewed. Appendix B provides details about the survey design and contents, while
Table 4 the main summary statistics.
       The survey is particularly useful for our purpose as it has a rich description of the house-
hold assets, real and financial, including investment in stocks, distinctly for stocks of listed
and unlisted companies and held directly or indirectly through mutual funds and investment
accounts.


2.0.3       Measuring trust

In the Fall of 2003 we had the opportunity of submitting to the DBN panel a short questionnaire
specifically designed to obtain individual measures of trust, attitudes towards risk and ambiguity
as well as indicators of optimism. This questionnaire was submitted to about half the DNB panel
and thus information is available for 1,990 individuals belonging to 1,444 households.
       To elicit trust we use a question routinely asked in the World Values Survey questionnaires:

              “Generally speaking, would you say that most people can be trusted or that you
         have to be very careful in dealing with people?”

       Individuals could answer in one of three ways: (a) most people can be trusted; (b) one has
to be very careful with other people; (c) I don’t know.5 In our analysis we will define trust as
   4
       Interviews are done via computer through the internet. If a household does not own a computer nor have
access to the internet, Center provides a set-top box and if necessary a television set that can be used to fill
in questionnaires. This feature allows Center to interview the panel occasionally after the main survey has
been conducted and collect additional data on some topic of interest. In the main survey, participants are
submitted seven questionnaires covering different areas: general information on household demographics; home
and market work; housing and mortgages; health conditions and income; financial assets and liabilities; economic
and psychological attitudes and work and home.
   5
     To avoid that the answers to this question be driven by the order with which the possible answers are
presented, half of the sample was randomly faced with a reverse ordering (that is option (b) was offered first and
option (a) second). The average answers of the two samples are very similar, suggesting that there is no response
order bias.


                                                       17
a dummy variable equal to 1 if individuals choose option (a). On average, 37.7 percent of the
respondents answer this way.
   For trust to be able to account for the puzzling lack of participation at high levels of wealth
it must be the case that it does not increase too much with wealth. Table 4D shows the average
level of the two measures of trust by quartile of financial assets. While trust increases with
wealth, consistent with findings in other surveys (GSZ, 2003; Alesina and La Ferrara, 2003),
the change is mild: in the bottom quartile, 2/3 of the individuals state that one has to be very
careful when dealing with people, while in the top quartile this fraction drops to 61 percent.
Thus, even among the wealthy a substantial fraction have a low level of trust.


2.0.4      Measuring risk and ambiguity aversion

To obtain a measure of risk and ambiguity aversion we asked individuals to report their will-
ingness to pay for a lottery. First, we offer them the following unambiguous lottery:

           Risky lottery: “Consider the following hypothetical lottery. Imagine a large urn
        containing 100 balls. In this urn, there are exactly 50 red balls and the remaining 50
        balls are black. One ball is randomly drawn from the urn. If the ball is red, you win
        5000 euros; otherwise, you win nothing. What is the maximum price you are willing
        to pay for a ticket that allows you to participate in this lottery? ”
           Then we offer them an ambiguous one:
           Ambiguous lottery: “Consider now a case where there are two urns, A and
        B. As before, each one has 100 balls, but urn A contains 20 red balls and 80 blacks,
        while urn B contains 80 reds and 20 blacks. One ball is drawn either from urn A or
        from urn B (the two events are equally likely). As before, if the ball is red you win
        5000 euros; otherwise, you win nothing. What is the maximum price you are willing
        to pay for a ticket that allows you to participate in this lottery? ”

   Clearly, risk aversion implies that the price they are willing to pay for the first lottery is
lower than the expected value of the lottery, i.e. 2,500 euros. The good news is that only 4
individuals report a price higher than 2,500 euros. The bad news is that the sample average


                                                   18
is extremely low (112 euros). While extreme, this low willingness to pay is not unusual. It is
a well-known phenomenon in experimental economics: individuals asked to price hypothetical
lotteries (or risky assets) tend to offer very low prices (Kagel and Roth, 1995: 68-86). Given
this downward bias in the reported willingness to pay, our risk aversion measures are likely to be
biased upward. We have found no reference on whether the magnitude of the bias is correlated
with observable individual characteristics. If the bias is constant across individuals, measured
risk aversion is just a scaled up version of the true one.
       To map these prices into a risk aversion measure we assume that individuals have a CARA
utility with risk aversion parameter θ and infer the coefficient of risk aversion from the indiffer-
ence condition between the price offered and the risky lottery.
       To get a measure of ambiguity aversion, or more precisely in our context, of aversion to
compounded lotteries, we use a similar approach based on the utility function developed by
Maccheroni, Marinacci, and Rustichini (2005). The details of these calculations are contained
in Appendix C.
       In some preference representations ambiguity aversion and pessimism are, to some extent,
intertwined.6 To disentangle the two effects on portfolio decisions as well as distinguish trust
from optimism we introduced in the questionnaire also a qualitative question meant to capture
   6
       We have also computed an alternative measure of ambiguity aversion based on the preference specification
of Ghirardato et. al (2004), who develop a general version of what is commonly called the Hurwicz (1954) α
-maxmin criterion which mainly consists in weighting extreme pessimism and extreme optimism when making
decisions under ambiguity. The general preference representation is of the form:

                                 v(x) = a(x) min Eπ u(x) + (1 − a(x)) max Eπ u(x)
                                             π∈Π                     π∈Π


where Eπ u(x) is the expected utility of x under the probability distribution π. a(x) is what Ghirardato et al.
(2004) call the index of ambiguity aversion, which they allow possibly to depend on the choice variable x. The
utility v(x) here is a weighted average of the utility derived by a purely ambiguity averse agent (minπ∈Π Eπ u(x))
and that of a purely ambiguity lover agent (maxπ∈Π Eπ u(x)) . The weights being a(x) and (1 − a(x)). Ambiguity
aversion depicted by (minπ∈Π Eπ u(x)) reflects extreme pessimism, the agent acts according to the worst case
probability measure π in Π. And likewise, (maxπ∈Π Eπ u(x)) reflects extreme optimism. This is why, as Hurwicz
(1954) himself describes it, the index a(x) is closer in terms of interpretation to an index of pessimism rather
than ambiguity aversion. But to the extent that pessimism and ambiguity aversion are intertwined, it may be
also interpreted as an index of ambiguity aversion.



                                                       19
an individual’s degree of optimism. In doing so we follow the standard Life Orientation Test,
very diffused in psychology (Scheier et al., 1994), and ask individuals the following question: We
now present you with the following statement. “I expect more good things to happen to me than
bad things.” Individuals have to rate their level of agreement/ disagreement with the content of
the statement, where 1 means they strongly disagree and 5 strongly agree.
        Table 4c shows the cross correlation between trust, risk aversion, ambiguity aversion and
optimism.


3        Results

3.1        The effect of generalized trust on stock market participation


We start by analyzing the impact of trust on the decision to invest in stock. Since portfolio
decisions are likely to involve the entire household, we look at the effect of trust on households’
portfolio decisions. It is not obvious, however, how to aggregate individual measure of risk
aversion and trust into a household measure. In the reported estimates, we use the attitudes
reported by the household head as the attitude of the entire household. The results using
household averages or using all individual level data are very similar.
        Table 5 reports the probit estimates obtained using the DNB survey. The left-hand side
variable is a dummy equal to 1 if a household invests directly (i.e. not through a mutual fund) in
stocks of listed or unlisted companies and zero otherwise. Here and in the subsequent definitions
investment in stock does not include investment in equity of own business for those who have
one.7 In this as well as the subsequent regressions we control for a number of variables. First,
since the literature on fixed costs emphasizes the importance of wealth, we include both the value
of household financial wealth and income. Then, we include various demographic characteristics
to account for possible differences in participation costs. We insert a male dummy, the number
of adults and the number of children in the household, two dummies for middle and high
education, and a dummy for being an employee. We also control for the household head’s age
(both linear and linear and squared), to capture changes over the life cycle. These variables
    7
        Trust issues should obviuosly be irrelevant for equity investment in an individual own business.


                                                          20
may also capture differences across individuals that affect their attitude toward investment in
stocks - such as variation in exposure to uninsurable risks (Kimball, 1993) - or that act as a
barrier to participation in the stock market regardless of any participation cost, such as lack of
awareness of stock as an asset (Guiso and Jappelli, 2005).
       The first column reports the estimates of the basic specification, where we insert both trust
and risk aversion. While risk aversion turns out to have little predictive power, the effect of
trust is positive and highly statistically significant.8
       Trusting others increases the probability of direct participation in the stock market by
6.5 percentage points. This is a remarkable effect as it corresponds to a 50% increase in the
unconditional probability of participation.
       The second column includes the measure of ambiguity aversion. In spite of the fact that
ambiguity aversion and trust are - as shown in Table 4 - negatively correlated, the coefficient of
trust is hardly affected while ambiguity aversion has the expected sign, but it is not statistically
significant.
       Of course, we cannot conclude from these regressions that trust is more economically im-
portant in explaining stock market participation than risk or ambiguity aversion. In fact, it is
likely that trust is measured with less noise than both risk and ambiguity aversion and thus its
coefficient estimates suffer less of the standard attenuation bias. What we can say, however, is
that if we want to predict the level of stock market participation, using measures of trust seems
more effective than using measures of risk and ambiguity aversion.
       An alternative interpretation of our finding is that trust, rather than reflecting an individual
fear of being cheated, captures investor’s optimism. Optimistic investors may be induced to
participate by their inflated expectations of returns. This possibility is strengthened by the
results of Puri and Robinson (2005), who find that people who overestimates their life expectancy
(and thus are optimistic) invest more in stock.
       We address this concern in two ways. First, in column (3) we insert a dummy variable equal
   8
       It is not surprising that risk aversion has limited power in explaining stock market participation in our
regressions. In a standard model without participation costs, risk aversion should have no effect. When one takes
into account costs of participation, risk aversion should have a negative effect on participation. However, given
the costs are small (Vissing-Jørgensen, 2003), the effect is likely to be trivial.



                                                          21
to one for all those individuals who answer that they normally expect more good things to
happen to them than bad things (a measure of optimism). Consistent with Puri and Robinson
(2005), this variable has a positive effect on stock market participation, albeit this effect is
not statistically significant. More importantly from our point of view, controlling for optimism
leaves the effect of trust nearly unchanged.
      Second, in column (4) we control for the household’s head expectations about the stock
market for the following year. Unfortunately, this question was asked to only 495 individuals and
when we merge them with our sample we are left with only 255 observations. Not surprisingly,
the effect of trust loses precision. It is interesting to note, however, that it has the same
magnitude (in fact, slightly bigger) than before, suggesting our results on trust are not driven
by different expectations about the future performance of the stock market.
      Finally, in the last column we show that the effect of trust does not fade away with wealth.
When we restrict the sample to those with above median financial assets, the effect of trust is
of the same order of magnitude and actually somewhat larger than in the overall sample. This
implies that trust has a chance to explain why even the rich may choose to keep themselves out
of the stock market, even if they can afford to pay the fixed participation cost.
      Though it is reasonable to expect the effect of trust to be particularly important for direct
participation in the stock market, it is neither limited to direct participation nor just to equity
investment. An investor needs some trust even when he buys a stock indirectly, through a
mutual fund, a broker, or a bank. While the presence of an intermediary reduces the need
for information (and thus for trust), it also increases exposure to opportunistic behavior of the
intermediary.9
      Hence, the effect of trust should generalize to investments in all risky assets, which we define
as the sum of directly and indirectly owned stocks, corporate bonds, and put and call options.
Table 6 shows this to be the case. The pattern of the estimates is very similar to that in Table 5.
While risk and ambiguity aversion have little predictive power on participation in risky assets,
  9
      In Italy, for instance, there is anecdotal evidence that banks tend to re-balance their portfolio by advising
customers to buy the securities they want to unload. After the Summer 2001 FIAT, the Italian car maker,
experienced distress. When FIAT’s distress was still unknown to the public, one of the authors was strongly
advised by his bank to buy FIAT bonds, on the grounds that FIAT was the largest and most solid Italian firm.



                                                         22
trust has a positive and significant effect: people who trust others have a probability of investing
in risky assets that is 8.5 percentage points higher, or about 20 percent of the sample mean. All
the other results are the same.


3.2   The Effect of Generalized Trust on the Portfolio Share Invested in Stocks

According to the model in Section 1, not only does trust increase the likelihood an individual
invests in stock, but it also increases the share of wealth invested in stocks, conditional on
investing in them. We test this prediction in Table 7. Panel A presents the Tobit estimates
when the dependent variable is the portfolio share invested in stock (computed as the value of
stocks held directly divided by the value of financial assets. We control for the same variables
as in the probit estimates reported in Table 6.
   As in the participation estimates, the effect of risk is poorly measured, while trust has
always a positive and statistically significant effect. Individuals who trust have a share in
stocks 3.4 percentage points higher, or about 15.5% of the sample mean. Ambiguity aversion
has a negative effect on the share in stocks, while optimism has a positive effect, but neither
coefficient is statistically significantly. Adding these controls leaves the effect of trust unchanged.
Estimated effects and conclusions are similar if instead of the share directly invested in stocks
we look at the share invested in all risky assets (Panel B).
   In summary, the evidence thus far suggests that our measures of risk and ambiguity aversion
have little predictive power, while generalized trust has considerable explanatory power both
on direct and overall stockholding as well as on the fraction of the portfolio invested in stocks
and risky assets.


3.3   Education, Market Knowledge and the Effect of Trust

If trust reflects individuals’ priors, then more educated individuals should be less affected by
these priors, because they possess more reliable information. This is consistent with GSZ
(2004b), who find that the trusting decision of more educated individuals is less affected by
cultural stereotypes. Hence, a direct implication of the trust-based model is that the effect of
trust on the stockholding decision should decrease with an investor’s level of education and with


                                                  23
his knowledge of the market.
         Table 8 tests this implication by splitting the sample according to educational attainments
(people with less than a secondary school degree and people with more). The results show a
clear pattern: the effect of trust is stronger for people with less education. In fact, the coefficient
for more highly educated individuals is never statistically different from zero. For instance, trust
raises direct stockholding by 6 percentage points in the low education group and only by 1.4
percentage points in the high education sample. Similarly, the impact on the share invested in
stocks or in risky financial assets is twice as large among the less educated.


4         Is Trust a Proxy for Risk Tolerance?

Given the noisiness of our measure of risk aversion, an obvious criticism to our results is that
trust may be just a proxy for (poorly measured) attitude to risk. All the effects of trust
we have seen so far are consistent with this interpretation: if trust was just a proxy for risk
tolerance we would expect higher trust (risk tolerance) to be associated with a higher portfolio
share invested in stocks and, in the presence of some fixed participation costs, with a higher
probability of participating in the stock market.
         To address this concern we exploit the differential implications of trust and risk tolerance
on the number of stocks. As shown in Section 1, while the number of stocks unambiguously
decreases with the investor’s risk tolerance, it may increase with his degree of trust. Thus, if
we find that trust has a positive effect on the number of stocks, we can reject it is just a proxy
for (poorly measured) risk aversion.10
         Table 9, Panel A, shows the results of an ordered probit estimate. The dependent variable
is the number of stocks in a household’s portfolio. The first four columns report ordered probit
regressions for the whole sample.
         Besides the male dummy and age, the only two variables that have predictive power on the
number of stocks are the level of wealth and generalized trust: individuals who trust invest on
    10
         Since the optimal number of stocks does not necessarily have to increase with trust (see section 1) this test
can only reject that trust is a proxy for risk tolerance if the empirical relationship between number of stock and
trust is positive.



                                                            24
average in 0.6 more stocks than those who do not trust. This is a non-negligible effect, given
that the median number of stocks among stockholders is 3. In order to obtain a similar effect,
we should move a household’s wealth from its median value to about the 80th percentile. All
the other controls - including measured risk aversion, ambiguity aversion and optimism have
the expected signs, but lack statistical significance. To take into account the possibility that
one can achieve diversification by investing in a mutual fund instead of buying single stocks, in
column 4 we include a dummy for whether the investor owns a stock mutual fund and results
are unchanged.
       The last column restricts the sample to the equity holders (162 observations). Even in this
very limited sample trust has a positive and statistically significant effect, which is very similar
in magnitude to the one estimated in the whole sample. The only puzzling aspect is that our
measure of risk aversion has a negative impact on the number of stocks held.
       An alternative way to separate trust from risk aversion is to look at insurance data. On
the one hand, more risk tolerant individuals should buy less insurance, at least as long as
insurance contracts are not actuarially fair (as generally they are not). On the other hand,
more trusting individuals should buy more insurance because insurance is just another financial
contract with delayed and uncertain repayment, where trust can play a role. An individual who
is less confident the insurance promise will not be kept - i.e. has less trust - will be less likely
to insure himself.
       Panel B uses data on holdings of private health insurance to distinguish between these
alternative predictions. Inconsistent with trust being a proxy for risk tolerance, trust has a
positive effect on the decision to buy private health insurance (first three columns), as well as on
the amount purchased (last two columns), albeit these effects are very imprecisely estimated.11
       In sum, there is no evidence that trust is a proxy for risk tolerance, while all the evidence is
consistent with mistrust creating a wedge between the demand the supply of financial contracts.
  11
       These results also suggest that trust is not a proxy for loss aversion. Loss aversion should make people to
buy more insurance, while the the regression evidence, albeit weak, is consistent with the trust interpretation.




                                                         25
5     Is Generalized or Personalized Trust that Matters?

The degree of trust a person has towards another or towards a company depends both on his
general trusting attitude and on the perceived trustworthiness of the counterparty. The nature
of the Dutch sample allowed us to capture only the first effect, we now move to our second
dataset (the Italian Bank customers survey), where we are able to capture the second one.


5.0.1     Bank customers’ data

This survey contains detailed information on portfolio composition and demographic character-
istics for a sample of 1,834 customers. It also asks participants to report how much they trust
the bank by asking:

           “How much do you trust your bank official or broker as financial advisor for your
        investment decisions?”

    We create a dummy equal to one when a customer answers that he trusts the bank a lot
and a second dummy equal to one if he instead says he trusts the bank enough. The offset
are the customers who trust the bank little or very little. Since the people interviewed are
already customers of the bank, their average level of trust is high: 30 percent report they trust
their banker a lot, while 45 percent report they trust it “enough”. We use these dummies as
a measure of personalized trust, i.e. of trust towards a well identified entity, in contrast to the
measure of generalized trust
    This bank survey also tried to elicit attitudes towards risk by asking individuals to report
whether they view risk predominantly as a) an uncertain event from which one can profit; b)
an uncertain event one should protect from. Hence, we will be able to control for this indicator
of risk preferences. Summary statistics for this sample are shown in Table 4F


5.1     Results

Table 10 reports the estimates of both the participation and the portfolio share decisions. As the
first column shows, those who perceive risk as something to avoid rather than an opportunity -
the risk averse - are less likely to be stockholders. Differently from what we found in the DNB

                                                26
data, this measure of risk aversion has predictive power, perhaps because eliciting attitudes
towards risk this way is less subject to measurement errors. The effect is also economically
important: being risk averse reduces the likelihood of investing in risky financial assets by 5
percentage points (7.8% of the sample mean).
    More importantly for our purposes, trust in the bank officer has also a positive and statis-
tically significant effect on the choice to invest in equity and the impact is sizeable. Compared
to those who do not trust, investors who trust a lot their bank are 16 percentage points more
likely to invest in stocks (25% of the sample mean).
    The second column reports Tobit estimates for the share of financial wealth in stocks, while
the third column reports estimates for the conditional share. In both cases trust has a positive
effect on the investment in stocks, albeit in the conditional share equation this effect is poorly
estimated.
    Overall, these results confirm those obtained by using a measure of generalized trust. That
lack of trust towards your own bank affects financial investment in risky assets testifies the
pervasiveness of the effects of trust on portfolio allocation. That the effect is present even when
we have a better measure of risk further strengthens the conviction that trust is not a proxy for
risk tolerance.


6    The Effect of Trust on Stock Market Development

Thus far, we have only analyzed the effect of differences in trust across individuals. But what
are the aggregate implications of a low average level of trust in a country? When the average
level of trust is low, for any given level of returns, investors are more reluctant to invest. Hence,
to attract them, price-earnings ratios should fall. If they do, entrepreneurs will be less interested
in floating their companies or even in selling pieces of them to private investors (see Giannetti
and Koskinen, 2005).
    We will test this implication both within a country and across countries.




                                                 27
6.1       Firms data

For our within-country test we rely on a sample of Italian firms and we exploit the variation in
the level of trust and social capital, which is very pronounced within Italy (Putnam, 1993).
       The dataset used for this test draws from the 1999 Italian Survey of Manufacturing Firms
(SMF), which is run every three years by Mediocredito Centrale (an Italian investment bank)
on a sample of over 4,000 small and medium-sized manufacturing firms. The main purpose of
the survey is to collect information on several aspects of a firm’s activities with a focus on tech-
nological innovation and investment in research and development. It also contains information
on the firm ownership structures and their location.


6.2       Within country results

As a proxy for the local level of trust, we use a measure of electoral participation that Put-
nam argues is very closely associated with trust(GSZ, 2004a). As a measure of entrepreneurs’
propensity to sell a stake in their company, we use a dummy variable equal to 1 if the firm has
a single shareholder owning all the firm’s equity and zero otherwise.
       Table 11 presents the results of this probit regression, where we control for other possible
determinants of a firm ownership structure (the north-south divide, the level of GDP per capita,
and a proxy for judicial inefficiency in the province where the firm is located).
       Even controlling for all these environmental variables, the indicator of the level of local trust
has always a negative and highly statistically significant effect on the probability that a firm
is entirely owned by a single shareholder. This is consistent with the prediction that in places
where trust is scarce, corporations are reluctant to broaden their shareholder base.


6.3       International data

To test this prediction across countries we assemble information from three sources. We get
stock market participation (fraction of individuals who directly own stocks) from Giannetti and
Koskinen (2005).12 These data show remarkable variation: the fraction of direct stockholders
  12
       Since individuals can also participate through mutual funds, pension funds, and managed investment accounts,
these figures represent a lower bound. But a very relevant one, since trust should be most important for direct



                                                         28
is only 1.2 percent in Turkey (the lowest value in the sample) and 40 percent in Australia (the
highest value). The fraction of stock market capitalization that is closely held is obtained from
La Porta et al. (1998). From the same source we obtain an index of legal enforcement, and the
country legal origin. Finally, average trust in each country is obtained from the World Values
Survey. It is computed as fraction of individuals in each country who reply that most people
can be trusted.


6.4    Cross-country results

Table 12 reports the results. In the first three columns the dependent variable is the percentage
of the stock market capitalization that is closely held. As expected, trust has a negative effect
on this variable and the effect is both statistically and economically significant. If Turkey had
the same level of trust as Belgium (the median country) the fraction of the stock market closely
held would be 11 percentage points lower.
    When we control (column 2) for legal enforcement as done by Giannetti and Koskinen
(2005), the coefficient of trust becomes even larger in absolute value. Further controlling for
Common Law, leaves the effect of trust positive and significant and its coefficient unchanged
suggesting that trust plays an independent and additive role with respect to the quality of
formal institutions in explaining worldwide differences in ownership concentration. The results
(not reported) are substantially the same when, as a measure of trust, we use the fraction of
people who do not have at all confidence in major corporations.
    If entrepreneurs are reluctant to float their companies and investors are reluctant to invest,
countries with low levels of trust should also exhibit low levels of stock market participation. To
test this implication we look at the proportion of population that invests in the stock market.
As Figure 2 shows, this proportion varies widely across countries. Stockholders are as low as 2
percent in Turkey and as high as 40 percent in Australia.
    While entry costs might differ across countries, it is hard to believe that they are much lower
in Australia and New Zealand (the countries with the highest participation) than in Switzerland
(with a participation rate of 18%) or Belgium (where only 6 percent buy equity).
investment.



                                                29
         It would also be hard to explain this variation just with differences in risk or ambiguity
aversion. In so far as these preference parameters reflect innate traits, their distribution should
be similar across different populations.
         By contrast, since generalized trust is affected by culture and history, it can potentially differ
considerably across communities, as indeed it does. In our sample, the share of individuals that
trust varies between a low of 3 percent in Brazil and a high of 67 percent in Denmark.
         The second three columns of Table 13 formally test this relation by regressing the share
of stockholders in each country on the World Values Survey measure of trust. As predicted,
trust has a positive effect on stock ownership and this effect is statistically significant. This
result is unchanged if we control for the quality of legal enforcement (column 5) and for the
fact a country has a common law system (6). In all these cases the effect is very economically
significant. If Turkey had the same level of trust as Ireland (the median country) the share of
stockholders would increase to 8 percentage points, more than a six-fold increase in the level of
participation in that country.13


7         Conclusions

After the recent corporate scandals, a lot of politicians and business commentators argued that
investors were deserting the stock market because they had lost their trust in Corporate America.
In spite of the popularity of this interpretation, the finance literature has so far ignored the role
of trust in explaining stock market participation and portfolio choices.
         This paper tries to fill this gap. Not only do we show that, in theory, lack of trust can
explain why individuals do not participate in the stock market even in the absence of any other
friction. But we also show that, in practice, differences in trust across individuals and countries
help explain why some invest in stocks, while others do not. Our simulations also suggest that
this problem can be sufficiently severe to explain the percentage of wealthy people who do not
invest in the stock market in the Unite States and the wide variation in this percentage across
countries.
    13
         The results (not reported) are substantially the same when, as a measure of trust, we use the fraction of
people who do not have at all confidence in major corporations.



                                                          30
   Another outstanding puzzle regarding stock market participation is why some demographics,
such as race, have so much impact on the decision to invest in stock, even after controlling
for wealth and education (e.g., Chiteji and Stafford (2000)). That the race effect disappears
when Chiteji and Stafford (2000) control for whether parents owned stock points to a cultural
explanation of the phenomenon. Since trust is very much linked to family background (Banfield
(1958) GSZ (2004a)), our trust-based model has the potential to address even this puzzle.
   If it is a policy goal to promote wider stock ownership, then this paper has two implications.
First, a better education about the stock market can reduce the negative effect of lack of
trust. Second, it becomes crucial to understand the determinants of investors’ (possibly biased)
perception of the trustworthiness of the stock market. This is the next item in our research
agenda.




                                              31
A        Appendix A


Proof of Proposition 3
    First notice that EU (α0∗ re(W −f )+(1−α0∗ )rf (W −f )) = U (α0∗ rb0 (W −f )+(1−α0∗ )rf (W −f )) >
    EU (αp∗ re(W − f ) + (1 − αp∗ )rf (W − f )) = U (αp∗ rbp (W − f ) + (1 − αp∗ ) rf (W − f ), since
α0∗ maximizes the first expression above and U is increasing in final wealth. It follows that
α0∗ rb0 > αp∗ rbp . We can now show that if W = W0 and p > 0 the investor will not participate, i.e.
(1 − p)EU (αp∗ rbp (W0 − f ) + (1 − αp∗ )rf (W0 − f )) + pU ((1 − αp∗ )rf (W0 − f )) < U (rf W0 ). Since
(1−αp∗ )rf (W0 −f ) < rf W0 , it is enough to show that αp∗ rbp (W0 −f )+(1−αp∗ )rf (W0 −f ) < rf W0 .
Substituting the value of W0 , the above inequality always holds since α0∗ rb0 > αp∗ rbp .Thus, with
partial trust, the wealth threshold required to enter the stock market is larger than when there
is full trust.
    Existence of a Solution for the Optimal Number of Stocks
    The first order condition for the problem
             h                      1 2     2 2
                                                in
    Maxn − p + (1 − p)e−θ(W/n)r+ 2 θ (W/n) σ       − cn

    is
               h                                           i
                            Z−p
    F OC : −Z n log Z +      Z    (θ W
                                     n r − θ 2 ( W )2 σ 2 ) = c
                                                 n

             h                      1 2      2 2
                                                 i
    where Z = p + (1 − p)e−θ(W/n)r+ 2 θ (W/n) σ    .
    To show that the first-order condition has at least one solution, we take limits of the LHS
of the first order condition for n → +∞ and n → 0.

    • Limit of LHS when n → +∞

    In this case, limn→+∞ Z = 1, limn→+∞ Z n = e−(1−p)θrw and LHS → 0.
    To see why limn→+∞ Z n = e−(1−p)θrw , we write the following approximations:
    1) log(Z) ≈ log(1 + Z − 1) ≈ Z − 1
                                      1 2
                                          (W/n)2 σ 2
    2) Z − 1 = (1 − p)(e−θ(W/n)r+ 2 θ                  − 1)
                                                              
                 ≈ (1 − p) −θ(W/n)r + 21 θ2 (W/n)2 σ 2
    3)Z n = en log(Z) ≈ (1 − p) (−θ(W )r)


                                                       32
   • Limit of LHS when n → 0

   1) Now limn→0 Z = +∞ and limn→0 Z n = +∞
                                    1 2 (W/n)2 σ 2
        Z−p         (1−p)e−θ(W/n)r+ 2 θ
   2)    Z    =                       1 2 (W/n)2 σ 2
                  p+(1−p)e−θ(W/n)r+ 2 θ
                               1−p
                =                    1 2 (W/n)2 σ 2
                  1−p+peθ(W/n)r− 2 θ
   So that     limn→0 Z−p
                       Z =1

   3) Let K = θ(W/n)r − 21 θ2 (W/n)2 σ 2
   We can write the following approximations:

                                Z −p             (1 − p)e−K
                                          =
                                  Z            (1 − p)e−K + p
                                                    1
                                          =          p K
                                               1 + 1−p e
                                                      p K
                                          ≈    1−        e
                                                    1−p
                                                      p K
                               log(Z) =        log(      e + 1) + log(1 − p)e−K
                                                    1−p
                                                      p K
                                          =    log(      e + 1) + log(1 − p) − K
                                                    1−p


   So that:

                         Z −p
              log Z +         (θ(W/n)r − θ2 (W/n)2 σ 2 )
                           Z                            
               p K                                  p K
     ≈ log(       e + 1) + log(1 − p) − K + 1 −        e   (θ(W/n)r − θ2 (W/n)2 σ 2 )
             1−p                                  1−p
               1
          ∼ − θ2 (W/n)2 σ 2
         n→0   2
                                                      
   This means that log Z + Z−p (θ(W/n)r  − θ 2 (W/n)2 σ → −∞ as n → 0 and that LHS
                             Z

goes to +∞.
   Since c > 0, according to the intermediate value theorem, the first-order conditions have a
solution.




                                                        33
B     Appendix B: The DNB survey and the bank customers sur-
      vey

B.1    The DNB Survey


We rely on the the 2003 wave of the DNB Household Survey. The DNB survey collects infor-
mation on a sample of about 1,943 Dutch households (about 4,000 individuals). The survey,
sponsored by the Dutch National Bank, is administered and run by Center at Tilburg Univer-
sity. The purpose of the survey is to collect household level data to study the economic and
psychological determinants of households savings behavior. Interviews are done via computer
through the internet. If a household has no computer or access to the net, Center provides a
set-top box and if necessary a television set that can be used to fill in questionnaires. This
feature allows Center to interview the panel occasionally after the main survey has been con-
ducted and collect additional data on some topic of interest. On the main survey, participants
are submitted seven questionnaires each covering a different feature of the household: general
information on household demographics; home and market work; housing and mortgages; health
conditions and income; financial assets and liabilities; economic and psychological attitudes and
work and home. All individuals in the households of age above 16 are interviewed but the
general information is collected for all household members.


B.2    The bank customers survey

The bank customer survey (BCS) draws on a sample of one of the largest Italian banking groups,
with over 4 million accounts. The survey was conducted in the Fall of 2003 and elicits detailed
financial and demographic information on a sample of 1,834 individuals with a checking account
in one of the banks that are part of the group. The sample is representative of eligible population
of customers, excluding customers aged less than 20 and more than eighty, and those who hold
accounts of less than 1,000 euro or more than 2.5 million euro. Account holders are stratified
according to three criteria: geographical area, city size, and financial wealth, and it explicitly
over-samples rich individuals.
    The goal of the survey is to understand customers’ behavior and expectations.

                                                34
       The questionnaire was constructed with the help of field experts and academic researchers.
It has 8 sections, dealing with household demographic structure and on occupation, propensity
to save, to invest and to risk, individuals and household financial wealth and liabilities, real
estate and on entrepreneurial activities, income and expectations and needs for insurance and
pension products.


C        Appendix C: Measuring risk and ambiguity aversion


C.1        The coefficient of risk aversion

Since survey participants are reporting the price that makes them indifferent between partici-
pating in the lottery and paying the reported price q and not participating, it must be that


                                         1                1
                                   −eθW = (−eθ(W +X−q) ) + (−eθ(W −q) )
                                         2                2
where X is the lottery prize (5,000 euros in the survey). Using this indifference condition we
compute for each individual in the sample his/her absolute risk aversion parameter θ. A measure
of relative risk aversion can be obtained multiplying θ by the individual endowment (income or
wealth or the sum of the two).14


C.2        The coefficient of ambiguity aversion

To get a measure of ambiguity aversion from the answers to our questions we rely on the
utility model recently developed by Maccheroni, Marinacci and Rustichini (2005). Consider an
individual who must make a decision prior to the realization of an unknown state of nature s.
There is a finite set S of possible states and a typical choice will be a vector (x1 , ..., xS ) among
a choice set X. The environment is ambiguous in the sense that the decision maker cannot
precisely evaluate his subjective probability distribution for the states of nature but he however
has a set of subjective probability distributions Π.
  14
       The assumption about the shape of the utility function to obtain the risk aversion parameter is not important.
Assuming that individuals have CRRA preferences and backing the relative risk aversion parameter under this
assumption gives essentially the same estimates of absolute risk aversion as using CARA preferences.


                                                          35
   In this framework ambiguity-averse preferences for two-state lotteries can be written as

               v(x) = Eπ u(x) if there is no ambiguity
                                                                              
                                                     π                1−π
               v(x) =   min        Eπ u(x) + ω(π log ∗ + (1 − π) log(        ))
                      π∈{πA ,πB }                   π                 1 − π∗

where π ∗ is a reference probability measure for the distribution (π, 1 − π) .The term (π log ππ∗ +
              1−π
(1 − π) log( 1−π ∗ )) is a measure of entropy and the extent of aversion to ambiguity is measured


by the parameter ω. Letting qA denote the willingness to pay for the ambiguous lottery and X
the prize of the lottery (5,000 euro), the index of ambiguity aversion can be computed as:


                          u(W ) − πA u(W − qA ) − (1 − πA )u(W + X − qA )
                     ω=
                                  (πA log ππA∗ + (1 − πA ) log( 1−π
                                                                1−π ∗ ))
                                                                   A


where W is the person’s wealth and the risk aversion of the utility function u(W ) is obtained
from the answers to the purely risky lottery. In our case the reference measure (π ∗ , 1 − π ∗ ) can
be taken to be (1/2, 1/2).
   We can further develop this formula to separate the effect of pure risk-aversion on the
ambiguity index a from the effect of ambiguity and write it as

             u(W ) − 1/2u(W − P ) − 1/2u(W + X − P )
     ω =                                                 +
                  (πA log ππA∗ + (1 − πA ) log( 1−π
                                                1−π
                                                   A
                                                    ∗ ))
             1/2u(W − P ) + 1/2u(W + X − P ) − πA u(W − P ) − (1 − πA )u(W + X − P )
                                 (πA log ππA∗ + (1 − πA ) log( 1−π
                                                               1−π ∗ ))
                                                                  A



The first term reflects the pure effect of risk-aversion and is equal to zero if the participant
is risk neutral; the second term reflects the effect of ambiguity, that is the effect of distorting
the perceived probability from (1/2, 1/2) to (πB , 1 − πB ) . Here the distortion of the perceived
probability distribution is made in favor of the “worst case model” (πA ,1 − πA ). Another way
to refine the index is to consider the second term only as the index of ambiguity aversion.
   Note that in this model there will be a non zero ambiguity aversion index even if the will-
ingness to pay are the same for both the purely risky lottery and the ambiguous lottery. This is
due to the fact that ambiguity (the sole fact of not knowing the probabilities) has this effect of
distorting the perceived probabilities for the decision maker which should be taken into account.




                                                36
    In practice, for CARA utility, we have that:

                             1
                     u(x) = − e−θx
                             θ
                             1 −θW 1 − πA eθqA − (1 − πA )e−θ(X−qA )
                        ω = − e
                             θ     (πA log ππA∗ + (1 − πA ) log( 1−π
                                                                 1−π ∗ ))
                                                                    A


                                            1 − πA eθqA − (1 − πA )e−θ(X−qA )
                               = u(W )
                                            (πA log ππA∗ + (1 − πA ) log( 1−π
                                                                          1−π ∗ ))
                                                                             A



and for CRRA utility, we have that:

                           x1−γ
                 u(x) =
                           1−γ
                                             q                         X−q
                           W 1−γ 1 − πA (1 − WA )1−γ − (1 − πA )(1 + W A )1−γ
                    ω =
                           1−γ        (πA log ππA∗ + (1 − πA ) log( 1−π
                                                                    1−π ∗ ))
                                                                       A

                                                   qA 1−γ                         X−qA 1−γ
                                     1 − πA (1 −   W)         − (1 − πA )(1 +       W )
                       = u(W )
                                             (πA log ππA∗ +   (1 −             1−πA
                                                                     πA ) log( 1−π∗ ))

    As already noticed by Maenhout (2000,2002), the Hansen-Sargent static multiplier prefer-
ences, of which the Maccheroni et al. (2005) are a generalization, are not homogeneous in wealth
even if the utility function u is homogeneous in wealth, this is the reason why the ambiguity
aversion index ω is proportional to u(W ) when u is homogeneous in wealth. In the numerical
                                 ω
calculations, we report only   u(W ) ,   the main reason is that u(W ) is extremely small (in the order
of 10−10 ).




                                                      37
References

 [1] Alesina, Alberto and Eliana La Ferrara, (2002), “Who Trusts Others?,” Journal of Public
    Economics, 85(2), 207-234.

 [2] Banfield, Edward C. (1958), The Moral Basis of a Backward Society. New York: Free Press.

 [3] Biais, B., P. Bossaerts, C. Spatt,(2004), ”Equilibrium Asset Pricing Under Heterogeneous
    Information”, University of Toulouse working paper.

 [4] Camerer, Colin F., George Loewenstein and Drazen Prelec (2004), “Neuroeconomics: Why
    economics needs brains,” working paper.

 [5] Chiteji Ngina S. and Frank P. Stafford (2000), Asset Ownership Across Generations, Pop-
    ulation Studies Center at the Institute for Social Research Working Paper.

 [6] Cohen, Lauren (2005) “Loyalty Based Portfolio Choice,” Yale University, working paper.

 [7] Coval, J. D. and Moskowitz, T. J. (1999), “Home Bias at Home: Local Equity Preference
    in Domestic Portfolios,” Journal of Finance, 54, 2045-2073.

 [8] Coval, J. D. and Moskowitz, T. J. (2001), “The Geography of Investment: Informed Trading
    and Asset Prices,” Journal of Political Economy, 109, 811-841.

 [9] Curcuru, S., J. Heaton, D. Lucas, D. Moore (2004), “Heterogeneity and Portfolio Choice:
    Theory and Evidence,” in Handbook of Financial Econometrics.

[10] Dominitz, J. and Charles Manski (2005) “Measuring and Interpreting Expectations of Eq-
    uity Returns,” Northwestern University, working paper.

[11] Dow, James, and Sérgio Ribeiro da Costa Werlang (1992), “Uncertainty aversion, risk
    aversion and the optimal choice of portfolio,” Econometrica, 60(1): 197-204.

[12] Driscoll, K., J. Malcolma, M. Sirull, and P. Slotter (1995), “1995 Gallupp Survey of Defined
    Contriobution Plan Participants,” John Hancock Financial Services, working paper.

                                               38
[13] Gentzkow, Matthew and Jesse Shapiro (2004), “Media, education, and anti-Americanism
    in the Muslim world,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 18(3): 117-133.

[14] Ghirardato, Paolo, Fabio Maccheroni, and Massimo Marinacci (2004), “Differentiating Am-
    biguity and Ambiguity Attitude,” Journal of Economic Theory, 118(2): 133-173.

[15] Giannetti, Mariassunta and Yrjö Koskinen (2005), “Investor Protection and Demand for
    Equity” Stockholm School of Economics working paper.

[16] Gilboa, Itzhak, and David Schmeidler (1989): “Maxmin Expected Utility with a Non-
    Unique Prior,” Journal of Mathematical Economics, 18(2): 141–153.

[17] Gladwell M. (2000), Tipping point, Little Brown and Company.

[18] Guiso, Luigi, Michael Haliassos, and Tullio Jappelli (2001) Household Portfolios, MIT
    Press, Boston.

[19] Guiso, Luigi, and Tullio Jappelli (2005), “Awareness and Stock Market Participation,” The
    Review of Finance, forthcoming.

[20] Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales (2003), “People’s Opium. The Economic
    Effects of Religion,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 50(1): 225-282.

[21] Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales (2004a), “The role of Social Capital in
    Financial Development,” American Economic Review, 94(3): 526-556.

[22] Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales (2004b), “Cultural Biases in Economic
    Exchange,” working paper.

[23] Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales (2005), “Does Culture affect Economic
    Outcomes?,” working paper.

[24] Hackett Fischer, David (1995), Paul Revere’s Ride, Oxford University Press, Oxford.

[25] Haliassos, Michael and Carol C. Bertaut (1995), “Why do so few hold stocks?,” Economic
    Journal, 105(432): 1110-1129.


                                             39
[26] Hong Harrison, Kubik Jeffrey D., and Jeremy Stein (2004), “Social Interaction and Stock-
    Market Participation,” Journal of Finance, Vol. LIX, No. 1, February 2004.

[27] Huberman, Gur (2001), “Familiarity Breeds Investment,” Review of Financial Studies, Vol.
    14, No. 3, pp. 659-680.

[28] Kagel, John H. and Alvin E. Roth (eds.), (1995), The Handbook of Experimental Economics,
    Princenton University Press, Princeton.

[29] Khawaja, Asim Ijaz and Atif Mian (2005) “Unchecked Intermediaries: Price Manipulation
    in an Emerging Stock Market”, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

[30] Kimball, Miles S. (1993), “Standard Risk Aversion,” Econometrica, 61(3): 589-611.

[31] Knox, Thomas A. (2003), “Foundations for Learning How to Invest when Returns are
    Uncertain,” University of Chicago Graduate School of Business, working paper.

[32] La Porta Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny (1998),
    “Law and Finance,” Journal of Political Economy, 106(6): 1113-1155.

[33] Maccheroni, Fabio, Massimo Marinacci, and Aldo Rustichini (2005), “Ambiguity Aversion,
    Malevolent Nature and the Variational Representation of Preferences,” working paper.

[34] Mankiw, Gregory N. and Stephen P. Zeldes (1991), “The Consumption of Stockholders and
    Nonstockholders,’ Journal of Financial Economics 29(1): 97-112.

[35] McCabe, Kevin, Daniel Houser, Lee Ryan, Vernon Smith and Theodore Trouard, (2001),
    “A funtional imaging study of cooperation in two-person reciprocal exchange.” Proceedings
    of the National Academy of Sciences, 98(20): 11832-11835.

[36] Osili, Una Okonkwo and Anna Paulson (2005), “Institutional Quality and Financial Market
    Development: Evidence from International Migrants in the U.S.,” working paper

[37] Poterba ,James M. and Andrew A. Samwick (1995) “Stock ownership patterns, stock mar-
    ket fluctuations, and consumption,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 295-372.



                                              40
[38] Puri, Manju and David Robinson (2005), “Optimism and Economic Choice,” Working
    paper.

[39] Putnam, Robert (1993), Making Democracy Work Civic Traditions in Modern Italy, Prince-
    ton, Princeton University Press.

[40] Routledge, Bryan R., and Stanley Zin (2001), “Model uncertainty and liquidity,” NBER
    Working Paper 8683.

[41] Rustichini, Aldo, John Dickhaut, Paolo Ghirardato, Kip Smith, and Jose V. Pardo (2002),
    “A Brain Imaging Study of Procedural Choice,” University of Minnesota working paper.

[42] Scheier MF, Carver CS, Bridges MW. (1994), “Distinguishing optimism from neuroticism
    (and trait anxiety, self-mastery, and self-esteem): a reevaluation of the Life Orientation
    Test,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67(6): 1063-78.

[43] Vissing-Jørgensen, Annette (2003) “Perspectives on Behavioral Finance: Does “Irrational-
    ity” Disappear with Wealth? Evidence from Expectations and Actions,” NBER Macroeco-
    nomics Annual.

[44] Zak, Paul J.,R. Kurzban and W. Matzner (2004), “The Neurobiology of Trust,” Annals of
    the New York Academy of Sciences.




                                             41
                                                                        Figure 1

This figure reports the optimal number of stock an investor should hold for different levels of risk aversion and different levels of trust. Trust is the
percentage probability of being cheated. Theta is the coefficient of absolute risk aversion of an exponential utility function.



                              50
                              45
                              40
           Number of stocks




                              35
                                                                                                                                    Theta=1
                              30
                                                                                                                                    Theta=3
                              25
                                                                                                                                    Theta=5
                              20
                                                                                                                                    Theta=8
                              15
                              10
                               5
                               0
                                   1   9   17 25    33 41           49 57          65 73 81               89 97
                                                            Level of trust



                                                                            42
                                  Figure 2



                    Table I StocK Market Participation Rate


   Australia
New Zealand
         UK
      Japan
   Denmark
         US
    Canada
    Sweden
    Norway
    Finland
 Switzerland
     Ireland
     France
    Portugal
Netherlands
 Hong Kong
     Taiwan
     Greece
   Germany
  Singapore
        Italy
     Austria
    Belgium
       India
   Sri Lanka
     Turkey


                0     0,1         0,2         0,3         0,4   0,5




                                     43
                                            Table 1
              Proportion of Households Investing in Risky Assets, by Asset Quartiles
The first panel shows the proportion of households in each quartile of gross financial wealth who owns stock directly.
The second panel shows the same proportion when we include also indirect ownership, via mutual funds or pension
funds. Data for European countries are computed from the 2004 wave of the Survey for Health, Age, and Retirement in
Europe (Share), and refer to year 2003. Data for the U.S. are drawn from the 1998 Survey of Consumer Finances. Data
for the U.K. are drawn from the 1997-98 Financial Research Survey.

                                                Direct Stockholding
                       Quartile I     Quartile II    Quartile III   Quartile IV         Top 5 %       Average
     U.S.                1.4             6.9             20.6          47.9               70.1         19.2
     U.K.                0.0             4.4             28.3          53.6               67.9         21.6
     Netherlands          1.5            7.4             20.0          40.3               60.2         17.2
     Germany              0.6            4.1             16.1          36.1               50.5         14.0
     Italy                0.0            0.8              3.1          12.8               30.8          4.0
     Austria               0             1.7              2.8          15.6               25.7          5.0
     Sweden              12.9           30.7             46.9          72.8               80.6         40.8
     Spain                 0             0.3              1.8          13.2               14.4          3.5
     France               0.7            9.9             14.6          33.3               44.2         14.4
     Denmark              6.3           25.9             36.4          55.6               68.4         31.0
     Greece                0             0.7              3.2          17.3               23.5          4.9
     Switzerland          2.8           12.2             30.3          54.2               63.2         24.9

                                        Direct and Indirect Stockholding
                       Quartile I     Quartile II   Quartile III    Quartile IV         Top 5 %       Average
     U.S.                4.4            38.3            66.0           86.7               93.7         48.9
     U.K.                4.9            11.9            37.8           71.1               83.9         31.5
     Netherlands          1.7           11.0            31.3           52.8               72.0         24.1
     Germany              6.6           17.6            22.1           29.3               41.6         22.9
     Italy                0.0            0.8             5.2           27.5               64.8          8.2
     Austria               0             1.9             8.1           25.5               33.8          8.8
     Sweden              25.8           63.4            82.7           92.9               95.8         66.2
     Spain                 0             1.1             3.0           19.1               24.6          5.4
     France               1.1           17.6            29.9           57.6               67.3         26.2
     Denmark              6.6           30.8            44.8           65.7               75.4         37.0
     Greece                0             0.7             4.0           22.2               32.9          6.3
     Switzerland          2.8           20.0            38.2           63.7               65.8         31.4




                                                         44
                                             Table 2
                                   Trust in Large Companies
This table reports data from the World Values Survey on people’s trust toward large companies. The first
column reports the proportion of people who do not have confidence at all in major corporations, while the
second the proportion that does not have very much confidence. Column 3 is the sum of the previous two. For
each country we report the value for the whole sample, for the people in the top 30% of the income
distribution and for people in the top 10% of the income distribution. To compute these values we pool the
1981-1984, 1990-1993 and 1995-1997 waves of the WVS.


  How much confidence do you have in major companies?

              Country                 No confidence          Not very much         Total fraction
                                                             confidence            with limited
                                      (1)                    (2)                   confidence
                                                                                   (1)+(2)

 USA
            Total sample              7.22                   41.54                 48.76
             Top 30%                  6.46                   41.78                 48.24
             Top 10%                  5.03                   43.55                 48.58

 France
            Total sample              12.51                  30.66                 53.17
             Top 30%                  13.21                  30.88                 44.09
             Top 10%                  4.62                   21.54                 26.16

 Germany
            Total sample              16.95                  49.27                 66.22
             Top 30%                  15.47                  48.82                 64.29
             Top 10%                  13.37                  50.87                 64.24

 Italy
            Total sample              18.54                  31.38                 49.92
             Top 30%                  28.32                  35.49                 53.81
             Top 10%                  28.89                  38.67                 67.56

 Netherland
          Total sample                12.03                  47.29                 59.32
            Top 30%                   8.66                   48.38                 57.04
            Top 10%                   3.45                   40.23                 43.68

 Sweeden
            Total sample              5.99                   40.31                 46.30
             Top 30%                  3.34                   33.89                 37.23
             Top 10%                  2.0                    20.0                  22.0




                                                  45
                                                        Table 3
                                                       Calibration
Panel A shows the result of a calibration exercise of the optimal portfolio choice for different levels of trust (expressed
as perceived probability p that an investor will be cheated). The first column reports these perceived probabilities,
varying between 0 and the maximum value above which no participation takes place. Column 2 reports the wealth
threshold beyond which people invests in the stock market expressed as a ratio of the level of wealth that will trigger
investment in the absence of trust considerations. Column 3 reports the optimal portfolio share invested in the stock
market, conditional on investing. The calculations assume the investor has exponential utility, wealth is set equal to 1,
relative risk aversion is 5, the participation cost is 0.1 percent of wealth and the return on equity and the risk free rate
are 1.12 and 1.05, respectively. Panel B reports the ration of the 75th and 90th percentile of financial assets to median
values.



                A. Probability of being cheated and wealth participation threshold
                                          Wealth participation
                      Probability         thresholds /wealth     Optimal share invested
                of being cheated in the threshold when trust is in stocks if participation
                     stock market             full (p=0)                 occurs
                                       0                       1                     0.350
                                  0.005                    1.251                     0.249
                                   0.01                    1.662                     0.197
                                  0.015                    2.066                     0.160
                                   0.02                    2.713                     0.131
                                  0.025                    3.544                     0.107
                                   0.03                    5.195                     0.087
                                  0.035                    6.349                     0.070
                                   0.04                    7.503                     0.054
                                   0.05                    8.658                     0.028
                                   0.06                    9.812                     0.005


              B. ratio of 75th and 90th percentile of financial assets to median value
                                          USA            Italy       France    Netherlands

              75th percentile/median                 4.908            2.932            2.996           2.945

              90h percentile/median                14.018             6.819            7.339           7.426




                                                             46
                                                    Table 4
                                                Summary statistics
The table shows summary statistics of the variables used. Panels A-D use data from the Dutch National Bank survey.
Financial wealth, income and health insurance premium are in thousand euro. Trust is a dummy equal to one if a person
answers ``most people can be trusted” to the question: ``Generally speaking, would you say that most people can be
trusted or that you have to be very careful in dealing with people}?"The price for the lotteries is obtained asking people
how much were they are willing to pay to participate in a lottery. In the unambiguous lottery the interviewed is given
the exact number of balls in the urn. In the ambiguous one this number is uncertain, but the interviewed if given the
probability distribution. The coefficient of risk aversion is obtained fitting a CARA utility. `` Optimism is an index of
agreement 9from 1 to 5) to the statement ``I expect more good things to happen to me than bad things.” “Expect stock
market to go up” is a dummy equal to one if the interviewed answers ``increase” to the question “do you expect market
stock prices to increase, remain constant or decrease in the next two years?” Panel E is from a survey of bank customers
of a large Italian commercial bank. In this sample high trust is a dummy equal to 1 when a bank customer responds "a
lot" or "enough" to the question: ``How much do you trust your bank official or broker as financial advisor for your
investment decisions?”. Medium trust is a dummy variable equal to one if s/he answers "so and so" or "not much" (the
left out category is "not at all"). Panel F is from an international dataset combining data from Giannetti and Koskinen
(2005), from La Porta et al. (1998) and from the World Value Survey (data on trust).


                            A. Stock holdings, financial assets and income: DNB (N. 1,444)
                                          Mean           Median           SD           Min                 Max
    Direct stockholders                    0.135            0.0          0.342           0                   1
    Risky assets holders                   0.422            0.0          0.449           0                   1
    Portfolio share in stocks             0.033              0           0.119           0                   1
    Portfolio share in stocks among        0.203          0.118          0.229        0.0001               0.926
    stockholders
    Portfolio share in risky assets        0.124             0           0.230           0                   1
    Portfolio share in risky assets        0.295          0.195          0.274         0.001                 1
    among holders of risky assets
    Number of stocks                       0.532             0           2.873           0                   97
    Number of stocks among                  3.90             3           6.952           1                   97
    stockholders
    Holders of health insurance            0.269             0           0.444           0                  1
    Health insurance premium               0.178             0           1.148           0                44.411
    (‘000 of euros)
    Household financial wealth           031.230          10.140        66.804           0                838.041
    (‘000 of euros)
    Gross household income                28.128          22.362        68.930           0               2,197.032
    (‘000 of euros)
    Number of observations




                       B. Trust, risk aversion, ambiguity aversion and optimism: DNB (N. 1,444)
                                            Mean         Median           SD          Min                  Max
    Trust WVS                               0.332           0.0          0.471          0                   1
    Absolute risk aversion                  0.107          0.028         0.186          0                 0.693
    Ambiguity aversion                       4.155        7.1077         4.275       -2.389               41.692
    Price to participate in risky           0.123          0.001         0.421          0                   5
    lottery (‘000 of euros)
    Price to partic. in ambiguous           0.090          0.001         0.341          0                    3
    lottery (‘000 of euros)
    Individual optimism                     3.127            4           1.532          0                    5
    Expect stock market to go up            0.596            1           0.458          0                    1




                                                           47
     C. Correlation matrix between trust, risk aversion, ambiguity aversion and optimism: DNB (N. 1,444)
                                                 Trust WVS    Absolute risk Ambiguity       Optimism
                                                              aversion        aversion
    Trust WVS                                         1
    Absolute risk aversion                         0.017             1
    Ambiguity aversion                             0.014           0.072            1
    Optimism                                       0.310           0.172          0.013           1

.
     D. Trust and wealth
                                                          Financial Wealth

                    Quartile I     Quartile II    Quartile III       Quartile IV   Top 5 %      Average

      Trust WVS      0.342        0.373           0.409              0.396         0.365        0.382



     E. Household head and household demographics: DNB
                                     Mean        Median                 SD          Min           Max
    Male                             0.466         0.0                 0.499         0             1
    Age                              30.184         34                 27.011        0            90
    High education                   0.178           0                 0.382         0             1
    Medium education                 0.292           0                 0.455         0             1
    Employee                         0.369           0                 0.483         0             1
    N. of household members          2.442           2                 1.281         1             8
    N. of children in the household  0.711          0                  1.070         0             6




      F. Summary statistics for the Bank Customer Dataset ((N = 1,834)
                                        Mean       Median            SD             Min           Max
    Share holding risky assets           0.638         1            0.481            0              1
    Portfolio share of risky assets      0.223      0.110           0.269            0              1
    High trust in bank official         0.665          1           0.472             0              1
    Medium trust in bank official        0.135         0            0.342            0              1
    Averse to risk                      0.709          1           0.454             0              1
    Financial assets                   109.185        25          270.810            0            3,760
    (‘000, euros)
    Male                                0.711          1           0.453             0             1
    Age                                 54.698        56           14.366            21            85
    Years of education                  11.974        13            4.412             0            21


                            G. Summary statistics for the International Data ((N= 33)
                                      Mean            Median            SD            Min         Max
    % of stock market cap. closely
    held                                  44.03            42.43          18.38          7.94           77.48
    % population participating in
    the stock market                        0.16            0.15           0.10          0.01            0.40
    Average trust                           0.34            0.36           0.17          0.03            0.67
    Legal enforcement                       0.54            0.50           0.24          0.17            1.00
    Common law                              0.32            0.00           0.47          0.00            1.00


                                                      48
                                                Table 5
                       The effect of trust on direct stock market participation
The dependent variable is a dummy equal to 1 if the household directly owns shares in a company (be it
listed or not) except in his own company. The table reports the probit estimates, calculated as the effect
on the LHS of a marginal change in the RHS variable computed at the average value of the RHS
variables. All household characteristics, which are defined in Table 1, are assumed to be those of the
household head. Standard errors are reported in parenthesis. *** indicate the coefficient is different
from zero at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10 % level.
                                                                                           Above
                                               Whole sample                                median
                                                                                           wealth
                           (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)             (5)
Trust                   0.065***          0.059***         0.057***            0.064         0.072**
                         (0.023)           (0.022)          (0.022)          (0.051)         (0.036)
Risk aversion             0.055             0.061            0.061             0.012           0.113
                         (0.052)           (0.047)          (0.047)          (0.122)         (0.085)
Ambiguity                                  -0.002           -0.002            -0.001          -0.003
aversion                                   (0.002)          (0.002)          (0.004)         (0.003)
Optimism                                                     0.005            0.047*           0.023
                                                            (0.010)          (0.025)         (0.019)
Stock market                                                                  -0.020
expected to go up                                                            (0.043)
Financial wealth        0.001***          0.001***         0.001***          0.001**         0.001***
                         (0.000)           (0.000)          (0.000)          (0.000)          (0.000)
Income                     0.994             0.837            0.824           -7.001            3.831
                         (1.325)           (1.190)          (1.189)         (20.720)          (3.662)
Male                       0.039             0.036            0.036            0.025            0.047
                         (0.027)           (0.024)          (0.024)          (0.069)          (0.045)
Age                     -0.005**           -0.004*          -0.005*          -0.010*           -0.006
                         (0.002)           (0.002)          (0.002)          (0.005)          (0.004)
Age square               0.000**           0.000**         0.000**            0.000*            0.000
                         (0.000)           (0.000)          (0.000)          (0.000)          (0.000)
Household size            -0.015            -0.014           -0.014            0.041          -0.075*
                         (0.026)           (0.023)          (0.023)          (0.060)          (0.045)
Number of                  0.040             0.037            0.037            0.009         0.121**
children                 (0.030)           (0.028)          (0.028)          (0.065)          (0.054)
College education       0.072**           0.066**            0.063*         0.357***            0.072
                         (0.036)           (0.033)          (0.033)          (0.133)          (0.053)
High school                0.041             0.038            0.036          0.169*             0.055
education                (0.029)           (0.027)          (0.027)          (0.091)          (0.047)
Employee                  -0.002            -0.000           -0.002         -0.139**           -0.058
                         (0.030)           (0.027)          (0.027)          (0.067)          (0.053)
Observations               1156              1156             1156              255              618




                                                      49
                                                Table 6
                          The effect of trust on participation in risky assets
The dependent variable is a dummy equal to 1 if the household directly owns any risky asset (shares,
mutual funds, corporate bonds, put and call options) except equity in his own company. The table
reports the probit estimates, calculated as the effect on the LHS of a marginal change in the RHS
variable computed at the average value of the RHS variables. All household characteristics, which are
defined in Table 1, are assumed to be those of the household head. Standard errors are reported in
parenthesis. *** indicate the coefficient is different from zero at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and *
at the 10 % level.

                                                                                         Above
                                              Whole sample                               median
                                                                                         wealth
                          (1)               (2)               (3)             (4)             (5)
Trust                  0.085**           0.084**           0.082**           0.053         0.084*
                       (0.037)           (0.037)           (0.037)         (0.079)         (0.044)
Risk aversion           -0.100            -0.107            -0.106          -0.039          0.019
                       (0.091)           (0.092)           (0.092)         (0.197)         (0.115)
Ambiguity                                 0.000             0.000            0.001          0.000
aversion                                 (0.000)           (0.000)         (0.006)         (0.000)
Optimism                                                    0.007           -0.009         0.042*
                                                           (0.019)         (0.040)         (0.023)
Stock market                                                                -0.028
exp. to go up                                                              (0.077)
Financial wealth       0.003***         0.003***           0.003***       0.001***          0.001***
                        (0.000)          (0.000)            (0.000)        (0.000)           (0.000)
Income                   -1.951           -1.979             -2.006        -53.158            -4.451
                        (3.271)          (3.290)            (3.295)       (33.834)           (5.356)
Male                    0.109**          0.109**            0.109**          0.153             0.096
                        (0.048)          (0.048)            (0.048)        (0.116)           (0.062)
Age                      -0.007           -0.006             -0.007         -0.009           -0.011*
                        (0.004)          (0.004)            (0.005)        (0.009)           (0.006)
Age square               0.000*           0.000*             0.000*          0.000             0.000
                        (0.000)          (0.000)            (0.000)        (0.000)           (0.000)
Household size         0.165***         0.165***           0.164***          0.083           0.119**
                        (0.044)          (0.044)            (0.044)        (0.096)           (0.056)
Number of              -0.109**         -0.109**           -0.108**          0.023            -0.051
Children                (0.052)          (0.052)            (0.052)        (0.108)           (0.066)
College                   0.016            0.016              0.013          0.136            -0.029
education               (0.050)          (0.050)            (0.051)        (0.111)           (0.061)
High school               0.020            0.019              0.017         0.083              0.011
education               (0.045)          (0.045)            (0.045)        (0.094)           (0.057)
Employee               0.183***         0.183***           0.181***         0.203*            0.109*
                        (0.050)          (0.050)            (0.050)        (0.107)           (0.066)
Observations              1,007            1,007              1,007           237               618




                                                      50
                                               Table 7
                 The effect of trust on the portfolio share in stocks and risky assets
The table reports Tobit estimates for the portfolio share invested in stocks (Panel A) and in risky assets
(Panel B), except equity in his own company. The share in stocks it the value of household holdings of listed
and unlisted stocks divided by total household financial assets; the share in risky assets is the value in stocks,
in stock mutual funds, corporate bonds and put and call divided by total family financial wealth. All
characteristics are those of the household head. Standard errors are reported in parenthesis. *** indicate the
coefficient is different from zero at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10 % level.

A: Share of household in financial assets invested in stocks

Trust                       0.131***               0.133***               0.130***                  0.145
                             (0.047)                (0.047)                (0.048)                (0.119)
Risk aversion                 0.064                  0.085                  0.085                  -0.048
                             (0.116)                (0.118)                (0.118)                (0.332)
Ambiguity                                           -0.003                 -0.003                   0.003
aversion                                            (0.003)                (0.003)                (0.010)
Optimism                                                                    0.012                   0.088
                                                                           (0.026)                (0.068)
Stock market                                                                                       -0.039
expected to go up                                                                                 (0.119)
Financial wealth            0.002***               0.002***               0.002***                  0.001
                             (0.000)                (0.000)                (0.000)                (0.001)
Income                         0.873                  0.781                  0.754                -19.128
                             (3.293)                (3.274)                (3.274)               (53.827)
Male                         0.129*                 0.132*                 0.132*                   0.161
                             (0.067)                (0.067)                (0.067)                (0.211)
Age                         -0.011**               -0.011**               -0.012**               -0.028**
                             (0.005)                (0.005)                (0.006)                (0.014)
Age square                   0.000**                0.000**               0.000**                 0.000**
                             (0.000)                (0.000)                (0.000)                (0.000)
Household size                -0.066                 -0.067                 -0.067                  0.071
                             (0.058)                (0.058)                (0.058)                (0.166)
Number of                    0.139**                0.141**                0.141**                  0.141
children                     (0.068)                (0.068)                (0.068)                (0.179)
College                      0.169**               0.171**                0.166**                0.724***
Education                    (0.067)                (0.067)                (0.068)                (0.232)
High school                   0.087                   0.089                  0.086                0.400*
education                    (0.063)                (0.063)                (0.064)                (0.217)
Employee                      -0.012                 -0.010                 -0.014               -0.348**
                             (0.067)                (0.067)                (0.067)                (0.170)
Observations                    999                    999                    999                    234




                                                       51
B. Share of household financial assets invested in risky financial assets

Trust                   0.096***            0.096***           0.095***        0.022
                         (0.034)             (0.034)            (0.035)      (0.071)
Risk aversion             -0.093              -0.095             -0.095       -0.068
                         (0.086)             (0.087)            (0.087)      (0.181)
Ambiguity                                     0.000              0.000         0.004
aversion                                     (0.000)            (0.000)      (0.005)
Optimism                                                         0.004        -0.003
                                                                (0.018)      (0.035)
Stock market                                                                  -0.030
expected to go up                                                            (0.070)
Financial wealth        0.002***            0.002***           0.002***      0.001*
                         (0.000)             (0.000)            (0.000)      (0.000)
Income                    -2.152              -2.164             -2.180     -32.009
                         (3.295)             (3.301)            (3.304)     (30.996)
Male                    0.125***            0.124***           0.125***     0.231**
                         (0.048)             (0.048)            (0.048)      (0.117)
Age                     -0.009**            -0.009**           -0.010**     -0.014*
                         (0.004)             (0.004)            (0.004)      (0.008)
Age square               0.000**             0.000**            0.000**     0.000**
                         (0.000)             (0.000)            (0.000)      (0.000)
Household size            0.066                0.066              0.065       -0.034
                         (0.043)             (0.043)            (0.043)      (0.095)
Number of                 -0.007              -0.007             -0.007        0.169
Children                 (0.049)             (0.049)            (0.049)      (0.104)
College                   0.028                0.028              0.027        0.159
Education                (0.047)             (0.047)            (0.048)      (0.101)
High school               0.017                0.017              0.015        0.009
Education                (0.042)             (0.042)            (0.043)      (0.086)
Employee                0.120**              0.120**            0.119**        0.096
                         (0.049)             (0.049)            (0.049)      (0.101)
Observations               999                  999                999          234




                                               52
                                                  Table 8
                                            Trust and education
In this table we re-estimate the regressions in Table 4 (first two columns), in Table 5 (second two columns),
and in Table 6 (last four columns) splitting the sample by level of education. In the first two columns the left
hand side variable is a dummy equal to 1 if the household holds equity directly; in the second two columns is
a dummy equal to 1 if the household holds stocks directly or indirectly and/or invests in corporate bonds and
put and call options. In the remaining columns the left hand side variable is the share oh household financial
assets invested directly in equity (columns 5 and 6) and in risky assets (last two columns), respectively; the
share in risky assets is the value in stocks, in stock mutual funds, corporate bonds and put and call options
divided by total family financial wealth. In all cases, investment in stock does not include equity in his own
company. As in Tables 4 and 5, the first four columns are probit estimates, calculated as the effect on the
LHS of a marginal change in the RHS variable computed at the average value of the RHS variables. The last
four columns are tobit estimates. High education includes all those with a high college degree or a university
degree. Low education includes all those with less than high college education. Education is that of the head
of the household. All characteristics are those of the household head. Standard errors are reported in
parenthesis. *** indicate the coefficient is different from zero at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the
10 % level.

               Ownership of stock        Ownership of risky        Share of stocks          Share of risky assets
                                         assets
                Low educ       High       Low educ       High      Low educ       High      Low educ      High
                               educ                      educ                     educ                    educ

Trust           0.059**         0.014      0.095**        0.056    0.155***       0.071     0.119***        0.052
                (0.025)       (0.046)      (0.045)      (0.068)     (0.052)      (0.095)     (0.040)      (0.063)
Risk              0.018       0.229*        -0.094       -0.201     -0.004        0.288      -0.102        -0.174
aversion         (0.038)      (0.118)      (0.105)      (0.195)     (0.126)      (0.250)     (0.097)      (0.186)
Ambiguity      -0.003***       -0.001       0.000         0.001      -0.007       -0.002       0.000        0.001
aversion         (0.001)      (0.002)      (0.000)      (0.002)     (0.005)      (0.003)     (0.000)      (0.001)
Optimism         -0.000         0.032       -0.001        0.021      -0.003        0.066      -0.006        0.021
                (0.008)       (0.029)      (0.022)      (0.040)     (0.026)      (0.061)     (0.020)      (0.037)
Financial      0.001***      0.002***     0.002***     0.003***    0.002***     0.002***    0.002***     0.002***
Wealth           (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.001)     (0.000)      (0.001)     (0.000)      (0.000)
Income           -0.127        3.785        -3.118       -0.618      -0.278       2.700      -3.006        -1.194
                (1.136)       (3.355)      (5.310)      (5.426)     (3.653)      (7.012)     (4.860)      (5.336)
Male              0.022        0.068       0.141**        0.021      0.089       0.216*     0.132**         0.069
                (0.022)       (0.050)      (0.061)      (0.080)     (0.080)      (0.122)     (0.061)      (0.076)
Age              -0.002       -0.009        -0.005      -0.035*     -0.004       -0.025      -0.003     -0.049***
                (0.002)       (0.011)      (0.005)      (0.018)     (0.006)      (0.023)     (0.005)      (0.016)
Age square        0.000         0.000        0.000      0.000**       0.000        0.000       0.000     0.001***
                (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.000)
Household        -0.013         0.003     0.182***        0.114     -0.049       -0.094     0.121**        -0.087
size             (0.020)      (0.054)      (0.054)      (0.080)     (0.065)      (0.114)     (0.052)      (0.076)
Number of         0.030         0.012      -0.118*       -0.082       0.098        0.211      -0.080      0.206**
children         (0.024)      (0.068)      (0.062)      (0.102)     (0.074)      (0.143)     (0.058)      (0.095)
Employee          -0.005        0.030     0.174***      0.226**      -0.035        0.046       0.081      0.225**
                (0.021)       (0.067)      (0.058)      (0.102)     (0.070)      (0.144)     (0.055)      (0.100)
Observations       858           298          748          259         740          259         740          259




                                                       53
                                                Table 9
                                  Is trust a proxy for risk aversion?
The table shows regressions for the effect of trust on the number of stocks (Panel A) and on demand for
health insurance (Panel B). The first panel reports ordered probit regressions for the number of different
stocks on which the household invests, excluding equity in his own company. The left hand side variable is
an integer varying between 0 (no directly held stocks) and n (the household invests in n directly held stocks
of different companies). In the last column the sample includes only households with strictly positive
stockholdings. In Panel B the left hand side is a dummy equal to 1 if the household has a private insurance.
The reported figures are probit estimates calculated as the effect on the LHS of a marginal change in the
RHS variable computed at the average value of the RHS variables. The last column shows Tobit estimates
for the amount of health insurance purchased (i.e. the value of the premium paid). All characteristics are
those of the household head. Standard errors are reported in parenthesis. *** indicate the coefficient is
different from zero at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10 % level.
A. Trust and the number of stocks
Trust           0.317***       0.322***                0.318***           0.269**               0.278**
                (0.100)        (0.101)                 (0.102)            (0.105)               (0.147)
Risk aversion 0.079            0.151                   0.152              0.150             -1.038**
                (0.254)        (0.259)                 (0.259)            (0.265)           (0.476)
Ambiguity                      -0.013                  -0.013             -0.014            -0.016
aversion
                               (0.010)                 (0.010)            (0.011)           (0.024)
Optimism                                               0.016              0.020             -0.096
                                                       (0.055)            (0.057)           (0.121)
Own mutual                                                                0.751***
funds
                                                                          (0.108)
Financial         0.005***           0.005***          0.005***           0.004***          0.002***
wealth
                  (0.001)            (0.001)           (0.001)            (0.001)           (0.001)
Income            0.003              0.003             0.003              0.002             -0.052
                  (0.007)            (0.007)           (0.007)            (0.008)           (0.037)
Male              0.239*             0.247*            0.247*             0.220             0.280
                  (0.144)            (0.144)           (0.144)            (0.147)           (0.282)
Age               -0.021*            -0.019*           -0.021*            -0.016            0.025
                  (0.011)            (0.011)           (0.013)            (0.013)           (0.023)
Age square        0.000**            0.000**           0.000**            0.000             -0.000
                  (0.000)            (0.000)           (0.000)            (0.000)           (0.000)
Household         -0.094             -0.097            -0.097             -0.109            -0.145
size
                  (0.124)            (0.124)           (0.124)            (0.127)           (0.222)
Number of         0.227              0.233             0.233              0.249*            0.238
children
                  (0.145)            (0.145)           (0.145)            (0.149)           (0.254)
High school       0.177              0.185             0.180              0.223             -0.147
education
                  (0.135)            (0.136)           (0.136)            (0.140)           (0.264)
College           0.259*             0.263*            0.256*             0.262*            0.041
education
                  (0.144)            (0.144)           (0.146)            (0.150)           (0.272)
Employee          -0.042             -0.035            -0.039             -0.083            -0.232
                  (0.142)            (0.142)           (0.143)            (0.146)           (0.269)
Observations      1156               1156              1156               1156              162

                                                     54
B. Trust and the demand for health insurance

 Trust              0.050          0.048          0.043       179.759
                   (0.031)        (0.031)        (0.031)     (223.050)
 Risk aversion      -0.126        -0.137*        -0.135*     -773.808
                   (0.079)        (0.080)        (0.080)     (591.815)
 Ambiguity                         0.000          0.000         0.188
 aversion                         (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.284)
 Optimism                                         0.019       178.813
                                                 (0.016)     (115.943)
 Financial        0.001***       0.001***       0.001***     5.767***
 wealth            (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)       (1.411)
 Income             1.867           1.852         1.797      6,931.391
                   (2.111)        (2.116)        (2.118)   (17,158.756)
 Male             0.115***       0.115***      0.116***     750.441**
                   (0.038)        (0.038)        (0.038)     (305.882)
 Age              -0.011***      -0.011***     -0.013***      -34.931
                   (0.003)         (0.003)       (0.004)      (28.967)
 Age square       0.000***       0.000***       0.000***       0.578*
                   (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.334)
 Household          0.005           0.005         0.003       144.074
 size              (0.037)        (0.037)        (0.037)     (269.719)
 Number of          0.002           0.002         0.005       -31.349
 children          (0.044)         (0.044)       (0.044)     (320.463)
 High school      0.157***       0.156***      0.151***       451.967
 education         (0.040)         (0.040)       (0.041)     (294.534)
 College          0.249***       0.249***       0.241***    986.477***
 education         (0.046)         (0.046)       (0.047)     (318.290)
 Employee         0.126***       0.126***       0.122***       71.651
                   (0.042)        (0.042)        (0.042)     (313.147)
 Observations        1156           1156          1156          1156




                                     55
                                                 Table 10
                                       The role of personalized trust
The table shows the effect of personalized trust on the participation in risky assets and the share invested in
risky assets. Personalized trust is the trust a person has towards his bank official. In the first column the left-
hand side variable is a dummy equal to 1 if the person invests in risky assets (directly held stocks, stock
mutual funds, corporate bonds, derivatives); in the second and third is the share of financial wealth invested
in these assets. “Risk averse” is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the interviewed answered (2) Risk is an
uncertain event from which one should seek protection” instead of (1) Risk is an uncertain event from
which one can extract a profit to the question of the individual chooses (2). All characteristics are those of
the respondent. Standard errors are reported in parenthesis. *** indicate the coefficient is different from zero
at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10 % level.

                                Probit for ownership of       Share invested in        Conditional share
                                risky assets                  risky assets (Tobit      (second stage
                                                              regression               Heckman)
   High personalized trust               0.1610***                  0.0653***                  0.0156
                                           (0.000)                    (0.002)                 (0.280)
   Medium personalized                     0.0580                     0.0226                   0.0011
   trust                                   (0.121)                    (0.431)                 (0.955)
   Averse to risk                           -0.04*                 -0.0883***               -0.0730***
                                           (0.025)                    (0.000)                 (0.000)
   Financial wealth                      0.0010***                  0.0001***               0.00002***
                                           (0.000)                    (0.000)                 (0.000)
   Male                                  0.1050***                  0.0753***                     -

   Age                                   0.0219***                  0.0144***                0.0073***
   Age squared                           -0.0002***                 -0.0001***              -0.00006***
   Education                             0.0221***                  0.0138***
   Observations                             1,834                      1,834                    1,834




                                                        56
                                              Table 11
                         The effect of Trust on Firms' Ownership Structure
 The dependent variable is an indicator variable taking value one if a firm has a single shareholder owning all
the shares. The sample is a cross-section of Italian manufacturing firms with at least 10 employees. Trust is
an indicator of social capital at the local level devised by Putnam (1993). It is the average participation to
national referendums, measured at the provincial level. Judicial inefficiency is the number of years it takes to
complete a first-degree trial in the local courts. All the regressions contain the following control variables
(not reported): firm age (computed as 1994 minus the year of foundation), its growth rate in sales, its
leverage (ratio of debt to total assets), return on assets, indicator variables for whether the firm belongs to a
group, is incorporated, has a number of employees below the median value, and has its major competitors
located in the same area. The reported coefficients are probit estimates of the effect of a marginal change in
the corresponding regressor on the probability of having just one shareholder, computed at the sample mean
of the independent variables. The standard errors reported in parentheses and are corrected for the potential
clustering of the residual at the provincial level.


          Trust                          -0.394***             -0.468***              -0.394***
                                          ( 0.152 )             ( 0.167 )              ( 0.157 )
          North                            -0.023                -0.015
                                          ( 0.017 )             ( 0.017 )
          South                             0.021                -0.029
                                          ( 0.030 )             ( 0.028 )
          Judicial inefficiency            -0.039                -0.028                 -0.026
                                          ( 0.029 )             ( 0.030 )              ( 0.029 )
          Judicial inefficiency             0.003                 0.004                  0.004
          Squared                         ( 0.004 )             ( 0.004 )              ( 0.004 )
          Per capita GDP                    0.324                 0.319                  0.286
                                          ( 0.402 )             ( 0.483 )              ( 0.420 )
          Pseudo-R2                         0.105                 0.104                  0.105
          Observations                      3,268                 3,268                  3,268




                                                       57
                                         Table 12
Trust, stock market participation and ownership concentration around the world

                        % stock market cap            % population participating in the stock
                           closely held                              market
                  (1)            (2)          (3)        (4)           (5)            (6)
Trust (WVS)    -42.65**     -46.80***   -46.84 ***     0.272**      0.399***      0.390 ***
                (0.023)        (0.01)     (0.01)       (0.041)       (0.001)       (0.000)
Legal                        -23.95*      -21.68                    0.246***        0.143*
Enforcement                   (0.074)     (0.20)                     (0.003)        (0.08)
Common Law                                    -1.92                                0.091**
                                             (0.82)                                 (0.02)
Observations      33           33              33         24            23            23

R-squared        0.15         0.24           0.25        0.18          0.50          0.62




                                               58
