NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EQUILIBRIUM APPROACH '10 LABOR MARKE'TS

Sherwin Rosen

Working Paper No. 1165

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

July 1983

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
In Labor Studies, Any opinions expressed are those of the author
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper //1165
July 1983

The Equilibrium Approach to Labor Markets

ABS TRACT

This paper exposits the modern theory of equalizing differences,

viewed as optimal assignments of workers to jobs. The basic ideas are
first illustrated in a simple model with binary choices of work attributes.

Multinominaichoices are briefly considered after that. Empirical implications are stressed, with special emphasis on elements of selectivity and
stratification by tastes and technology. Applications are sketched f or
certain aspects of the economics of discrimination, human capital, the

value of safety and the theory of implicit contracts. Issues raised by
assignment stratification according to worker traits and productivities
are discussed, and the principle sorting model by comparative advantage

is outlined. The implied valuation system on personal traits and

its

relationship to factor-analytic models, as well as selectivity issues in
educational and occupational choice illustrate this aspect of the
theory.

Sherwin Rosen
The University of Chicago
Department of Economics
1126 E. 59th Street

Chicago, IL 60637
(312) 753—1234

6/9/83

THE EQUILIBRIUM APPROACH TO LABOR MARKETS

Sherwin Rosen*

University

of Chicago

I. Introduction
This paper elaborates variations on some themes of Adam Smith,
particularly those in the first ten chapters of the Wealth of Nations.

Those chapters are without parallel in economics and
still define research frontier subjects in economics today. In reading
those chapters one is struck by the timeless importance of the subject
matter, by the quality of Smith's writing and the clarity of his exposition,

and by the great scope and depth of his ideas. Two central themes stand out:
The first and most important for economic analysis as a whole is
the discussion of gains from trade due to specialization and division of

labor. Specialization exploits scale economies which multiply the fruits
of labor resources. The resulting division of labor provides the basis
for mutually advantageous exchanges of goods and services among economic
agents. This is the sine q.ua non of decentralized competitive market
organization, and is of course fundamental to the main theme of the work

as a whole. It has been the main intellectual preoccupation of economists
ever since. While the limitations of decentralized market allocation
mechanisms are now well understood, there is small irony in the fact that
Smith's own argument rests on scale economies that are not entirely consistent with competitive market organization of economic activities.

1

2

The second theme, and the one we will be most occupied with here,

is the celebrated theory of equalizing differences. This is the basic
equilibrimn theory in labor economics. It rests on the proposition that
wages paid to various types of labor and under various circumstances must
equalize total advantages, both pecuniary and nonpecuniary, among them.

It is interesting, but would take us too far afield, to track the fortunes

of this theory over the years. Nevertheless, it is worth mentioning that
the institutional approach to labor economics, which itself dominated the
subject for most of its life, was far more concerned with anomolies and
noncompeting group qualifications of Mill and Cairnes than with Smith's

contributions themselves. Indeed, the theory of equalizing differences,
which is fundamentally a theory of spatial equilibrium, found much greater
direct use in agriculatural and urban economics, stemming from its develop-

ment to those fields by von Thunen. There is no question, however, that
whatever its status in the past, Smith's theory rests securely at the center

of modern labor economics. His analysis of professional income was the
first rigorous theory of human capital. His treatment of the influence
of random fluctuations in income on occupational choice is closely related

to the modern theory of implicit contracts. His treatment of consumption
elements of work environments is essential for empirical understanding of

the structure of wages. The work even contains a nascent statement of the
principal and agent problem! The theory of labor supply, production theory,
and some elements of economic dethography are the only subjects of inquiry

that are missing from Smith's treatment.

What follows is an analytical sketch of the theory of equalizing

differences and some of its applications. These applications hardly are

3

exhaustive, but rather illustrate the approach from studies in which I have

had a hand and

.... most familiar with. I hope they convey the

power, simplicity, and practical value of the theory. The basic model
is sketched in Section II. It takes off on the treatment contained in
Friedman and Kuznets, Income from Independent Professional Practice, but
gives a more complete account of the nature of equilibrium and some of its

implications. Section III outlines some applications. These include
elements of the economics of discrimination; human capital; imputations of
the value of work safety and the valuation of life in risk—benefit analysis;

and the nature of implicit contracts and income risk. Section IV extends
the model to valuations of personal traits and specific skills rather than
job and work—environment characteristics. This. is necessarily incomplete
because several conceptual problems have not been resolved at this date.
Implications for income distribution, and selectivity bias in occupational
and educational choice are the examples chosen to illustrate these aspects
of the theory.

II. Th.e Theory of Equalizing Differences
The theory of equalizing differences is fundamentally a theory of
valuation of job attributes. In this account I specialize the job attrib.ute
to a consumption item, so the problem is basically one of a tie—in in which.

the worker sells the services of his labor but simultaneously purchases

the characteristics of his job, viewed as on—the—job consumption. In this
model work attributes are fixed for a given work situation, but vary from

job to job. The basic problem is to match each worker's preferences for
on—the—job consumption versus market consumption to the proper work
attribute; that is to say, to assign each worker to a firm which offers

4

the desired job characteristics. A twin choice problem must be addressed:
wärkers choose among job attributes by working for firms that offer the
desired amounts; and firms

choose which job attributes to offer. A

competitive price mechanism guides these choices and takes the form of

wage differentials ——

equalizing

differences —— on jobs with different

attributes. The tie—in nature of attribute transactions makes clear that
the problem is basically one of spatial equilibrium, assignment, and sorting.

Most of the basic ideas are illustrated in the simplest possible

case. Consider a job characteristic D which is discrete and binary: D
takes on two values, say 0 or 1. To be specific, suppose D indexes a dis—
amenity such as airborne particulates at the workplace. Hence a job is
either "dirty," in which case D = 1 (some particulates); or it is clean
(no particulates), in which case D =

0.

We simplify further by assuming

that all workers are alike in terms of their basic underlying skills (this
assumption will be relaxed later) and that the job attribute D does not

In and of itself dIrectly affect any worker's productIvity. This means
that D, or its absence, is a pure consumption good from a worker's point

of view. Allowing for direct productivity interactions

complicates

the analysis, but does not affect the main conclusions. In these circumstances there must be two possible wages in the market: W1 for jobs
characterized by D = 1

and W0 for jobs characterized by D

0. The

wage differential between them is the equalizing difference.

A. Worker Choice and Supply
A worker chooses the value of D that maximizes utility subject to

a budget constraint. Preferences are described by a utility function
u

U(C,D) defined over market consumption goods C and job consumption

5

goods (attributes) D. As usual, U(C,D) represents the internal trade—off s

between C and D that the worker would find acceptable. Since we are here
interpreting D as a disamenity (a "bad" rather than a "good"), the map of
U(C,D) in the C,D plane has convex indifference curves that are positively
inclined rather than negatively inclined as in the standard case. (It is
always possible to convert a disamenity problem into an amenity by an
appropriate change in scale, e.g., consider the cleanliness of a job rather
than its dirtiness, but the result is the same in either case.) In deciding
on the choice of job D, the worker contemplates the fact that his labor
services are exchanged for money which buys market consumption goods and

that D is an undesirable by—product of the work environment chosen. It is
clear that if the worker dislikes larger values of D, compensation in the
form of additional market consumption is necessary for him to voluntarily
choose it compared to a job with a smaller value of D. This is the counnon

sense of the idea of equalizing differences. Preferences alone therefore
predict that

W. Still, we are interested in the determinants of how

large the difference between

and

might be and also what can be

inferred from wage—attribute data.

When D is binary, the budget constraint reduces to two points.1
Since C =

W1,

for i =

0, 1, the available consumption possibilities in the

(.C,D) plane are (W1,l) and (W0,O). The worker chooses the point, and

therefore the value of D, which lies on the highest indifference curve.

Consequently, the choice is D = 1 if TJ(W1,l)

> U(W0,0) and is D =

0 if the

inequality is reversed. The worker is indifferent between the two jobs
if U(W1,l) =

U(W0,0).

In fact, given W0 it is

6

that would equalize utility between D = 1 and D = 0.

possible to find a

That value of W1 compared with

is known as the reservation price. It

represents the equalizing difference for that particular worker. Therefore an equivalent description of the solution to the worker's choice
problem is to compare the actual, available market wage difference

between the two jobs with this reservation price. If the difference in
1

market wages exceeds the reservation wage, the worker chooses D

because the additional market goods available from that choice more than

compensates for the additional disagreeableness of the job. Similarly,
the worker chooses D = 0 if the market wage differential is less than
the reservation price.

To illustrate, suppose preferences are described by a one para-

meter family of curves u =

Ce.

The parameter p is a measure of the

worker's distaste for D. The larger is p the greater the additional
market compensation necessary to bribe the worker to undertake a job

with a larger value of D. To analyze the choice problem, form an index
function defined by I =

log

U(W1,l)/tJ(W0,O) =

log

(W1/W0) —

p.

The

reservation wage is defined as the value of (W1/W0) that sets I =

0.

Define the reservation wage as R. Then substituting into the above
yields R =

e,

D = 1 if I >

which is an increasing function of p. The worker chooses

0,

of if (W1/W0) <

or equivalently, if (W1/W0) >

e.

e.

D = 0 is chosen if I <

Choice is made by a random device if (W1/W0) =

0,

e.

Aggregation over worker choices is required to describe market

supply conditions to each type of job. In the example given, a worker is
completely characterized by the taste parameter p. Different workers might

7

have different preferences, and that is conveniently described by a

distribution function over all workers. Denote that distribution by
g(p)dp, which is readily transformed into a distribution of R, say
h(R)dR. Since all workers for whom B. <

(W1/W0)

choose D =

1,

the

supply function of workers to jobs of type 1 must be the sum

(1)

N =

f

h(R)dR

The supply to jobs for which D = 0 is just the rest of the distribution,
the integral of h(R) from W1/W0 to the largest value of B..

Expressed in this way it is apparent that the market assignment
of workers to job characteristics neatly partitions the

distribu—

tion of tastes into two parts. The situation is illustrated in Figure 1.
Consider a given market wage ratio (W1/W0) marked by the heavy vertical

line in the figure. Then by the choice rule set forth above, the area

under the distribution h() to the left of W1/W0 is N, the number who
supply their labor to dirty work. Similarly, the area in the right tail
of the distribution is the number who supply their labor to clean jobs.
The figure clearly shows that were, say (W1/W0) to increase, those people
who were close to the margin of indifference at the old wage ratio would
switch over and choose D = 1 rather than D = 0.

Therefore, the supply

curve of workers to dirty jobs is increasing in (W1/w0) and literally
sweeps out the transformed distribution of preferences for D as captured

in h(R).
Were it possible to econometrically identify and estimate supply

curve (1) or its counterpart N, it would be straightforward to impute the

8

entire underlying distribution of preferences h(R) or g(p), conditional

of course on the assumed form of the underlying utility function. However, it is usually not possible to do that because of data limitations.

At this point most studies must rest content with estimating the
equilibrium wage differential (W11W0) in a cross section, itself not a

trivial task. This identifies only one point on the distribution h(R),

but

still

provides some information on the conditional first

moments of h(R) or g(p).
Consider the distribution of K in Figure 1 conditional on D = 1

having been chosen. Then we know from the definition of a conditional
expectation that the average value of K (and therefore of p) for those

who choose D = 1 must be less than the observed value of (W1/W0). It
also must be less than or equal to the unconditional expectation of R in

the entire population. That is to say, the observed value of lôg(W1/W0)
is an upper bound estimate of the conditional mean of p for D =

1.

By a

parallel argument, it is a lower bound estimate of the conditional mean
value of p for those who choose D = 0.

If we have prior information that

the variance of h(K) is small, if individuals have very similar tastes,

then the estimated value of

tells us much more about those tastes

than if the variance is large. If we furthermore have reason to believe
that most workers do not work on D = 1 jobs so that N is a small fraction
of available workers in the market, then we can confidently predict that

the observed value of log (w1/W) is a lower bound on the average value
of p in the population as a whole. While not providing complete information about preferences, these inequalities are very useful in many practical

applications of the theory. Note that the choice rule and market assignment

9

in Figure 1 sorts people to jobs in a systematic way and that the people
who are observed in each category form a censored sample of the population

as a whole. This is perhaps the most simple and fundamental example of
selectivity

in labor economics. It should be apparent that it is a

very general implication of the theory of revealed preference and applies to

virtually all economic choices. Another way of saying this is that there
are economic rents inherent in these choices, since most people who make
a given choice would continue to make it even if wages were somewhat

different. It is only when all persons have the same tastes that rents
disappear and that observed wages index the equalizing difference for the
whole population, for the average person in the market as well as for the
marginal one.

B. Firm Choice and Demand
If most workers dislike D we know from the analysis above that

generally must exceed W0. But higher wages on D = 1 jobs must be supported
somehow and what sustains them must be larger productivity among firms who

find it optimal to offer that kind of work. Clearly if that was not the
case we would never observe any jobs for which D =

1.

All jobs would

offer D = 0 and would be preferred by everyone. Hence we conclude that in
some general sense attributes that are disamenable must be productive.
It does not follow though that job attributes which are amenable must

be

counterproductive. Rather, if the two coexist, disamenities must exhibit

a productivity advantage to the firms that offer them. This is the basis
for ascertaining which types of jobs a given firm chooses to supply to

the labor market. For this purpose, and analogous to its role in workers'

10

utility functions, D must enter as an argument into a firm's production

function. The choice of D is then made by comparing the enhanced productivity
of a given labor force when D = 1 with the additional cost of labor due to

the fact that W1 rather than W0 must be paid to each worker. If the additional value of productivity is larger than the additional wage bill the
firm chooses D

1; while, if the productivity effect is small, dirty work

does not generate sufficient revenue to cover the extra labor costs, and

the firm cleans up its technology. It installs ventilation equipment and

0.

uses other resources for cleaning up its environment and offers D =

To illustrate this in the simplest possible way, consider a fixed
coefficient technology with production function x =

x =

ct0n

if D =

0.

c1n

if D = 1 and

Here x is output, n is labor input, and

are fixed

coefficients with l > a0. The last condition reflects the fact that
productivity is larger if D = 1 is chosen, that some otherwise productive
labor must be used up in the cleaning process if D = 0 were chosen instead.

1,0.

With this technology unit cost is W1/ct, for i =

The firm chooses

the value of D which minimizes unit costs. Liefine another index function

1* =

(W1/a1)

(w0/a0)

=

(W1/W0) (a01a1)

as 1* < 1 or as (W11W0) .

If

(W1/W0)

(l/). Then D = 1 or 0

1* < 1 the productivity effect outweighs

the added labor cost; and if I > 1 added productivity is insufficiently
large to compensate for added labor costs. In this case we have that

is

itself the firm's reservation wage ratio, the firm's equalizing difference.
If the market wage ratio happens to equal 13

the

firm is indifferent about

its choice of D.

To obtain the market demand for workers in type D

1 jobs it is

necessary to aggregate among firms that choose to offer them: Suppose firms

11

differ in their technology ratio

bution of

D =

(2)

1,

and that f(8)d describes the distri-

among firms. Then since

>

(W/W0)

describes firms who choose

the nwnber of such workers demanded is2

N= f

The partition of firms among D
Equation (2) defines a curve

in

0 is displayed in Figure 2.

1 and D

the N,(W1/W2) plane that is negatively

inclined. Now all those to the right of the heavy vertical line choose
D

1 and all those to the left choose D

demand sweeps out the distribution of

0. As (W1/w0) falls the market

among firms from right to left and

the demand for workers in dirty jobs increases. The same arguments about
conditional moments as in Figure 1 apply to this distribution and will not

be repeated. Suffice it to say that a single observed value of the market
wage ratio measures the equalizing difference for firms on the margin of
choice only and marginal and average firms depart in systematic ways unless
all firms have the same technologies.
It is conmion in economics today to maintain the assumption that all

firms in a given industry have access to the same technology, so some
connuent on the rationale for a nondegenerate distribution of is warranted.
The most important point is that the construction in Figure 2 is not

necessarily confined to a given industry. Variance in

is produced by

interindustry differences in technologies. Some production processes are
inherently dirtier than others. While there is no technology that cannot
use resources to clean up its work environment, it is undoubtedly more
costly to do so in some industries than in others; e.g., think of coal

12

mining versus insurance. The second point is that there is nothing sacred
about the assumption of identical technologies in a given industry, though

it is sometimes convenient. Indeed, many aspects of firms, such as differences in their size in the same industry, are simply not consistent with

identical technologies. Whatever firm—specific factors cause these differences
may well interact in nonseparable ways with job attribute—output tradeoffs,
even in the same industry.

C. Market Equilibrium
The joint solution to market supply and demand functions (1) and (2)

determines the wage ratio (W1/w0) that is observed in the market.3 Since
supply price is increasing and demand price is decreasing, an equilibrium
in which some workers are observed in both types of jobs must be unique,

if it exists. The equilibrium wage ratio is determined so that the partitions in Figures 1 and 2 are conformable, so that all workers seeking D

1

jobs are able to find them and all firms seeking workers on such jobs can

fill them. It is interesting to note that the equilibrium assignment of
workers to firms exhibits a negative assortive matching property. Workers
with lower than average values of p are matched to firms with higher than

average values of .

Workers who have the least distaste for the disamenity

work in firms for whom the disamenity Is the most productive. The equilibrium
assignment matches the proper worker type to the proper firm type, analogous

to a marriage market. This kind of allocation is characteristic of all
spatial equilibrium problems, but the question of who works for whom is

especially important in the labor market. Finally, it is also obvious that
the equilibrium assignments and choices are Pareto optimal when information
is complete.

13

D. Generalization
While binary choices takes us a long way toward understanding
the issues raised by equalizing differences and what can be inferred
from the data, it remains true that most job attributes exhibit much

more variation. Thus to continue along with the problem above, jobs
differ greatly in the degree of cleanliness offered. A straightforward
generalization of the model is to consider multinomia]. choice rather

than binary choice. I used the index function approach to suggest a
probit analog: more choices would require a multinomial probit or

logit approach. Thus let D take on k possible values, with k ? 2.
Since D is ordered, let larger values of k index correspondingly large

values of D. Then k distinct markets must be considered. The competitive wage in the kth market is Wk and the budget constraint for a worker

is represented by k distinct points (W.D) for j =

1,

2, ...,

k.

The worker chooses that value of j which maximizes utility. While
conceptually straightforward the problem is difficult to analyze for
general utility functions because a computational algorithm that makes
pairwise comparisons between all possible

choices is required. It is

easy to see that the optimal choice depends not only on local curvature

properties of preferences, but on global curvature as well. Nonetheless,
it is clear that the ordering property of the optimal assignment by tastes
and relative costs shown in Figures 1 and 2 are more or less preserved.

Thus with

suitably regular parameterizations of preferences, the

distributions are partitioned into at most k ordered regions. Workers
with the largest values of p are assigned to the smallest values of j and

14

firms whose cleaning costs are largest are assigned to the largest values
of j:. The negative assortive matching feature of market equilibrium is
thereby generalized.

A marginal analysis serves to illustrate this very nicely when k
is so large and D is sufficiently divisible that there are an infinite

number of choices for all practical purposes Then D may be represented
as a continuous variate, measured say in parts per million particulates.
There remains a wage associated with every value of D, so now income
possibilities for a worker are represented by a continuous function W(D),

which is nondecreasing if D is a disamenity. The worker maximizes
utility subject to C = W(D):

therefore D is chosen to maximize u

A maximum is characterized by the marginal condition

U(W(D),D).

= W' (D). Here

UD/UC is the marginal rate of substitution between D and consumption goods

and is negative if D is disamenable. Notice the slight variance from a
standard constrained maximum problem in that the gradient of W(D) is the
correct (marginal) price in the optImization calculation, not W(D) itself.

Notice also that W(D) need not be linear, so the marginal price W'(D) may
vary with D.

The solution is represented •as a proper spatial equilibrium

in Figure 3. The curves labeled

and

are (C,D) indifference curves

for two different types of workers. Worker 1 exhibits a greater distaste
for D and chooses a smaller value in equilibrium.

A similar development, wherein D shifts production possibilities

rather than tastes, is available for firms. I omit it here. A swmnary
of the solution is also depicted in Figure 3 by profit
curves in the (W,D) plane, labeled
firms.

and

indifference

for two different types of

type firms find it easier to provide clean workplaces than

15

type firms do and therefore choose to offer smaller amounts of D to the

market. The equilibrium assignment allocates worker taste types to firm
technology types in a systematic manner. That a profit indifference
curve "kisses" a worker's indifference curve at the equilibrium assignment
best summarizes the marriage aspects of the problem solved in the implicit
market for job attributes.

Figure 3 well illustrates the revealed preferences sorting aspects
of the equilibrium assignment and shows what can be inf erred from the observed

wage—attribute schedule W(D). For example, it is apparent that the gradient
W' (D) identifies the marginal rate of substitution only for workers and

firms who happen to choose that particular value of D. Still, when workers
are approximately identical in their preferences then W(D) identifies an
indifference curve and W' (D) measures the marginal rate of substitution all

over the map. Similarly, were firms identical rather than workers, W(D)
would coincide with a profit indifference curve and its gradient function
would closely approximate the marginal cost function for achieving smaller
values of D. When firms and workers are both. heterogeneous, the data are

censored and selected by the optimal assignment. Thus for example, the
difference in wages between

and B2 is an underestimate of the equalizing

difference required for type 1 persons —

that

is why type its. are located at

rather than at B2; and it is an overestimate for type 2 persons, who
evidently found the wage premium sufficiently large to more than buy—off

their distastes and who chose B2 instead of B1. Rence, if W(D) is
estimated over its upper range, for the largest values of B, it could b.e
confidently predicted that the gradient W' (B) in that range underestimates

the average person's marginal rate of substitution, because their intrinsic

16

distaste for D was much larger, by revealed preference. Comparable state—
mertts can be made about firms.

III. Applications
A. Value of Safety5
Recent years have seen an explosion of interest in this topic that

pervades many aspects of environmental legislation, workplace safety regula-

tion, food and drug safety, consumer safety, and so on. It is now well
understood that proper cost/benefit analysis of alternative policies

requires both an estimate of the magnitude of risks involved and some
valuation of the additional safety that might be provided by the policy.
Following general economic practice, the appropriate valuation of risk Is :the

willingness to pay to reduce it. Let V measure this sum for any given

person. It is defined as the marginal rate of substitution between
consumption and mortality risk and is sometimes labeled the "value of

life." To motivate that terminology, consider the following conceptual
experiment. Think of a large group of N people who contemplate a project
that would reduce morality risk by 1/N. Then each would be prepared to
pay approximately V/N for the project and they would collectively pay

N(V/N) = V.

Since the project reduces mortality by 1/N and N people

are involved, approximately one statistical life is saved; hence these
people are prepared to pay V for one statistical life.
Thoroughgoing analysis of safety has been hampered by lack of

direct measures of valuations V. As is usually the case in economics,
it must be inferred from actual behavior of persons in risky situations.

A basis for inference is provided by the common observation that people
do in fact voluntarily undertake many risks in their everyday lives and

17

do so by weighing the perceived costs and benefits of their actions.

Nowhere is this so apparent as in the labor market, where we observe
many jobs with substantial risks to health and longevity that pay

correspondingly large wages. This is a straightforward application of the
theory of equalizing differences: if workers find health risks distasteful,
jobs that involve considerable perceived risks must bribe workers to accept

them by paying a wage premium. The observed wage premium, in conjunction
with the size of the risk therefore provides a possibility for inferring
V from the risk premium.
Consider a worker with von—Neuman—Morgenstern utility (l—q)U(C),

where q is the risk of a job and C is consumption. It is readily verified
that the marginal rate of substitution between q and C is TJ(C)/(l—q)U'(C)

V.

Suppose the worker has an opportunity to work in jobs of various risk q
which pay wages W(q), with W'(q) > 0.

The worker chooses q and C to

maximize expected utility subject to the constraint W(q) = C.

Substituting

into the utility function and differentiating with respect to q yields the

marginal condition V = W' (q). Therefore the wage gradient provides an esti-

mate of the marginal value of life V at q. The analysis in Section II
applies virtually intact, with q replacing D —— see Figure 3. Only if all
workers had the same preferences would it be true that W(q) would cover

a unique indifference curve. More generally, workers have different tastes.
For many reasons some are more risk averse and have higher values of V

than others. Then revealed choices suggest that workers found on riskier
jobs have lower values of V than those who work on safe jobs. However, if
we can find the wage premium on very risky jobs that should serve at least
as a lower bound estimate of the average value of V in the population as a whole.

18

Econometric estimates of W(q) are obtained by regression or related

methods. Required data are wage rates, risks workers are exposed to, and
measures of personal characteristics such as schooling, experience, and
other variables that are known to affect wages and which serve as statistical

controls. Two types of risk measures are available for this purpose:
occupational and industry risks. Both are obtained from accident statistics
collected by the federal government and from life

insurance

company records.

They are matched to earnings and related data available from census survey

records. All studies undertaken so far have shown that the empirical
wage—risk gradient is positive and prove the feasiblity of the approach.

Having said that, however, there is far less agreement from study to study

on the magnitude of the gradient and therefore on the size of V. Studies
using occupational risk data provide estimates of V that are systematically

smaller than studies using industrial risk data. The former estimates are
in the vicinity of $500,000 (in 1983 dollars), whereas the latter estimates

range as high as $2N or more. The reason for these substantial differences
in the estimates has not yet been resolved, but probably lies in the crudeness of the risk measures available.

It is interesting to note that

estimates lnf erred from observed risk choice behavior outside of the market,

such as cigarette smoking, tend to corroborate these figures, wide as
their range may be.

B. Economics of Discrimination
It is in this area that the theory of equalizing differences has

found its earliest and most widespread use. Discrimination is viewed as
arising from tastes or distastes of association with identifiable groups

19

in the workplace or other environments. Such preferences, which in some
contexts may be viewed as socially illegitimate, effectively serve to tax
members of despised groups and subsidize members of favored groups.

The theory of tax incidence may then be applied to predict the
distribution and size of wage differentials among workers.6 Since this
theory and the many empirical studies that support it are so well known,

I have chosen a less familiar example drawn from the market for public
school teachers.7 This example is not only interesting In its own
right, but considerably broadens the scope of the theory of equalizing
differences and raises issues that apply to many other labor markets as
well.

We seek to study the implicit valuation of student attributes by
teachers, particularly the racial composition of the student body within

a school. For example, how much additional pay, if any, is required to
entice a white teacher to work in a school with mainly black students?
Answers to questions such as these have obvious relevance for estimating
real educational costs indexes necessary to implement Equal Educational

Opportunity policies. The analytical issues raised by this problem
involve a nontrivial extension of the theory which has much broader

applicabiilty. While teachers may have well defined preferences for
schools and students of various characteristics, it is also true that
schools may well have distinct preferences for various types of teachers

and their attributes. The matching problem is therefore much more
complicated than was indicated in Section II.

Denote school characteristics by the vector S and teacher

characteristics by the vector T. A teacher endowed with a particular

20

value of T searches out a school with the desired value of S, given the

wage prospects available. Similarly, a school is endowed with a
particular value of S and searches for teachers with desired characteristics
T because teaching effectiveness may differ among persons with different

traits for .a particular composition of the student body. A match
occurs when desired values Of T and S are conformable with each other.
It is particularly interesting that the matching problem gives rise to

possibilities for trade refusal. A given teacher may desire to work at
a particular school because it offers a preferred wage and student

characteristic configuration. But the school may not be willing to hire
him if he does not possess desirable teaching attributes T relative to

someone else. Similarly, a school may desire to hire a particular teacher,
but may not offer the value of S necessary to attract him. The equilibrium
concept therefore must be extended to cover the joint space (S,T), which
implies that the equilibrium pricing mechanism is defined over both sets

of variables: W(S,T) is the market clearing wage for any feasible S,T
comb mat ion.

A teacher's utility function is defined over market consumption C

and school attributes, as before: u =

U(C,S).

Choice of S is found by

maximizing U subject to the constraint C W(S,T), given the teacher's
particular value of T, leading to the marginal condition _W3(S,T) = US/UT.
Conditioning the choice on T is necessary for feasibility, given the

definition of W(S,T). Therefore the S subgradient of the observed wage—
attribute function measures the marginal valuation of S for those teachers
who were able to choose it.

Revealed preference—selectivity bias

again applies for persons who are not located at that particular margin.

21

A school's choice of teachers is made on the basis of the effects
of teacher traits T on educational output, represented in the educational
production function E =

F(T,S),

where E is educational value—added per

student. Notice that T and S strongly interact in production- if the
effectiveness of a teacher of given traits varies according to the
characteristics of the school and students to which he is assigned.
School administrators serve as agents for parents and choose teachers

with traits that minimize costs given E and S (or equivalently that

maximize £ given costs and S). This leads to the marginal condition
WT(S,T) = XFT(T,S), where X is the marginal cost of £.

That is, the

school chooses teacher attributes such that their marginal cost is proportional
to their marginal product, all conditional on the student characteristics

that the school is endowed with. Therefore the T—subgradient of the
observed wage—attributes function estimates marginal productivity of T
for schools who were able to hire those persons. The selectivity bias
argument again applies to schools who are located at yet other margins.
Empirical work on this problem has concentrated on estimating the

function W(S,T) in cross—section data. This requires information on wages
paid to teachers, on the student and neighborhood characteristics of the
schools they work in, and productivity attributes of teachers.

The basic

unit of observation is a school—teacher pair, and wages of teachers are

regressed on empirical proxies for S and T. While several such studies
• have been made, the one I am most familiar with used a national random

sample of schools from 1965 survey data. When S is summarized in a
single statistic, the racial composition of students measured by proportion
black, it is found that white teachers prefer to teach in schools with

22

mainly black students. The average compensating differential was $6 per
percentage point black students for white teachers (1965 $).

It

was $2 per

percentage point white for black teachers. This suggests that it would be
necessary to compensate a white teacher at least $600 to move from an
all—white school to an all—black school; whereas a black teacher would
need to be compensated at least $200 to move from an all—black school

to an all—white one. Experimentation with other school and student
characteristic variables indicates that these differentials reflect much

more than racial preferences per se. These indicators include measures
of student ability; attendance, truancy and disciplinary problems;
college—going preferences of students; and neighborhood characteristics.

Regression coefficients on these variables typically reveal that teachers
prefer to teach in schools located in more amenable neighborhoods with
more able and better motivated students.8 They are willing to pay someting

for these opportunities in the form of wage reductions. In Mierican society
today it is an unfortunate fact that student racial composition is highly

correlated with these other attributes of students and schools. The
correlation is sufficiently large that it is not possible to disentangle

the separate influences of each dimension of S. An index on the entire
vector is the best that can be done to summarize the data, because schools
are very strongly stratified by race and other school—student attributes.
Nonetheless, the sorting implications of the basic model were strongly

confirmed. The average white teacher in this sample required additional
compensation of more than $400 to teach in schools with the characteristics

of the average black teacher. Similarly, the average black teacher
required additional compensation of at least $300 to work in schools with

23

the average characteristics of those in which white teachers were found.

C. Human Capital
The theory of human capital has been very important to labor
economics in the last two decades.

Its implications for the distribution

of income and inequality in economic life are profound. The major outline
of the subject is readily found in the Wealth of Nations, when Smith notes

that occupations requiring time and money expenditures on training must pay
larger wages to compensate both for that expense and for the briefer dura-

tion of labor market productivity implied by it. As is now well known,
observed earnings differentials between schooling levels provides a basis

for imputing rates of return to education. However, these concepts have
much greater generality to learning opportunities and skill acquisition

in the labor market as well as to the analysis of education per se. It
is these largely informal, learning—by—doing aspects on which the following
account focuses..

It is a common observation that most specific job skills are learned

from work activities themselves. Formal schooling paves the way, both by
setting down a body of general knowledge and principles as well as teaching

students how to learn. But even in the case of professional training there
is no perfect substitute for apprenticeship, that is, for work experience

itself. These ideas can be captured in the following way.9 Think of a
job as a tied package of work and learning: a worker simultaneously sells
the services of his skills and jointly buys the opportunity to augment these

skills. Learning potential is a by—product of the work environment itself.
It is tied to a specific work activity but varies from activity to activity

24

and from job to job. Some provide more learning opportunities and some
provide less. Therein lies a margin of choice, for both workers and
firms.

As is generally known, a worker's incentives for capital accumula—

tion (learning) are largest at young ages. Hence young workers are
typically assigned to those jobs and work activities for which learning

potential is largest. The optimal human capital investment program is
implemented by a sequence of assignments in which workers systematically
move across work activities and jobs that offer successively smaller

learning opportunities. Thus, the optimal program implies a systematic
pattern of job mobility and "promotions" with experience. Firms accommodate
this by structuring work activities in various ways to provide greater or

smaller learning options. While some learning invariably is jointly supplied
with all work activity, prospects for altering learning potential arises
from reallocating experienced workers' time away from direct production

and toward instructing inexperienced personnel. This is costly, because
marketable output is foregone. Thus, a firm can be viewed as jointly
producing both marketable output and training output, summarized by

a production possibilities frontier between the two. Training services are
directly sold to existing employees. These sales are implicit in wage
reductions of workers who undertake training. In this case the equalizing
differential is defined over

the learning opportunity connected with

some activity.

To see what this implies, index the training potential of a work

activity by a latent variable I. Let p(I) represent the market equalizing

25

difference, with P increasing in I and P(O)

0. P is the foregone

earnings paid by a worker if assigned to activity I. Let the worker be
endowed with skill k, which rents for unit price R. Then the worker's
observed earnings are y and y = BK —

P(I).

This illustrates the tie—in.

The worker sells services of value Bk but buys back a learning opportunity

worth P(I), The worker demands learning opportunities because they
enhance future skills and rewards. The model is closed by specifying a
relationship between the effect of choice of i on
logical constraint is l =

g(I),

=

dk/dt.

This techno-

where g is an increasing function. In-

verting g, expressing I as a function of l and substituting into the
definition of earnings yields y = Bk —

G(1),

where G is an increasing.

convex function. The worker chooses a time valued function 1(t) and
therefore k(t) to maximize the present value of earnings over working

life. The economics of the choice problem is illustrated in Figure 4.
The smooth curve shown as an envelope is the function y = Bk —

G()

conditioned on the current value of k. The step functions that this
curve envelopes represent alternative learning opportunities I, with
I increasing as

increases and which cost more in terms of P(I). Choice

of a larger value of I is costly because current income falls. The potential
return is a larger value of k in the future which shifts income—investment
opportunity locus upward and to the right and expands future choices.

For example, consider a simple case where i =

yl,

with y interpreted

as a learning efficiency parameter; and where P(I) is a simple quadratic,

P(I) —

12/2.

Then y(t) =

Rk(t)

—

[k(t)/y]2/2.

The discounted value of

is I y(t)e_rtdt, where N is the leng.th of working life and.
0
r is the discount rate. In this s-ixple case the program that maximizes

human

wealth

26

human wealth (subject to an initial stock k(O) =

k0) equates marginal cost

of investment to its marginal return. Marginal cost is simply the slope
of the income—investment possibilities curve in Figure 4, or (t)/y2 in
this case. The discounted marginal return of a unit of skill is the
rental that will be obtained from it over its useful life. At time t
this is nothing other than (RJr)(l —

et))

=

Q(t),

the present value

of an annuity paying R for (N—t) periods. Notice that Q(t) is decreasing
and concave in t. Along the optimum trajectory we therefore have k =

2

y

Q(t):

the worker's rate of learning is largest at young ages and monotonically

falls over the life cycle. The sequence of learning options that implement
the optimal policy is given by 1(t) =

yQ(t).

Young workers are assigned

to positions with the largest learning opportunities and are successively
promoted to "higher" levels as their skills increase.

An interesting selectivity aspect of this problem arises if y is
thought of as a fixed effect that varies from person to person in the

population. Some persons may be more efficient in converting a given learning opportunity into useful marketable skills. A more complicated problem
would specify an interaction between learning ability and previously

acquired knowledge, as well as with inherent ability. Whatever the source
of these differences, the formulas above for

and I reveal that workers

with larger values of y accumulate more human capital and are assigned to

jobs with greater learning opportunities at each age. Greater learning
efficiency reduces the real price of investment to the more able, and they

purchase greater amounts. This may be an important source of income
inequality in the population as a whole, because human wealth is increasing
in y and observed wage differences are not completely equalizing across the
population at large.

27

This theory implies a corresponding theory of promotions within an
organization and possibly a "stepping stone" theory of job mobility among

firms. For example, it is not hard to imagine that some firms might
exhibit comparative advantage in producing learning opportunities. If so,
they would cater mostly to young workers and provide a source of supply
of experienced workers to firms which have relative advantages in other

lines of production. Little empirical work has been done so far along
these lines.10 Instead most empirical studies have concentrated on

observable life cycle earnings. The basis for this is easily seen in
the simple example. If the expression for k and the implied life cycle
trajectory for k is substituted into the definition of y, a closed form

solution for y(t) is obtained. It is easily imagined, and turns out to
be true, that the implied functional form of y(t) provides information on

underlying parameters such as y and r. The few studies that have been
made suggest that workers with more formal schooling are more efficient
learners. They also suggest that their depreciation and obsolescence :rates
on human capital investment are larger than those with less schooling,
implying another obvious source of selection and assignment of workers

among different types of work

activities

D. Implicit Contracts
Recent research on implicit.contracts extends the idea of equalizing

differences to unemployment risk. An implicit contract is a mutual understanding between workers and employers in which the firm is given wide
latitude to make decisions concerning employment and layoff status and hours

of work of its employees at its own discretion and and as circumstances

arise. The agreement is implicit because myriad

28

unforeseen contingencies make contracting costs so large that formal con-

tracts are uneconomic. Employers decisions serve their firm's self interest
in any given situation. Were these decisions otherwise unconstrained, they
might involve a degree of worker exploitation. In most analyses sufficient
cotmuon information and potential mobility of workers across firms insures

that an employer's decisions are constrained to achieve a minimal level of
expected utility by its workers; viz., the level expected at other firms.12
Figure 3 still serves as an organizing device for this class of

problems. Assuming that all workers are alike, the equalizing difference
function, defined say on the risk of layoff, maps out the representative
worker's indifference curve, and constrains a firm's choice, which is

described by the usual tangency condition. There is an equivalent dual
representation of the problem. Instead of treating the implicit contract
as maximizing profits subject to a utility constraint, think of the contract
as maximizing worker utility subject to a profit constraint; in fact

with free entry of firms, profit is constrained to be zero. Competition
for workers among firms guarantees that contractural features make workers

as well off as possible. I follow the dual approach here.
Early work on compensating differentials for unemployment risk took
the worker's objective to be expected income maximization?3 Expected

earnings are the wage while working times the probability of employment, and

the latter is 1.0 minus the probability of unemployment. Therefore, jobs
offering high unemployment prospects must pay higher wages in order to

attract workers and equalize expected utility among them. Implicit contract
theory shows that this approach may be seriously misleading when various
aspects of insurance and risk sharing are considered.

29

A sketch of the basic idea is illustrated by a simple example.

Imagine a worker in some activity where the value of production x is

stochastic. Let

x

be distributed by the known probability law G(x).

The worker is permanently attached to the activity, but has the option
of not working in any period if his productivity (the realized value of

x) is small enough. Let the nonmarket value of the worker's time be
k, and assume that k is nonstochastic. Thus k is the value of leisure
or of home production. Let u(.) denote the worker's concave utility
function of consumption. Finally, let 6(x) denote an employment indicator
function such that 5(x) =

I when the worker is employed in market production

x and 5(x) = 0 when the worker is unemployed (or employed in the nonmarket
sector),

"producing" k.

I propose to

analyze the problem in two steps. First consider a

worker—firm that doesn't trade with anyone else. Then examine the gains
from trade through risk shifting and insurance.

The worker's autarky expected utility is

(3)

=

fu(x)dG

+ u(k)G(k)

k

= (l.-G(k))E(u,(x)16
=

where 0

(l—8)E(u(x)

I =

1)+ G(k)u(k)

1) + Ou(k)

G(k) is the unemployment rate and E(uIcS = 1) is a conditional

expectation. Expression (3) provides the simple intuition for compensating
differentials on unemployment risk. Consider two activities, one with a
greater unemployment rate than the other. Then, since the employment rule
implies that E(u(x)15 =

1) > u(k), the activity with the larger value of 0

30

has smaller expected utility at equal average consumption when employed.

A wage premium is necessary to attract any workers. That something might
be awry with this logic is suggested by the fact that e and E(u(x)JtS = 1)

are both endogenously determined, presumably by such things as the riski-

ness of the distribution C(x). This is most easily shown when risk is
diversifiable through insurance.
Consider now a situation where there are many firms, each facing
statistically independent risks which can be fully diversified by pooling.

Availability of insurance breaks the personal link between consumption and

production. It allows a worker and firm to form a relationship in which
the firm pays w(x) to employed workers and unemployment compensation

w(x) to its unemployed members, both possibly state dependent.. This is
achieved by shifting productivity risk from workers to risk—neutral

employers or to the market at large by portfolio diversification. Full
risk shifting is equivalent to an actuarially fair Insurance arrangement

and must satisfy a budget constraint: expected income to the insurance
agent equals expected outgo. Thus the implicit contract solves the following constrained maximum problem

(4)

U

f[ô(x)u(w(x)) + (1 —

+ Af[cS(x)x —

with

(x))u((x)

5(x)w(x)

+ k)]dG

— (1 —

respect to functions 5(x), w(x) and (x).
State—by—state differentiation of the policy functions in (4) reveals

the following. The equiilbriuin contract equalizes consumption in all

employed states: w(x) = w for all x for which 5(x) =

1.

Similarly,

31

unemployment compensation equalizes consumption in all unemployed states:

(x)

for all x where 6(x) = 0.

In fact fair insurance implies com-

plete insurance in all states independent of x: w = + k, and the
worker's consumption is guaranteed independent of employment status. These
are all familiar consequences of risk aversion and are sometimes thought

to imply wage rigidity in the optimal contract. However, that is
slightly mistaken. It is more accurate to say that consumption rigidity
is implied, akin to the permanent income hypothesis. Finally, the optimum
employment policy is efficient as before and has 6(x) = 1 when x k and
6(x) =

0 when x < k.

Complete insurance disassociates productive efficiency

from distribution.

These properties of the optimum contract allow us to write maximum
expected utility as

(5)

Uu(+k)+X[(x-k)dGwJ
u( + k) + A[(l -

G(k))(E(xlx

k) —

k)

-

from which comparative statics can be derived. Consider an increase in
risk in the sense of a mean preserving spread in the distribution G(x).

Increasing risk changes expected utility in proportion to its effect on

,

and expression (5) suggests that the effect of such a change on

depends on how E(x{x

k) is affected. We know from definition that a

conditional mean in increasing in the spread of its parent distribution.

Therefore we conclude that increasing risk raises expected utility because

it increases w. The logic of this paradoxical result, that greater risk
is preferred to less risk, is analogous to option pricing formulas in

finance. The availability of a nonmarket "production" alternative trun—

32

cates the distribution of employed states from below. Increasing risk
allows the firm to be more selective in its employment policy, employing
workers with greater frequency in the most productive states, increasing
average output and supporting larger w and w payments.
It must be stressed that the risk—is—good argument applies only to

those shocks that are sufficiently transient and Independent to be diversi-

fied. In that case permanent wealth of a worker is not affected by any
particular realization of x. This suggests that equalizing differences would
only be observed for anticipated undiversifiable risk because those do
imply permanent changes in wealth and therefore in consumption prospects.
Empirical work on this problem is in a surprisingly elementary state

and the few studies that have been done

found small wage premiums for

unemployment risk. However, most investigators have not clearly distinguished
between diversifiable and nondiversifiable risk, so all returns are not in.
Nevertheless there are some other broad implications of these models that

are consistent with observation. First, the theory implies that consumption
should be smoothed relative to stochastic realizations. Permanent income
studies of consumption broadly confirm this prediction. Second, the model
implies systematic sorting and assignment of different types of workers to

risk classes. Those workers whose nonmarket uses of time are most valuable
should bear a proportionately greater share of unemployment risks because

it is socially less costly for them to do so. The incidence of unemployment
among various socioeconomic groups is broadly consistent with this prediction.

IV. Selection, Assignment and Productivity
This section sketches how a competitive labor market assigns workers

of different talents to alternative tasks and occupations. The equalizing

33

difference function is now defined over productivity attributes of workers
and is closely related to the Ricardian theory of rent (consumption attri-

butes of jobs are ignored in this discussion). Just as different climate,
irrigation, and soil nutrient attributes of agricultural land affect

productivity and therefore value, so too do different ability and other
attributes of workers affect their valuations in a competitive labor market.

One of the problems in Section III showed how this might be addressed by
introducing worker traits directly into production functions.. Then a

variant of Figure 3 applies with W(.) defined over worker traits. The
equilibrium wage—attributes function is an envelope across bid functions

of firms for attributes. Workers are systematically sorted and stratified
to jobs according to their productivity attributes and are matched to

firms according to the intensity with which attributes affect production
of various goods and services.

Such an approach has two limitations: it restricts analysis to
those situations where production functions can be expressed directly in
terms of worker characteristics; and it is easily manageable only when
each firm specializes its choice of personnel to a single. type of worker.

The former is not always possible or meaningful, and the latter is seldom

strictly observed. I therefore outline an alternative model in which the
valuation system on characteristics is the indirect outcome of market

assignments, in the manner of the conventional theory of rent. This
model is better articulated with standard analytical methods, particularly
those used in the theory of international trade, and is also more fruitful
for analyzing the distribution of earnings.14

34

Consider a simple economy with n goods and production functions
i
Xj = F (Tii,T21), where Xj is output of good i = 1, ..., n and T11 and T21

are total input of two labor factors in the production of x1, each measured

in efficiency units. The T's may be given a variety of interpretations
depending on the particular problem to be analyzed, but for present purposes

are two distinct occupations, which themselves are (exogenously) defined

as collections of productive tasks and work activities. Notice that this
formulation preserves a certain additivity: It is the sum of productive
inputs among all workers employed in the production of a particular good
that matters, not how this sum is distributed over different types of

workers in a production unit. Another way of saying it is that there is
a form of perfect quantity—quality substitution among workers in production.
Ignoring hours of work decisions for simplicity, a worker is

completely described by two numbers (t1,t2) where t, j =

1,2

represents

a worker's productive efficiency in job j, his contribution to

if

full time is allocated to that task. I assume for this exposition that
and t2 are endowed for each worker, but differ among them. Then the
absolute scale of t1 and t2 measures a worker's absolute advantage, in each.

activity and the ratio r =

t2/t1

is an index of comparative advantage on

activity 2 (equivalently, hr indexes comparative advantage in activity 1).
Define a worker type by an index v of the comparative advantage ratio,
r =

r(v),

with v defined on the unit interval. Then v can be chosen so

that r is ordered from largest to smallest. I assume that there are such
a large number of different types of workers in the sense of v that r&)
is continuous for all practical purposes, so that dr/dy < 0. The total
supply of worker talents is des.cribed in either of two equivalent ways.

35

One

is

as a distribution by type v, say n(v)dv, where n is appropriately

scaled to account for differences within type v for absolute advantage or

differences in absolute efficiency units. Another is by a joint distribution on the random vector (t1,t2) across the entire working population,

say g(t1,t2)dt1dt2. We wish to study how the market assigns workers to
activities, how it partitions these distributions and what those partitions
imply about observable variables.15
It is clear that the optimum assignment of workers to tasks follows

the principle of comparative advantage. An. economy—wide task possibility—

frontier in the T1,T2 planets found byiuaximizingT2 for any given level of
subject to the constraints implied by either n(v) or g(t1,t2). This is
done in exactly the same way that the world production possibility frontier
is derived in the theory of international trade with many countries.

Each worker specializes in the activity in which he exhibits comparative
advantage and potential skill in the activity to which he Is not assigned

remains latent and unutilized. The assignment is ordered on v: a given
point on the task possibility frontier is supported by a critical value
v' such that persons with v >

v*

are assigned to T2, those with v <

are assigned to T1, and those for whom v =

v

v*

are assigned by a random

device. The frontier itself completely describes relevant factor endowments
in the economy, which in turn define the conditions of supply of all goods
Xj

—— the production possibility set of outputs in the economy at large.

Finally, demand conditions for goods and services determine the general
equilibrium, including the assignments of workers to various firms and
industries and the precise menu of goods actually produced.

36

Since it is not immediately relevant to the purposes at hand, I
omit details of how the complete equilibrium in the economy is determined.

What is crucial is that this equilibrium is supported by a maximum problem

and a competitive labor market. General equilibrium determines linear
prices p1 and p2 on the inputs T1 and T2 that maximize the total value of
inputs in the economy. A plane tangent to the task possibility frontier defines

thse prices, and its gradient can be thought of as piece rates for personal
output in each activity. Each worker faces these prices parametrically
and decides whether to supply his labor to

or T2. Given the worker's

endowed values of t1 and t2, the alternative that maximizes income is

chosen. Income potential in activity j is simply j
Define p =

p1/p2

1,2.

as the relative price. Then maximization of earnings is

equivalently described by the rule: choose
equality r (v*)

for j =

p defines

the critical value

or T2 as r(v)

p. The

of v* discussed above..

An alternative description of the optimum assignment is represented
as a linear partition of the joint distribution g(t1,t2) shown in Figure 5.

Each person is uniquely described by a point in the t1,t2 plane. The
ellipses in Figure 5 show the probability contours in the overall working

population, the level sets of g(t1,t2). The linear function t2 =

Pt1

serves as the dividing line in the optimal and market assignment of workers

to activities. All those whose skill endowment point lies above the line
choose activity 2 because their incomes are largest there. All those whose
skill endowment point lies below the line choose activity 1. Notice that
as p rises, a margin of workers (it would be represented by a wedge—shaped
area itt Figure 5) find it optimal to reassign themselves to activity 1

rather than 2 because their relative income prospects change. Notice also

37

that for small changes in p most people are inframarginal and continue

using the same skill. This is very similar in spirit to what happened
in the model of Section II.

The contours in Figure 5 are drawn on the assumption that t1 and
are positively correlated in the population, so that a person who is

very productive in activity 2 is also likely to be very productive in

activity 1 as well. Positive correlation signals the presence of absolute
advantage and suggests a factor structure interpretation of t. which places

substantial weight on a single dimension, such as general intelligence or

I.Q. However, it is entirely possible that the correlation is negative.
Then the ellipses would have been negatively inclined, and a person who

was very good at one activity would more than likely be worse than average

in the other. In that case absolute advantage is not important. A factor
structure interpretation of t3 suggests at least two distinct factors in
which skills in one activity load heavily on one factor and skills in the

other activity load heavily on a distinctly different factor. The ellipses
in Figure 5 have been drawn so that the marginal variance of t2 in g(t1,t2)

exceeds the marginal variance ot t1. This may be interpreted in terms of
the inherent difficulty of performing the two activities. Smaller variance
in activity 1 suggests that just about everyone achieves more or less the
same amount

of

useful output if they devote themselves to that activity.

In that sense activity 2 in Figure 5 is inherently more difficult and offers
greater scope for talent and ability to stand out and make its mark.

Given the shape of g(t1,t2) market selectivity implies some interesting

productivity calculations in response to relative price changes. For example,
suppose t1 and t2 are positively correlated and p increases. Then the

38

average personal productivity of people observed in both occupations would

tend to rise: the average person observed in T2 initially exhibits absolute
advantage in both, and some of these persons switch over to T1. On the
other hand, were the correlation between latent skills negative, an
increase in p raises average productivity of workers remaining in T2,

because those finding it advantageous to switch from

to T1 are drawn

from the lower tail of the conditional (marginal) t2 distribution. Those
making the switch are of lower average productivity In

than workers who

initially chose it, so average personal productivity observed in
decreases.

Equivalent statements can be made about the observed distribution

of earnings in each activity. These statements are readily obtained from
the fact that both the latent and actual income distributions are simple
linear transforms of the distribution of g(t1,t2) due to the linearity of

prices p1 and p2. This provides a very powerful basis for analyzing the
cross—sectional distribution of earnings, both between activities and
among them, from the relationship y = max (y1,y2), where y is observed
earnings independent of activity choice and y. is earning opportunities of

a person in activity j. Space limitations preclude a complete development
of those Ideas here. Suffice it to say that the actual choices are made
optimally. This implies selectivity bias in between—activity earnings
comparisons. Average earnings observed by those who chose T1 are unlikely
to be an unbiased estimate of average earnings prospects available to those

who chose T2 had they somehow been assigned to T1 instead. The converse
also applies. Again, these statements are very similar in spirit to the
sorting implications of revealed preference discussed in Section II.

39

V. Ability Sorting: Applications
Two applications illustrate the ideas in Section IV. The first
is theoretical and the second is empirical.

A. Sorting by Latent Characteristics.16
Given the general flavor of this essay, it is perhaps noteworthy
that the general outline of equilibrium in Section IV made little or no

reference to worker characteristics or traits. That deficiency is
remedied here. It is shown that the selectivity aspects of optimal assignments imply corresponding sorting of workers by those characterisitcs which
influence abilities and comparative advantage.

The number t is a direct measure of a worker's talent in activity
j. The vector of talents and prices Pj were seen to be all that was
necessary to study market assignments and income distribution. Further
development is possible by writing the determinants of personal talent

in an activity in terms of another set of latent factors (in the sense
of factor analysis in statistics), according to "production functions"

Here Z1,. ..,Z are a relatively small set of
latent factors which determine ability in a given activity, such as

physical strength, manual dexterity, verbal abilities, analytical

abilities, and so forth. As written, the Z's influence potential output
in all activities, though the marginal product of any Z may differ among
activities, as shown by the index on production function &.
clearest in the case of a proper factor model, when

=

where

This

is

is linear as in Z..;

are constants.

A worker is endowed with particular values of attributes Z and

is completely described by a point on the vector (Z1,.. ,Z). All workers

40

together are described by a distribution over (Z1,... ,Z), which in con-

junction with the production functions relating the Z's to ti's lead to

the joint density g(t1,t2) extensively utilized above. As a consequence
the equilibrium analysis of Section IV applies intact, and the pricing
system that supports it induces an implicit pricing scheme on the Z's
through the relations Yj =

Substituting the production relations

into these expressions in the linear case results in y. =

where

3

i
can be regarded as the implicit prices of Z1 in activity j.

4ij =

Notice that the implicit prices

on any given characteristic Z are

distinct across activities. There are no exploitable arbitrage opportunities
that equalize implicit prices across different types of jobs in the economy.

This is a fundamental implication of the assumption that the Vs themselves
are not direct objects of choice by firms and do not directly enter into

a firm's production function. Viewing the linear relations between the

Vs and y.'s as a factor structure suggests interpreting

as a "factor

loading." However, the analogy is not complete because factor loadings
vary from job to job (i.e., across j).

Nevertheless, systematic sorting of activities according to Z is

strongly implied by the model. For example, consider Figure 6, which is
specialized to two underlying factors (m = 2) and four activities (j =

Given lj and 2j' the
of

j =

l,...,4).

dashed intersecting lines show those combinations

and Z2 that result in a dollar's worth of earnings in activity j, for

l,...,4.

A person with an endowment at point A makes the most money in

activity 1 and is therefore assigned to that activity. The rays through the
origin are defined by intersections of consecutive dashed lines, and it

follows from homogeneity of the linear &

production

functions that

41

all individuals whose endowment lies between the vertical axis and the first

(steepest) ray optimally choose activity 1, by exactly the same logic. The
rays therefore define the optimal partition of the joint distribution of

the Z's across activities. There is systematic sorting of characteristics
and worker types to activities. Notice that the relative slopes of the
dashed lines in Figure 6 depend on relative factor prices

Thus

income prospects in activity 1 weight attribute Z2 much more heavily than

Z1 and vice—versa for activity 4. Activities 2 and 3 weigh both attributes

more equally. Those individuals who are heavily endowed with one attribute
are more likely to be found in the extreme activities (1 or 4), while those
with. more balanced endowments are more likely to be found in the middle

activities (2 or 3). Again, sstemátic selection of persons by latent
characteristics is. the rule rather than the exception.

B. Educational Selection'7
The rate of return to schooling is the fundamental concept in the

economics of education. The basic idea is simple. Suppose a person takes
s years of schooling and enters the market thereafter. Let V(s) represent
the discounted present value, as of some early age, of future earnings

prospects given that s years are completed. Here earnings include income
during the schooling period (with deductions for direct costs) as well as

during periods of full participation in the work force. The person's incremental rate of return to schooling is the gradient V'(s). A major empirical
task is to calculate the function V(s). This is complicated by the fact that
we never observe a path not taken, and only one value of s is realized for

any given person. Therefore, V(s) must be imputed by a "counterfactual"

42

comparison of income streams between people who stopped school at different
levels, raising possibilities of bias due to interpersonal differences in
returns and costs of schooling.

Public policy interest in these calculations rests on cost—benefit
analysis. of interventions, such as subsidies, which induce young people to

undertake more schooling than they otherwise would. If we were confident
that actual schooling choices were randomly determined, then imputing V(s)

from interpersonal differences in earnings would map out the average social

rate of return. However, there are strong reasons for believing that
school completion choices are systematic: rational decision requires
choosing s to equate the marginal rate of return with the personal rate

of discount. Still if family wealth (interpersonal differences in discount
factors) was the only constraint on individual choice. interpersonal

estimates of V(s) would yield excellent approximations of average schooling

prospects for a random person in the population. This is not the case if
private rates of return systematically differ among people.

Early investigations of schooling returns clearly recognized possible
problems of "ability bias," that those who continue school are likely to be

more able in some sense than those who stop at lower levels. Thus selection
and admissions policies of colleges are contingent on adequate high school
performance, and colleges themselves are highly stratified by abilities of

students. Nevertheless, most studies have adopted a very narrow view of
ability—as—IQ which, by the logic of section IV, implicitly restricts

attention to questions of absolute advantage and ignores comparative advan-

tage. Since different levels and types of schooling are closely associated
with different occupations and work activities, it seems

evident

that

43

a priori restrictions of absolute advantage or disadvantage are too con-

fining for the problem. Would a person who was very successful as a lawyer
have been a very successful plumber as well (and vice—versa)? Or is it more
likely that the verbal skills that make for successful lawyering would not
have as much value in the plumbing profession, for which mechanical

abilities are more important? In short, it seems likely that the constructions
in Figures 5 and 6 apply to these choices and that individuals are sorted
across occupations and school completion levels by latent characteristics
(talents) which produce comparative as well as absolute advantage.

The apparatus of section IV can be applied directly to this problem

when school completion levels are discrete rather than continuous. Thus

let V be the present discounted value of earnings oL a person for schooling
level i, with i = 1, ...,

ii.

a random vector (V1, V2, ...,

Then the population at large is described by

v)

in the sense of the distribution g(.)

used above. Each person chooses the value of i which maximizes V, that is
the distributions of V and i actually observed are generated by the rule

V = max (V ,
1

..., Vn) for

each person, leading to partitions much like

Figures 5 and 6.

My study with Willis examined the choice of continuing schooling
beyond high school compared with stopping after high school graduation, a
special case in which ii

2.

This restriction of the choice set was

dictated by limitations of available econometric technology which currently

is best suited to binomial rather than multinomial choices. We found
substantial evidence of ability sorting in these two classes, though
necessary adjustments to simple rate of return calculations were relatively

small. More interestingly, when observed earnings patterns in the two

44

classes were purged of selection bias there was strong indication of the
presence of comparative advantage and negative correlation in underlying

talents. Those who entered college would have earned less had they
stopped upon high school graduation than those who actually stopped.
Had high school completers continued on to college, they would have
earned less than those who actually found it in their best interests to

enter college. We also discovered that prospective personal financial gains
from college entrance were important determinants of the decision to attend,
though family background and costs

were important considera-

tions as well. Studies of this sort have to be replicated on a broader
scale and on a variety of data sources to get a more complete picture of
the practical importance of these effects.

VI. Conclusions
I hope my exposition and examples illustrate both the simplicity and
broad range of applicability of equalizing differences in labor markets.

Much more work. remains to be done. Existing analysis of valuation of worker
traits and characteristics and the assignment of workers to firms seems to

me to be a weak sister in this enterprise. A main function of labor markets
is to solve a type of marriage problem, to match a particular worker to a

particular position in a particular firm. While the framework I set forth
above does this in a general way, it ignores productivity interactions among
workers within firms, how a specific worker fits a niche in the enterprise

and becomes a proper member of a productive team. A good deal of the search
and turnover activity we observe among young workers probably is attributable

to this kind of matching. While much

interesting recent research

45

on matching has

been

done, most of it is partial equilibrium and conceals

the larger picture of assignments in the market as a whole. Finally, we
are a long way toward understanding how disequilibrium affects mobility

decisions and how movements provoked by disequilibrium can be distinguished
empirically from equilibrium mobility that naturally arises over the
life—cycle through skill and job upgrading and reassignment.

FOOTNOTES

*1 am indebted to Nasser Saidi for the opportunity to present this

material and for his substantial contributions over the years

to many of the ideas in this paper. The National Science Foundation provided
financial support. As will be apparent, my bibliography is highly selected,
but more complete citations are found in the references listed.

1The presence of nonearned income modifies the budget constraint in

an obvious way and is therefore omitted. In that case, nonzero income
effects in preferences imply systematic sorting by wealth, along the lines
indicated below for differences in taste.
2Determination of firm size and related questions are ignored

because they are not directly relevant for the problem at hand: the distribution f(s) incorporates the exogenous distribution of firms by size, but
each firm's scale decision could be incorporated without great difficulty.

3mis example has been carefully chosen so that the wage ratio
enters both supply and demand, and is not general. More typically the wage
difference is relevant for workers, while the ratio is sufficient for

firms. Clearly, no great issues of principal are involved here.
4it is straightforward to extend this to multivariate (vector)

attributes: see Rosen [1974] for detailed elaboration. Mas—Colell [1975]
proves an existence theorem for models of this type.
5My exposition is based on Rosen [1981] and Thaler and Rosen [1975].

Useful surveys of this and other issues are found in Linnerooth [1979] and
Jones—Lee [1976].

6See especially Becker [1957]. Also, Arrow [1972].
draw mainly on the study by Antos and Rosen [1975]. Several
other studies along similar lines appear in the literature; e.g., Chambers
[1978].

8Existence of substantial wage differentials between public and

private schools confirms this interpretation. Racial mixing of students
may produce social tension that creates nonlinearitles in the wage regression, but this remains to be investigated.
9

See Rosen [1972] for elaboration.

10
MacDonald 1 1982] develops a major extenion

in

which. learning about

workers' latent talents allows more efficient work. assignments as experience

is accumulated. See also Ross, Taubman and Wachter 11981].
11These studies are surveyed in Rosen 11977].
12The basic references are Azariadis [19753 and Baily 11974]. Ily

account follows my own

work

(Rosen [1983]) atid Nortensen 11983],

'3See Hall [1972] for example.

Harris

and Todaro 119.7QJ present

an especially interesting application to underdeveloped countries..

Abowd and Ashenfelter 11981] pursue this line to its logical limit.
14Roy [1952] pioneered this approach., though. see the related effort

by Tinbergen [1959]. That work was rediscovered and elaborated in recent
years by Rosen [1978] and Sattinger j1980]. Heckinan and Sedlacek .11981]

develop econometric methods suitable for these models.
15The distribution of latent talents g(.) is the fundamental prirnative

and readily generalizes to an arbitrary number of work activities, The

ordered distribution n(v) does not usefully generalize to more than two
skills, but has certain expository virtues.
16

The ideas in this section were first formulated in a neglected

article by Mandeibrot [1962]. Welch [1969] takes a much different approach
in which the Vs are direct factors of production in place of the T's.
discussion is based on Willis and Rosen [1978].

REFERENCES

Abowd, J. and 0. Ashenfelter, "Anticipated Unemployment, Temporary Layoffs
and Compensating Differentials,t' in S. Rosen (ed.), Studies in
Labor Markets: Chicago, 1981.

Antos, J. and S. Rosen, "Discrimination in the Market for Public School
Teachers," Journal of Econothetrics, 1975.

Arrow,

K., "Models of Discrimination," in A. H. Pascal, (ed.), Racial
Discrimination in Economic Life: Lexington, 1972.

Azariadis, C., "Implicit Contracts and Underemployment Equilibria," Journal
of Political EdonOmy, 1975.
Baily, M., "Wages and Employment Under Uncertain Demand," Review of Economic
Studies, 1974.

Becker, G., The EconomicS of Discrimination:

Chicago,

1957.

Chambers, J., "Educational Cost Differentials and the Allocation of State
Aid for Education," Journal of HthñanRésOurces, 1978.
Hall, R., "Why Is the Unemployment Rate So High at Full Employment?" Brook—
ings
Harris, 3.

Papers

and

On Economic Activity, 1970.

N. Todaro, "Migration, Unemployment and Development: A Two—

Sector Analysis," AEietican Economic Review, 1970.

Heclcman, J. and C. Sedlacek, "The Impact of the Minimum Wage on Employment

and Earnings of Workers in South Carolina," University of Chicago, 1981.
Jones—Lee, N., The ValUe of Life: An Economic Analysis: London, 1976.

Linnerooth, J., "The Value of Human Life: A Review of the Models," Economic
Inquiry,

1979.

MacDonald, G., "Information in Production," Eóonometrica, 1982.

Mandeibrot, B., "Paretian Distributions and Income Maximization," Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 1962.

Mas—Colell, A., "A Model of Equilibrium with Differentiated Commodities,"

Journal of Mathemtica1

EconOmics, 1975.

Mortensen, D., "A Welfare Analysis of Unemployment Insurance: Variations on

Second Best Themes,"Carngie—Rochester Papers on Public Policy, 1983.
Rosen, S., "Learning and Experience in the Labor Market," Journal of Human
Resources, 1972.

________

"Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Product Differentiation in

Pure Competition," Journal of Political'Economy, 1974.

________

"Human Capital: A Survey of Empirical Research," in R. Ehrenberg
(ed.), Research in Lab6r Markets: Greenwich, 1977.

"Substitution and Division of Labor," Economica, 1978.
"Valuing Health Risk," .Ainericait Economic Review, 1978.

________

"Unemployment and Insurance," Carnegie—Rochester Papers on Public

Policy, 1983.

Ross, S., P. Taubman and N. Wachter, "Learning by Observing and the Distribution
of Wages," in S. Rosen (ed.), Studies in Labor Markets: Chicago, 1981

Roy, A. D., "Some Thoughts on the Distribution of Earnings," Oxford Economic
Papers, 1951.
Sattinger, M., Capital and the Distribution of Labor Earnings: Amsterdam, 1980.

Thaler, R. and S. Rosen, "The Value of Saving a Life: Evidence from the
Labor Market," in N. Terleckyj (ed.), Household Production and
Consumption: New York, 1975.

Tinbergen, J., "On the Theory

of

Income Distribution," in _____________
Selected Papers:

Ansterdani, 1959.
Welch, F., "Linear Synthesis
Resources,

of Skill Distribution," Journal of Human

1969.

Willis, R. and S. Rosen, "Education and Self—Selection," Journal of Political
Economy, 1979.

Cl

E (R 10=1)

Figure

1

wi/wo

choose D=O

R

E Cal

Iwo

E(pjD=i)

Figure 2

E()

f(p)

D=1

/1

Figure

3

W(D)

D

>

t2

Figure 5

T1

t2= Pt1

ti

z2
choose
1

\

Figure 6

choose 2

choose 4

choose 3

zi

