                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         SEPARATING THE BUSINESS CYCLE FROM
                            OTHER ECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

                                             Robert E. Hall

                                         Working Paper 11651
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11651


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2005




Presented at "The Greenspan Era: Lessons for the Future," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve
Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 25-27, 2005. This research is part of the program on
Economic Fluctuations and Growth of the NBER. A file containing data and programs is available at
stanford.edu/~rehall. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Robert E. Hall. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Separating the Business Cycle from Other Economic Fluctuations
Robert E. Hall
NBER Working Paper No. 11651
September 2005
JEL No. E32, E52

                                           ABSTRACT



Macroeconomists——especially those studying monetary policy——often view the business cycle
as a transitory departure from the smooth evolution of a neoclassical growth model. Important ideas
contributed by Friedman, Lucas, and the developers of the sticky-price macro model generate this
type of aggregate behavior. But the real-business cycle model shows that the neoclassical model
implies anything but smooth growth. A purely neoclassical model, devoid of anything resembling
a business cycle in the sense of transitory departures from neoclassical equilibrium, nevertheless
explains most of the volatility of GDP growth at all frequencies. Monetary policymakers looking to
a neoclassical model to provide the neutral levels of key variables-potential GDP, the natural rate
of unemployment, and the equilibrium real interest rate, need to solve a complicated and
controversial model to find these constructs. They cannot take average or smoothed values of actual
data to find them. Further, low-frequency movements of unemployment suggest a failure of the basic
idea that departures from the neoclassical equilibrium are transitory. I discuss new theories of the
labor market capable of explaining the low-frequency movements of unemployment. I conclude that
monetary policymakers should not try to discern neutral values of real variables. Some branches of
modem theory do not support the concepts of potential GDP, the natural rate of unemployment, and
the equilibrium real interest rate. Even the theories that do support the concepts suggest that
measurement in real time is impractical.


Robert E. Hall
Hoover Institution
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6010
and NBER
rehall@gmail.com
1 Introduction
The U.S. economy rarely grows smoothly. Periods of variable but positive growth are
interrupted occasionally by contractions, usually brief. Macroeconomics is making some
progress in understanding the patterns of aggregate fluctuations. The answers seem to be
anything but simple. The traditional notion no longer holds that the economy moves along
a smooth growth trend with temporary cyclical departures. This notion is badly incomplete
as a description of the data. Key variables—real GDP, unemployment, and real returns—
display important movements at frequencies below the business cycle but above long-term
trend. Modern macro theory helps explain these movements in a view that integrates them
with cyclical and trend movements.
   Over the past half-century, macroeconomists have found the neoclassical model of the
economy useful. That model follows the principles of Solow’s growth model together with
standard ideas about clearing markets. The neoclassical model lacks a business cycle be-
cause it lacks the frictions and information limitations that modern macroeconomics finds
helpful in explaining transitory movements of employment and output. In a view that is
widespread today, the neoclassical model governs the evolution of the economy in all but
the short run—it provides a baseline for understanding macroeconomic fluctuations.
   The view that the business cycle is an add-on to a smoothly evolving neoclassical econ-
omy has come under a double challenge. One challenge is factual. The decomposition of
variables into a trend and a cycle reveals important components that are neither trend nor
cycle. The other challenge comes from models. A macro model describes the effects of
exogenous driving forces on the key endogenous variables. The models under most active
debate today do not support the trend-cycle view.
   One branch of the new learning emphasizes the volatility that a strictly neoclassical
model predicts, given the magnitudes of the shocks that hit the economy. The enduring
contribution of Kydland and Prescott’s real business cycle model was to make this point.
The RBC model emphasized the irregularity of productivity growth, but movements in ex-

                                            2
ogenous spending appear to be roughly equal contributors to the volatility of real GDP.
Much of that volatility, in fact, appears to come from the neoclassical mechanisms embod-
ied in the RBC model and not from the transitory departures from neoclassical equilibrium
that might be called the business cycle.
   Another branch, particularly active in the past few years, builds a coherent view of
business-cycle facts that elude neoclassical explanation. This work focuses on the labor
market, though some of the new ideas might also help explain features of other markets.
Its primary objective is an understanding of unemployment, a concept not even considered
in the RBC model. The new work can be embodied in dynamic general-equilibrium mod-
els to develop hybrids, where volatility comes from movements of productivity, exogenous
spending, and other driving forces, amplified by variations in unemployment. This branch
of macro thinking disclaims the notion that the business cycle is an add-on to the neoclas-
sical model. Models instead deliver unified explanations of fluctuations at all frequencies.
   The traditional idea is that neoclassical constructs—production functions, consumption
demand functions, labor supply functions, embedded in markets that clear—describe the
actual operations of the economy in the longer run. There is a ∗-economy that generates
variables such as y ∗ , called potential GDP, u∗ , called the natural unemployment rate, r∗ ,
called the natural real interest rate, and so on. Milton Friedman’s famous presidential
address, Friedman (1968), developed this idea informally. Lucas (1972) formalized the
idea in a particular way, in which the ∗-economy is one with full information and deviations
occur because of imperfect knowledge of the current state of the economy.
   Deviations of the actual economy around the ∗-economy constitute the business cycle.
They arise from some kind of disequilibrium relative to the neoclassical equilibrium of the
∗-economy. As Lucas showed, the actual economy is in equilibrium, once limitations on
information are included in the model. When I refer to the transitory disequilibrium of the
business cycle, I mean specifically in relation to the neoclassical benchmark.
   I draw an arbitrary line separating neoclassical principles from the full set of ideas that


                                             3
constitute modern economic science. Much of non-neoclassical economics, as I use the
term, involves imperfect information, as in Lucas’s model and in the worker-job matching
models that have added much to understanding of unemployment in recent years. Although
non-neoclassical economics is sometimes casual in stating its theories, the parts that I con-
sider here are just as rigorous as anything neoclassical.
   In the early years of what Paul Samuelson called the “neoclassical synthesis,” the ∗-
economy was viewed as generating smooth trends, as described by Solow’s growth model,
the keystone of neoclassical macroeconomics. Short-run movements around the smooth
trend were transitory, the result of imperfect information, delayed adjustment of prices, or
other non-neoclassical features of the economy.
   An important milestone in the unfolding breakdown of the neoclassical synthesis was
Kydland and Prescott (1982)’s discovery that the ∗-economy is anything but smooth, once
the actual volatility of productivity growth is included in the model. Their real business
cycle model generates substantial short-run volatility from relentlessly neoclassical princi-
ples. This discovery forbids extracting the disequilibrium cyclical movements as deviations
from a smooth trend. Instead, one would have to solve the ∗-model and calculate devia-
tions from the volatile ∗-variables. I’m not sure that this lesson has fully informed the
community of practical macroeconomists who try to use signal-extraction methods based
on statistical characterizations of the ∗-variables as moving smoothly over time.
   The second element in the breakdown is the high persistence of the deviations of actual
from neoclassical performance. The puzzle is most visible in unemployment, a distinctly
non-neoclassical variable. Unemployment has large low-frequency swings—low in the
1950s and 1960s, high in the 1970s and 1980s, low again in the 1990s and 2000s. The
idea is unpalatable that these movements are the results of transitory cyclical forces, for
they are only barely transitory. The standard view that the ∗-economy explains longer-run
movements seems to call for adding low-frequency movements of unemployment to the
∗-economy—that is, to create a model of the natural rate of unemployment that permits


                                              4
slow-moving changes.
   Unemployment is not a feature of any neoclassical economy. Explanations of even a
constant natural rate of unemployment invoke distinctly non-neoclassical mechanisms of
matching friction, the result of imperfect information among workers about available jobs
and among employers about available workers. Theories of matching and unemployment
do not deliver a distinction between transitory and slow-moving elements. They do not
contain an object called the natural rate. They are unitary theories of unemployment. A
careful look at detailed historical data finds no discrepancies—no special factors in the
1970s and 1980s that would boost unemployment. Rather, turnover in the labor market
was at normal levels in the 1970s and 1980s and unemployment was high because jobs
were harder to find. The period resembled a long recession. The mechanism at work in a
recession is close to permanent, not transitory.
   I conclude that neoclassical principles properly applied in an environment with volatile
driving forces delivers predictions rather different from the smooth growth implicit in
most thinking based on the cycle over trend model. Sudden movements of GDP and
other variables are not necessarily part of the disequilibrium business cycle—they may
reflect the neoclassical response to shifts in productivity and exogenous spending. And
non-neoclassical forces in the labor market may result in long-lasting, smooth changes in
unemployment that are not distinguishable from the more rapid movements that observers
have earlier assigned to transitory disequilibrium.
   Building new models of the labor market that come to grips with the observed level of
volatility of employment and unemployment is an active current area of research. Subtle
changes in the economic environment, such as changes in the distribution of information
known to one side of the employment bargain but not to the other, can cause large changes
in unemployment. And these changes can be long-lasting—they may play an important
role in the sub-cyclical movements of the labor market that are so prominent in the data but
escape explanation in existing models.


                                              5
    Although research on the puzzles of financial returns is even more active than in labor-
market volatility, I am not confident that we are making as much progress. Even the sim-
plest observations, such as the equity premium, defy explanation even from new ideas. And
the volatility of the stock market is far, far above the prediction of any sensible general-
equilibrium macro-finance model.
    The conduct of monetary policy is generally outside the scope of this paper. Some of
the lessons are worth mentioning briefly. The traditional view encouraged policymakers to
think that the ∗-economy delivers normal or neutral values of real variables. The idea was
that these reveal the stance of the economy and of policy. If unemployment exceeds the
natural rate, real GDP falls short of potential, and the real interest rate is below its natural
level, then the economy is in a cyclical slump and the stimulus of the low interest rate is
appropriate. As unemployment and output return to their ∗ levels, monetary policy should
move into neutral and the interest rate should be moved to its neutral, ∗ level, according to
the neoclassical synthesis.
    The new view makes real variables less useful in the formulation of monetary policy.
Only an elaborate, realistic version of the RBC model can deliver values of y ∗ and r∗ that
take proper account of the movements of productivity and exogenous spending. Even that
model does not know how to deal with movements of unemployment. New thinking about
unemployment is far too primitive to help in that area, and, in any case, does not support
the whole idea of constructing u − u∗ . I believe that the idea of a ∗-model will gradually
disappear from macroeconomics and from policy making.
    The Taylor rule has proven an exceptionally useful tool for describing monetary policy.
A generic rule might be written

                         rt = art∗ + b(πt − π ∗ ) + c(ut − u∗) + drt−1                         (1)

Here πt is the rate of inflation and π ∗ is the target rate of inflation. The presence of r∗ and u∗
(or y ∗ ) in the Taylor rule creates problems according to the evidence and thinking discussed
in this paper. Even in a model where these constructs are meaningful, evaluating them in

                                                6
real time is likely to involve serious errors. And the correct model may not involve ∗-
variables at all. The new view points in the direction of a Taylor rule that adapts the interest
rate to inflation (positive b), but does not use a base or neutral value of the real interest rate
(a = 0) and does not try to respond to cyclical variables such as the unemployment gap
(c = 0). Rather than set the interest rate to a measure of the neutral real interest rate, the
Taylor rule would raise the nominal rate from its earlier value whenever inflation threatened
to exceed its target (d = 1).


2 Sources of Volatility
2.1 Decomposing the sources of volatility in real GDP
I begin by demonstrating—in a model-free environment—the basic point that neoclassical
forces, notably productivity growth, predict a good deal of volatility. The ∗-economy does
not evolve along a smooth trend.
   Solow’s growth decomposition provides a good framework demonstrating this point
with respect to the sources of movements in real GDP:


                            ∆Yt = ∆At + αt ∆Nt + (1 − αt )∆Kt                                 (2)

Here Yt is real GDP, At is an index of productivity, Nt is annual hours of work adjusted for
quality, Kt is the flow of capital services, and αt is labor’s share in factor income, taken as
an estimate of the elasticity of output with respect to hours of work. ∆ is the annual percent
rate of growth of the corresponding variable.
   Quality-adjusted hours of work further decompose as

                      ∆Nt = ∆Lt + ∆Pt + ∆(1 − ut ) + ∆Ht + ∆Qt                                (3)

Here Lt is the size of the working-age population, Pt is the labor-force participation rate, ut
is the unemployment rate, Ht is hours per worker, and Qt is the quality of the average hour


                                                7
2.5



2.0
                                                                                                                                            Output


1.5


                                                                                                                                            Capital
1.0

                                                                                                                                            Productivity
0.5                                                                                                                                         Population
                                                                                                                                            Participation
                                                                                                                                            Labor Quality
0.0
                                                                                                                                            Employment
                                                                                                                                            Hours
       1948
              1951
                     1954
                            1957
                                   1960
                                          1963
                                                 1966
                                                        1969
                                                               1972
                                                                      1975
                                                                             1978
                                                                                    1981
                                                                                           1984
                                                                                                  1987
                                                                                                         1990
                                                                                                                1993
                                                                                                                       1996
                                                                                                                              1999
                                                                                                                                     2002
-0.5

Figure 1. Components of Output Growth, 1948-2002

of work, derived from the education mix of workers. Thus one can examine a seven-factor
breakdown of the sources of fluctuations in output:

              ∆yt = ∆At + αt (∆Lt + ∆Pt + ∆(1 − ut ) + ∆Ht + ∆Qt ) + (1 − αt )∆Kt                                                                           (4)

       The Bureau of Labor Statistics prepares data on the total private economy based on a
detailed application of Solow’s method. Figure 1 shows the growth of the log of output
and the seven components for the period since 1948. Figure 2 shows the same data after
removing a linear trend from each series.
       One of the most striking features of the data is the large role of productivity in output
fluctuations. Figure 2 shows that productivity grows along anything but a smooth path of
constant increase. Fluctuations in productivity are important at low, medium, and high fre-
quencies. The variables most closely associated with normal ideas of the business cycle—
employment (1 minus the unemployment rate) and hours per worker—are only part of the

                                                                                           8
  0.25


  0.20                                                                                  Productivity


  0.15
                                                                                                             Capital
  0.10                                                                                                                         Participation
                                                              Output

  0.05


  0.00


  -0.05
                                                                                                                 Employment
                                                                                                                   t
  -0.10          Population                                                                              Labor Quality
                                                            Hours
  -0.15
          1948
                  1951
                         1954
                                1957
                                       1960
                                              1963
                                                     1966
                                                            1969
                                                                   1972
                                                                          1975
                                                                                 1978
                                                                                        1981
                                                                                               1984
                                                                                                      1987
                                                                                                              1990
                                                                                                                     1993
                                                                                                                            1996
                                                                                                                                   1999
                                                                                                                                          2002




Figure 2. Detrended Components of Output Growth, 1948-2002




                                                                                 9
 Variable                                                Data source                          Weight            Contribution (percent)
                                                                                                              1-year    3-year     7-year
                                                                                                             changes changes changes

 Output growth                         Bureau of Labor Statistics, Multi-factor
                                       Productivity Index, Private Business
 Productivity growth                   Bureau of Labor Statistics, Multi-factor                  1             48         52        60
                                       Productivity Index, Private Business

 Growth of working-age population      Bureau of Labor Statistics, Multi-factor             Labor share         -4        -4        4
                                       Productivity Index, Private Business
 Growth of labor-force participation   Current Population Survey, Labor Force Divided       Labor share         0          2        1
 rate                                  by Civilian Non-Institutional Population

 Growth of employment rate, 1 -        Current Population Survey, Employment Divided        Labor share        18         21        24
 unemployment rate                     by Labor Force
 Growth of hours per worker            Bureau of Labor Statistics, Multi-factor             Labor share        17         15        13
                                       Productivity Index Data, Private Business
 Growth of quality of the average hour Residual from Multi-factor Productivity Index,       Labor share         7          4        -1
 of work                               Private Business, Hours of Work with Quality
                                       Adjustment and Bureau of Labor Statistics, Major
                                       Sector Productivity Data, Private Business, Hours
                                       of Work
 Growth of capital services            Bureau of Labor Statistics, Multi-factor            1 - labor share     12         10        -2
                                       Productivity Index Data, Private Business



Table 1. Decomposition of Sources of Variation in Output Growth, 1948-2002

story of short-run fluctuations. And those two variables have important lower-frequency
movements.
   I measure the contributions of the variances of annual growth of the various components
by their covariances with output growth. This gives an exact additive decomposition of
explanatory contributions to the variance of growth. I measure growth over 1-, 3-, and
7-year periods. Table 1 shows the results.
   Almost half of the variance of annual output growth arises from the variance of produc-
tivity growth, according to Table 1. This figure is biased upward to some extent because the
BLS measures productivity growth as a residual from measured output growth, so errors in
output growth appear in both variables and bias the covariance upward. A second source
of bias is the endogenous response of productivity arising from increasing returns or un-
measured changes in capital utilization. Nonetheless, by all appearances, variations in the

                                                                     10
rate of productivity growth are a major source of variations in GDP growth. Not surpris-
ingly, productivity growth variability accounts for an even larger fraction of the variability
of output growth over 3- and 7-year periods.
    Population, labor-force participation, and labor-quality growth have small variances, so
they account for little of the variation in output growth. Variation in growth of the capital
stock accounts for a moderate amount of output variability for 1- and 3-year differences,
but essentially none for 7-year differences.
    The two cyclical variables, the employment rate and hours per worker, jointly account
for about a third of the variability of annual output growth. As expected for a cyclical
variable, variations in hours per worker account for less of the variation in 3- and 7-year
changes in output than for 1-year changes. But the same is not true for the employment
rate. Its role in output variability is actually a little higher for the longer differences.
    Table 1 little resembles the findings for an economy with smooth underlying growth
buffeted by transitory recessions and recoveries. Smooth productivity growth would have
little volatility in 1-year changes, so it would not account for much of the variability of
annual growth of output. Transitory cyclical variables—the employment rate and hours—
would have large roles in annual differences. For 7-year changes, on the other hand, the
transitory components would have little role, and variations in productivity growth, though
small, would account for all of the similar variations in output growth.
    As Figure 2 demonstrates, the primary reason for the findings of Table 1 is that all of the
components of output growth are quite persistent. The main difference between productiv-
ity and the employment rate, for example, is that productivity is much more volatile. The
persistence of fluctuations is comparable between the two variables. Consequently, Table
1 does not assign high explanatory power to variations in the employment rate for 1-year
differences and high power to variations in productivity growth for long differences.




                                                11
2.2 Volatility in macroeconomic models
Next I will investigate the potential volatilities of a model of a neoclassical economy and a
model of an economy with the same fundamentals but with frictions in its labor market. I
will compare both volatilities to those of the U.S. economy over the past half-century.
   Table 2 shows the standard deviations of key macro variables over the period 1947
through 2004. The variables are chosen to describe a non-stationary economy—one with
stochastic variations in its growth rate—but with a stationary unemployment rate and sta-
tionary exogenous disturbances to spending. The U.S. economy fits this description. The
first two rows describe two major driving forces, productivity and exogenous spending.
The latter is the sum of government purchases of goods and services and net exports, stated
as a ratio to consumption. Both exogenous spending and consumption are non-stationary,
but the ratio is stationary though quite persistent. I take net exports as exogenous, though
of course in the global view they are endogenous. Much of the volatility of exogenous
spending arises from military spending, reasonably taken to be exogenous.
   Kydland and Prescott (1982) revolutionized thinking about the behavior of the aggre-
gate neoclassical model. Prior to their real business cycle or RBC model, the neoclassical
model took the form of a growth model, with smooth exponential growth of population and
productivity. Kydland and Prescott found that fluctuations in productivity of realistic mag-
nitude induced realistic movements of some macro variables, including real GDP. As I will
demonstrate shortly, this finding holds for conventional values of parameters, including the
elasticity of labor supply. Kydland and Prescott found that explaining the observed volatil-
ity of employment required highly elastic labor supply, a controversial property. Their need
to assert unrealistically elastic labor supply derives from their neglect of unemployment, I
believe.
   Hall (2005d) describes an aggregate modeling framework suited to the investigation of
volatility. Here I start with a version of the model that is strictly neoclassical. The model
resembles Kydland and Prescott’s in most respects, except that I use a standard specification


                                             12
 Variable                                        Data source                         Units            Value

 Productivity growth               Bureau of Labor Statistics, Multi-factor   Quarterly standard      0.94
                                   Productivity Index, Private Business       deviation, percent,
                                                                              inferred as half the
                                                                              annual standard
                                                                              deviation
 Government purchases plus net     Bureau of Economic Analysis, National      Standard deviation      5.01
 exports relative to consumption   Income and Product Accounts, Table         of quarterly data,
                                   1.1.5. Nominal Gross Domestic Product      percent


 GDP growth                        Bureau of Economic Analysis, National      Standard deviation      1.00
                                   Income and Product Accounts,Table          of quarterly data,
                                   1.1.3. Real Gross Domestic Product,        percent
                                   Quantity Indexes
 Consumption growth                Bureau of Economic Analysis, National      Standard deviation      0.85
                                   Income and Product Accounts,Table          of quarterly data,
                                   1.1.3. Real Gross Domestic Product,        percent
                                   Quantity Indexes

 Investment/capital ratio          Growth ratio of the real capital stock     Standard deviation      0.22
                                   from Bureau of Economic Analysis,          of annual data,
                                   Fixed Asset Tables, Table 1.2. Chain-      divided by 4, percent
                                   Type Quantity Indexes for Net Stock of
                                   Fixed Assets and Consumer Durable
                                   Goods
 Unemployment                      Bureau of Labor Statistics,                Standard deviation      1.53
                                   Unemployment rate, 16 years and older      of quarterly data,
                                                                              percent



Table 2. Volatility of Macro Variables, 1948-2002




                                                     13
for capital adjustment costs in place of their specification with time to build (this difference
has almost no effect on the results). The most important difference from Kydland and
Prescott’s work is that labor supply is inelastic. I calculate the exact equilibrium of the
stochastic model, rather than using a log-linearization. For many purposes a log-linear
approximation is perfectly satisfactory, but not for the measurement of volatility.
   In the model, consumers live forever and make consumption plans that maximize ex-
pected utility. Utility each period is a constant-elastic function of consumption. The in-
tertemporal elasticity of substitution is 0.4 and the coefficient of relative risk aversion is
2.5. The technology is Cobb-Douglas. Each person works the same amount each quarter,
independent of the wage or the person’s wealth. Capital accumulation incurs quadratic ad-
justment costs such that the quarterly growth rate of capital is one-third of the deviation of
Tobin’s q from one. All of these parameter values are standard.
   A productivity shock with a mean of 0.33 percent and a quarterly standard deviation of
0.94 percent disturbs the economy each quarter. The shocks are cumulative, so that the level
of productivity is a random walk with upward drift. An exogenous spending shock with a
mean of 32 percent of consumption and a standard deviation of 5 percent of consumption
also disturbs the economy. The shock is highly persistent but eventually dies away. The
means, standard deviations, and persistence of the two shocks match the data underlying
Table 2.
   Table 3 shows the volatilities of the key variables. The first column repeats the measures
from Table 2. The second column shows the computed volatilities from the neoclassical
model. The model falls a little short in matching the volatility of output. It overstates the
volatility of consumption by about the same amount. It also overstates the volatility of
investment somewhat. None of these failings is very serious. With plausible modifications
the neoclassical model could match the volatility of output, consumption, and investment
essentially perfectly. The neoclassical model matches those volatilities reasonably well
without bringing in the mechanism normally thought to be at the center of the business cy-


                                              14
                                                               Model with
                                                    Neoclass-    labor-
                                      Actual
                                                    ical model  market
                                                                friction

                                              Standard deviations

  Output growth                        1.00           0.84          0.83
  Consumption growth                   0.85           1.06          1.03
  Investment/capital ratio             0.22           0.26          0.25
  Unemployment                         1.53           0.00          1.55


Table 3. Volatilities of Key Macro Variables, Two Models Compared to Actual

cle. Employment remains a constant fraction of the population and unemployment remains
at zero at all times in the model.
   The right-hand column reports on the properties of a non-neoclassical model that shares
many of the same elements and parameter values of the neoclassical model, but includes a
specification of the labor market with endogenous and quite variable unemployment. The
production function and preferences in the model are the same as before, but the labor
market has important limitations on information. I will spell out more of the details of the
model in a later section. The calibration of the model places the average unemployment
rate at its historical level of 5.5 percent and also matches the observed volatility of about
1.5 percentage points.
   The key point of Table 3 is that adding a realistic specification of the labor market does
not make much difference for the implied volatility of GDP, consumption, or investment,
even though it helps a lot with respect to the volatility of unemployment. Adding variable
employment actually reduces the volatility of output growth by a tiny bit, but this finding
should not be taken seriously, because it rests on the extreme assumption of zero elasticity
of labor supply. Rather, the conclusion is that employment variation is likely to be a small

                                               15
part of the total picture of the volatility of output growth. There is much more to the story
of output growth than the business cycle captured by unemployment fluctuations.
   The finding that much of the volatility of the economy arises from neoclassical sources
greatly complicates the extraction of the transitory cyclical components of the movements
of macro variables. The ∗-economy captured by the middle column of Table 3 is hardly a
smooth trend. Most of the action in the economy arises from sources other than the business
cycle.


3 Properties of Key Macro Variables
This section takes a closer look at three macro variables that play key roles in discussions
of monetary policy, especially in connection with the Taylor rule. Some forms of the rule
call for the central bank to set an interest rate based on a measure of the position of the
economy in the business cycle—the gap between real GDP and potential or the deviation
of unemployment from the natural rate—and also based on a measure of the neutral level
of the real interest rate. Studying the histories of the variables illustrates the challenges in
providing these measures.

3.1      Real GDP
Figure 3 shows real GDP in terms of the deviation of its log from a linear trend. I remove
the trend to bring out the cyclical and sub-cyclical movements. The business cycle is readily
apparent in Figure 10. In addition, real GDP has large sub-cyclical movements.
   The normal or neutral level of real GDP is usually called potential GDP. Many discus-
sions relate potential GDP to the level predicted by a neoclassical ∗-model. In practice,
however, potential GDP is often taken as the smooth component of a two-component sta-
tistical decomposition, where the second component is the business cycle. The Hodrick-
Prescott filter is spectacularly successful in separating an historical series for real GDP into
convincing slow-moving trend and higher-frequency cycle components.

                                              16
                                                                         -0.10
                                                                                 -0.05
                                                                                         0.00
                                                                                                0.05
                                                                                                       0.10
                                                                                                              0.15
                                                                  1947
                                                                  1949
                                                                  1951
                                                                  1953
                                                                  1955
                                                                  1957
                                                                  1959
                                                                  1961
                                                                  1963
                                                                  1965
                                                                  1967
                                                                  1969
                                                                  1971
                                                                  1973
                                                                  1975
                                                                  1977




17
                                                                  1979
                                                                  1981
                                                                  1983
                                                                  1985
                                                                  1987
                                                                  1989
                                                                  1991
                                                                  1993




     Figure 3. Deviations of Log Real GDP around a Linear Trend
                                                                  1995
                                                                  1997
                                                                  1999
                                                                  2001
                                                                  2003
   Orphanides and van Norden (2002) investigate smoothing methods, including Hodrick-
Prescott, for recovering potential GDP in real time, as required for use in a Taylor rule.
They demonstrate the difficulty of extracting the current value of the smooth trend from
just past data. The great success of Hodrick-Prescott comes in part from its use of future
data—it is a two-sided filter. Data revisions are also a major issue for calculating output
gaps in real time.
   The results in Section 2 cast serious doubt on the smoothing or signal-extraction ap-
proach to determining potential GDP and thus the GDP gap. The neoclassical model does
not predict that GDP will evolve smoothly. Instead, one would need to solve the neoclassi-
cal model to obtain Yt∗ , a volatile series. Notice that Kydland and Prescott studied data after
applying the Hodrick-Prescott filter. They interpreted the higher-frequency movements of
output remaining after filtering as the equilibrium of their neoclassical RBC model, not
deviations from a neoclassical equilibrium. Even macroeconomists like myself who find
room for improvement in the RBC model’s treatment of the labor market find persuasive
the RBC model’s showing that a neoclassical model predicts substantial volatility of output.
   My conclusion is that a central bank should not try to compute a GDP gap in real time
and adjust monetary policy according to the current gap. Smoothing approaches to defining
potential GDP fail to consider the strong evidence that potential GDP—if there is such a
thing—is volatile, not smooth. Macroeconomics is far from having delivered a workable,
real-time measurement process for potential GDP.

3.2    Unemployment
Figure 4 shows the unemployment rate over the entire period that it has been measured
by the current method based on a household survey. The business cycle is a conspicuous
feature of the movements of unemployment—each recession results in a spike of unem-
ployment. The series has no trend over nearly 60 years. But unemployment has substantial
movements at frequencies below the business cycle. It was high around 1960, low around


                                              18
 12



 10



  8



  6



  4



  2



  0
      1948
             1950
                    1952
                           1954
                                  1956
                                         1958
                                                1960
                                                       1962
                                                              1964
                                                                     1966
                                                                            1968
                                                                                   1970
                                                                                          1972
                                                                                                 1974
                                                                                                        1976
                                                                                                               1978
                                                                                                                      1980
                                                                                                                             1982
                                                                                                                                    1984
                                                                                                                                           1986
                                                                                                                                                  1988
                                                                                                                                                         1990
                                                                                                                                                                1992
                                                                                                                                                                       1994
                                                                                                                                                                              1996
                                                                                                                                                                                     1998
                                                                                                                                                                                            2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                   2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                          2004
Figure 4. Unemployment Rate, 1948-2004

1968, high again around 1980, and recently low again.
      The figure makes it clear that something more than a simple transitory business cy-
cle drives unemployment. Persistent influences are at work as well. One of them is
demographics—the baby-boom generation caused a bulge of unemployment as it went
through its high-unemployment years in the late 1970s. But Figure 5 shows that other
highly persistent forces are at work as well. It adjusts unemployment for the age composi-
tion of the labor force by taking a fixed-weight index of age-specific unemployment rates.
The weights reflect the composition of the labor force in the middle year of the data, 1975.
Even with the demographic adjustment, unemployment was high for an extended period in
the 1970s and 1980s.
      I will ultimately argue against the two-component view of unemployment, where it is
the sum of a slow-moving natural rate and a cyclical component. As usual, the Hodrick-


                                                                                                               19
                                                                                                       10
                                                                                                            12




                                                                                   0
                                                                                       2
                                                                                           4
                                                                                               6
                                                                                                   8
                                                                            1948
                                                                            1950
                                                                            1952
                                                                            1954
                                                                            1956
                                                                            1958
                                                                            1960
                                                                            1962
                                                                            1964
                                                                            1966
                                                                            1968
                                                                            1970
                                                                            1972
                                                                            1974
                                                                            1976
                                                                            1978




20
                                                                            1980
                                                                            1982
                                                                            1984
                                                                            1986
                                                                            1988
                                                                            1990
                                                                            1992
                                                                            1994
                                                                            1996
                                                                            1998
                                                                            2000
                                                                            2002




     Figure 5. Unemployment Rate, Adjusted for Age Composition, 1948-2004
                                                                            2004
Prescott filter does a marvelous job of finding two such components from historical data.
Staiger, Stock and Watson (1997) estimate a two-component model in a more structural
framework, where the transitory component obeys the Phillips-curve principle that inflation
rises when unemployment falls below the natural rate. They warn against relying on their
estimates of the natural rate in real time—their method yields estimates of the current
natural rate with large standard errors.

3.3 The real interest rate
The real interest rate displays similar puzzles to those just documented for output and
unemployment. The idea that the real interest rate has a stable value r∗ and transitory
cyclical fluctuations receives even less support than does the same idea for unemployment.
Discussion of the real rate is further complicated by the wide variety of ways to measure the
concept. Nominal short interest rates have expected real levels and realized real levels. The
market for price-level-protected treasury debt gives direct measures of real rates. Longer
debt has a real yield and real holding-period returns. The stock market has short-, medium-,
and long-period real returns. The real return to capital can be measured from a residual or
from a model of the marginal product of capital. And the marginal rate of substitution of
consumers between this year and the next is another measure that should reveal real returns.
   The following equation from macro-finance, embodying the consumption capital-asset
pricing model, provides a way to unify all the measures just listed and many others as well:

                                           log ct+1
                                                ct
                                                    − ki
                                  ri,t   =               + ²i,t                             (5)
                                                 σ
The left side is the ratio of the current to the future price of consumption and the right
side is the marginal rate of substitution. Specifically, the left side is the real return earned
over a specified holding period. In the results I present, the holding period will be a year.
The subscript i indexes the wide variety of assets available to the household—debt, equity,



                                                21
physical capital, foreign assets, and the like. On the right, the quantity

                                           log ct+1
                                                ct
                                                                                          (6)
                                              σ
describes the marginal rate of substitution, down to a constant. The parameter σ is the
intertemporal elasticity of substitution. The parameters ki describe the differences in risk
and therefore return across the assets. Their overall level depends on the volatility of con-
sumption and the rate of impatience. The random variable ²i,t is the surprise in the relation,
arising from new information that affects the realized return and next year’s consumption.
See Hansen and Singleton (1983) for a discussion of the underpinnings of this equation.
   I will investigate two ideas about real returns that might be useful in determining neutral
or normal levels of returns. One is that a given return is reasonably described by a normal
level ri∗ plus an expectation error. In this view, the common element in returns suggested
by the consumption growth term in equation (5) is taken to be unimportant (σ large). The
second idea is that returns do contain a common source of variation over time. Finance
models have this implication. Because those models do not necessarily relate the common
time element to the rate of growth of consumption, I will consider an approach that does
not assume that the element takes that form.
   Table 4 presents basic data on a number of returns and on the marginal rate of substitu-
tion. It shows the standard deviation of the variable, the mean over about the past 50 years,
and the standard error of the estimated mean. All of the returns are for one-year holding
periods and all are measured as the number of units of consumption achieved by giving up
one unit of consumption, investing the proceeds in the asset, and then selling the position
and converting back to consumption goods a year later. The variables include two returns
to capital. The first takes the earnings of capital as the residual, the difference between
the corporate sector’s revenue and its non-capital costs. I adjust for corporate taxation, for
depreciation, and adjustment costs. The details of the construction of this series appear in
Hall (2003). The second measures the return from the marginal product of capital. For a


                                              22
                                                                                                             Standard            Standard error
  Variable                                      Period                       Data source                                 Mean
                                                                                                             deviation              of mean

  Realized return to one-year treasury bills   1954-2004 Nominal return on one-year treasury bills              2.4      2.08         0.34
                                                         adjusted for change in the NIPA price index for
                                                         consumption
  Realized residual return to corporate        1947-2001 Hall (2003)                                            2.8      4.49         0.38
  capital
  Return to capital inferred from marginal     1948-2002 Marginal product of capital estimated by               1.9      8.03         0.26
  product of capital                                     equating the Cobb-Douglas marginal product
                                                         (the output/capital ratio) to the rental price of
                                                         capital and solving for the return

  Realized real return over one-year           1947-2004 From Robert Shiller,                                  15.5      9.51         2.13
  holding period, S&P 500                                http://www.econ.yale.edu/~shiller/data.htm

  Annual marginal rate of substitution         1948-2001 Equation (5) in this paper, using rate of growth       7.8      10.39        0.91
                                                         of consumption from NIPA; sigma=0.4


Table 4. Data on Five Variables that Record Real Returns

Cobb-Douglas production function, the value of the marginal product is
                                                                          pY
                                                             (1 − α)         ,                                                    (7)
                                                                          K
where α, as before, is the elasticity of output with respect to labor, p is the price of output,
and K is the capital stock. To derive the return to capital from the value of the marginal
product, I equate the latter to the rental price of capital and solve for the return.
   Table 4 reveals some of the standard puzzles of finance. The standard deviation of the
return to the stock market is vastly greater than the standard deviation of the returns to the
underlying activities, as measured by either of the measures of the return to capital. The
suspicion of excess volatility of the stock market arises. The average return to the stock
market much exceeds the return to treasury bills—the difference is the notorious equity
premium.
   The standard errors in the right-most column of the table show that 50 years of data
is enough to give reasonably precise measures of the long-run normal value of the real
treasury-bill return and the two measures of the return to capital. If it were true that these
returns consisted of a constant and a random surprise, the constant would be well-measured

                                                                     23
and provide a reliable benchmark for a neutral interest rate or return. But, as I show next,
that model does not remotely fit the facts.
    The standard errors are much larger for the return to the stock market and for the
marginal rate of substitution. Neither is particularly informative about the normal level
of real returns.
    Figures 6 through 9 show data on annual realized returns for the various assets and
Figure 10 shows the realized marginal rate of substitution. Figure 6 plots the realized real
return to one-year treasury bills. To the naked eye, the plot suggests that the return has
properties in common with the unemployment rate—in addition to transitory movements
lasting only a couple of years, the return has changes in level lasting for a decade or two.
In particular, returns averaged around zero until the late 1970s, rose to high levels, then
declined gradually down to current levels around zero again. Only a major feat of signal
extraction could find the time-varying neutral or natural or normal level of this return.
Figure 7 shows that much the same conclusion follows for the realized return on corporate
capital. In addition to occasional sudden movements of several percentage points, the return
has low-frequency movements, high in the 1970s, low in the 1980s, and high again since
1995. Figure 8 provides a related measure with its own low-frequency movements, based
on the marginal product of capital. Because this measure is not a residual, it has lower
volatility. But it plainly is not a constant plus a serially uncorrelated surprise. Again, signal
extraction would be required to determine its normal value. Figure 9 shows the realized
real return on the S&P 500. In addition to the large annual deviations demonstrated in
Table 4, the plot suggests a low-frequency component, declining during the first half of
the period and rising during the second half. Figure 10 shows the realized marginal rate
of substitution, the final candidate to provide a benchmark for the normal level of the real
return. It has no visible low-frequency movements, but its volatility is far too high to be
useful as a benchmark.
    Formal statistical hypothesis-testing confirms the impressions from the figures. Table 5


                                               24
 10



  8



  6



  4



  2



  0



 -2



 -4
      1954   1958   1962   1966   1970   1974   1978    1982   1986   1990   1994   1998   2002

Figure 6. Realized Real Return on One-Year Treasury Bills, 1954-2004




                                                       25
14


12


10


 8


 6


 4


 2


 0


 -2


 -4
      1947   1951   1955   1959   1963   1967   1971   1975   1979   1983   1987   1991   1995   1999

Figure 7. Realized Real Return on Corporate Capital, 1947-2001




                                                        26
  14



  12



  10



   8



   6



   4



   2



   0
       1948   1952   1956   1960   1964   1968   1972   1976   1980   1984   1988   1992   1996   2000

Figure 8. Realized Real Return on Capital, Based on Cobb-Douglas Marginal
Product of Capital, 1948-2002




                                                        27
  60

  50

  40

  30

  20

  10

   0

 -10

 -20

 -30

 -40
       1947 1951 1955 1959 1963 1967 1971 1975 1979 1983 1987 1991 1995 1999

Figure 9. Realized Real Return on the S&P 500, 1947-2004




                                             28
 25




 20




 15




 10




  5




  0
      1948   1952   1956   1960   1964   1968   1972   1976   1980   1984   1988   1992   1996   2000


Figure 10. Realized Marginal Rate of Substitution, 1948-2001




                                                        29
                                                                                                                 Probability that the difference
                                                                                Probability that the difference
                                             Probability that the series is a                                      between the series and the
                                                                                 between the series and the
Variable                                       constant plus independent                                         marginal rate of substitution is
                                                                              treasury-bill return is a constant
                                                     disturbances                                                 a constant plus independent
                                                                               plus independent disturbances
                                                                                                                         disturbances


Realized return to one-year treasury bills               0.0191                                                              0.2108

Realized residual return to corporate                    0.0822                            0.0003                            0.3756
capital
Return to capital inferred from marginal                 0.0000                            0.0000                            0.2364
product of capital
Realized real return over one-year                       0.3232                            0.5124                            0.7367
holding period, S&P 500
Annual marginal rate of substitution                     0.3757                            0.2108



Table 5. Tests of the Hypothesis that Returns Have Natural Levels

tests a simple property of a time series that comprises a constant and a serially uncorrelated
disturbance. The deviations of the series from its calculated mean should change sign
about half the time. The distribution of sign changes would be binomial except for the step
of subtracting the mean, which has the effect of slightly increasing the frequency of sign
changes. I obtained the null distribution by bootstrap. The table reports p values for three
sets of hypotheses. The left column in the table considers the simple model that each series
is a constant plus an independent disturbance. The entry is the probability that the observed
number of sign changes could have arisen from data obeying serial independence (the test
is two-tailed, so the probability includes the possibility of the observed amount of positive
serial correlation, with few sign changes, and negative serial correlation, with many sign
changes). The hypothesis is soundly rejected for treasury bills and fairly strongly rejected
for the residual return to capital. The test casts some suspicion for the stock market return
and the marginal rate of substitution.
    The middle column of Table 5 considers whether the time-varying element predicted by
finance theory accounts for the rejections in the first column. Because all returns contain
the same time-varying component, the difference between any pair should be serially un-

                                                                  30
correlated. I subtract the treasury bill rate from each of the other series and apply the same
test based on sign changes. The hypothesis is rejected decisively for the two returns to cap-
ital and moderately for the marginal rate of substitution. Similar results have been found in
previous work, starting with Hansen and Singleton (1983). The slow-moving components
visible in the figures differ across series. The obstacle to finding a benchmark is more than
just accounting for a common slow-moving element.
   The right-hand column in the table subtracts the marginal rate of substitution from each
of the returns. Because of the high volatility of the marginal rate of substitution, the results
are not definitive, but raise the suspicion that the slow-moving component in each return is
not the same as the one in the marginal rate of substitution (if there is one in that series).
   These results suggest that macro and finance have yet to reach anything like the state
of development where a measure of the normal level of any real interest rate is empirically
useful or reliable. All measures of the real rate tell different stories.


4 New Thinking about Macro Fluctuations
A large amount of macro model-building continues to superimpose a transitory cycle on
a neoclassical ∗-economy. These models generally assume that sellers—either producers
or workers—agree to provide the quantity that buyers choose, given a price or wage that
is sticky for a period of time. The ∗-economy is the same economy without any price-
wage stickiness. Because each price or wage adjusts to its ∗-level after a year or two,
the economy tends back to its ∗-equilibrium. The deviations around that equilibrium are
transitory. Woodford (2003) describes the state of this art and relates it in great detail to
monetary policy making.
   Because this class of models gives the purchaser a call option on the quantity transacted,
I call it the call-option sticky-price model. Its proponents have put vastly more effort into
rationalizing and documenting the stickiness of prices and wages than into rationalizing
and documenting the call-option aspect of the relation between buyer and seller. In product

                                               31
markets, one can identify some markets, such as regulated utilities, where the price is set
for a period and the buyer chooses the quantity. In retail commerce, merchants set prices
and generally fill the demand that materializes, but the period over which prices are sticky
is short in relation to the duration of cyclical fluctuations. In most parts of the labor market,
in almost all intermediate product markets, and in some consumer markets, prices are set
in idiosyncratic bargains between buyers and sellers, and the buyer has no call option.
   The call option is central to the ability of this class of models to describe the busi-
ness cycle, because it results in volatility of unemployment and other cyclical variables. If
workers and employers made contracts that specified both the price and the volume trans-
acted, rather than leaving volume to be determined later, employment and output would not
change during the contract. Such an economy would have a puzzle of the excess stability
of employment and output, hardly the issue with the U.S. economy.
   Barro (1977) made a trenchant criticism of the call-option aspect of the call-option
sticky-price model, to which the proponents have not made an effective response, in my
view. The call option is not the natural structure for the bilateral relation between buyer
and seller. Call options of sufficient duration to match the duration of business cycles do
not seem to be widespread; indeed, I might go farther to say that they hardly seem to exist at
all. But it is not my purpose here to criticize the call-option sticky-price model, but rather to
discuss emerging thinking about other non-neoclassical explanations of macro fluctuations.
The new thinking views buyers and sellers as making bilateral bargains. It dispenses with
the call option of earlier cycle models, but may retain sticky prices and wages.
   The new thinking concentrates on the labor market, but many of its ideas might apply
in product markets, especially intermediate product markets. A great deal of progress has
occurred in recent years in understanding unemployment, mostly in partial-equilibrium
analysis. General-equilibrium analysis incorporating the new ideas generally confirms that
the insights from partial-equilibrium models carry over.
   The equilibria of the new models do not take the form of the equilibrium of the neo-


                                               32
classical model perturbed by a transitory cyclical component. In this respect they differ
fundamentally from the model implicit in Friedman’s presidential address, from Lucas’s
misperceptions model, and from the now dominant call-option sticky-price model. The
new models do not have a natural unemployment rate, a potential level of GDP, or a normal
real interest rate.

4.1    The matching model of unemployment
Diamond (1982), Mortensen (1982), and Pissarides (1985) (DMP) launched the view that
now accounts for most thinking about unemployment. The model focuses on the employ-
ment-unemployment margin and usually takes labor supply in the sense of participation to
be inelastic with respect to the payoff from participation. Wage elasticity is easy to add to
the model.
    In the DMP family of models, the labor market is in continuous equilibrium. No player
waits to change a price or allocation once the change is merited. Unemployment arises
because job-seekers and prospective employers encounter frictions that limit their flows of
meetings. When a job-seeker does meet an employer, the two determine if their prospective
relationship has a surplus. The job-seeker’s reservation wage is the wage of the job fore-
gone by taking the current job. The employer’s reservation wage is the net productivity of
the job-seeker in the employer’s job. The surplus is the difference between the employer’s
reservation wage and the job-seeker’s, if the difference is positive. Having found a positive
surplus, the pair make a bargain and the job begins. The worker remains in the job until
the surplus evaporates. The relation between the worker and the employer is bilaterally
efficient.
    Employers decide upon a level of recruiting effort—they expend resources whenever
the gain from adding another worker exceeds the cost of the effort required to get in touch
with the worker. A matching technology relates the job-filling rate to the resources ex-
pended by employers. The job-finding rate—the monthly probability that a job-seeker will


                                             33
be matched to an employer with a suitable job—moves in the direction opposite from the
job-filling rate. If employers are deploying low levels of effort, jobs are hard to find and
the job-finding rate is low. The job-filling rate is correspondingly high, as employers find
that candidates for openings are plentiful.
   Unemployment depends negatively on the job-finding rate and positively on the job-loss
rate. Except for unimportant transition effects immediately after one of the rates changed,
two equations determine the unemployment rate:

    unemployment entry rate = separation rate × fraction becoming unemployed (8)
                                 + LF entry rate × fraction becoming unemployed
                                 unemployment entry rate
                     u=                                              .                     (9)
                          unemployment entry rate + job-finding rate
Here the separation rate is the fraction of workers who lose or leave their jobs each period.
The LF entry rate is the flow of people into the labor force.
   Hall (2005c) reviews a variety of data sources that appear to agree that the separation
rate is essentially a constant. Although job losses rise in a recession, the increase is tiny
in relation to the high normal levels of separations, which run more than 3 percent per
month. The entry rate to unemployment rises in recessions not because of higher separa-
tions but because those separated are more likely to enter unemployment rather than move
directly to new jobs and those entering the labor force are more likely to transit through
unemployment.
   The job-finding rate and its close cousins, the fractions of separators and entrants who
become unemployed, are the key determinants of the unemployment rate. In strong mar-
kets, the job-finding rate is high and the fractions who become unemployed are low, so
unemployment is low.
   The labor market is in equilibrium when employers gain the same amount from a new
hire as they pay for the recruiting effort that results in the hire. The market is continuously
in this equilibrium. The employer’s gain from a match is the productivity of the match less

                                              34
the wage paid to the worker. Thus the wage is a central determinant of unemployment. If
the wage is high, the employer’s incentive to create a job and expend efforts to fill it is small.
A high wage across the labor market will result in an equilibrium with high unemployment.
Fluctuations in wages will result in movements in unemployment. So will fluctuations in
productivity if the wage does not change to offset the fluctuations.
   What forces determine the wage? At the most fundamental level of economic logic, the
wage bargain is indeterminate over a range. Employer and job-seeker enjoy a prospective
surplus. Any wage between the job-seeker’s reservation wage (the opportunity cost) and
the employer’s reservation wage (productivity) will split the surplus and create a bargain
that makes both parties better off than they would be if they failed to make the match. A
wage-determination mechanism overcomes the indeterminacy by assigning a wage that lies
within the bargaining set.
   Until quite recently, models in the DMP tradition assumed that the parties split the
difference by setting a wage that is a weighted average of the two reservation wages. This
wage-determination rule guarantees that the wage lies within the bargaining set. It turns
out to make the wage highly flexible. For simplicity, I will assume that the weights are the
same and thus equal to 1/2. When productivity falls, the employer’s reservation wage falls
by the same amount. On this account, the wage falls by half the amount of the productivity
decline. But the job-seeker’s reservation wage then falls as well because it depends on
wages at other jobs. In the new equilibrium, the wage falls by essentially the same as
the decline in productivity. The employer’s gain remains close to the same and nothing
much happens to the job-finding rate and thus the unemployment rate. The model based
on the split-the-difference wage rule predicts almost constant unemployment. It leaves all
movements in unemployment, those that occur in recessions and those that occur at lower
frequencies, almost completely unexplained. Shimer (2005) made this important finding
about the standard DMP model.




                                               35
4.2 Sticky wages in the DMP model
Some of the effort to alter the DMP model to equip it to explain the observed volatility of
unemployment has focused on wage determination. A paper of mine, Hall (2005b), makes
the simple observation that a constant wage satisfies the equilibrium condition, provided
that the job-seeker’s reservation wage remains below the constant wage as the economy’s
driving forces change and provided that the employer’s reservation remains above the con-
stant wage. With a constant wage, unemployment is realistically sensitive to changes in
determinants such as productivity. If productivity falls, employers find the payoff to hiring
is lower, because the wage they pay is unchanged. They cut back on recruiting activity, the
job-finding rate falls, and unemployment rises. A decline in productivity of only a fraction
of a percent is enough to raise unemployment by the two percentage points typical of a
recession.
   I call the view that emerges from this line of thought the equilibrium sticky-wage model.
It retains the appealing feature of earlier thinking about sticky wages—the fact that wages
in practice seem to have a good deal of inertia. It eliminates the call-option element of
earlier sticky-wage modeling, with its property of inefficient disequilibrium. Instead, the
new approach describes a full economic equilibrium at all times. No pair of actors faces an
opportunity for a Pareto-improving reallocation. No worker loses a job because the wage
is too high, in a situation where preserving the match job would make both the worker and
the employer better off.
   Although the model in Hall (2005b) embodies stickiness of the real wage, the same
line of thought rationalizes nominal stickiness as well. A rule or process that governs
the evolution of the money wage will result in a full economic equilibrium as long as it
delivers a real wage that is within the range—generally fairly wide—between the worker’s
and employer’s reservation wages. With nominal wage stickiness, monetary policy has
leverage over the real economy. New models of the labor market may help understand why
this leverage seems to be so strong in the short run and why inflation responds only slowly


                                             36
to monetary control.
   The source of unemployment fluctuations in the equilibrium sticky-wage model—and
in essentially all of the models currently emerging from the DMP tradition—is quite dif-
ferent from the source in earlier models. In the call-option models, unemployment rises as
employers discharge workers whose wages exceed the new values of their marginal prod-
ucts. Job loss is the proximate driving force of rising unemployment in a recession. In the
RBC model, employment falls in a recession because incentives have moved against work
in the market and toward time spent outside the market. The DMP models bring in a third
key determinant—the incentives for job-creation.
   In the DMP class of models, employers deploy resources to attract workers. When the
payoff to employers is high—because the value of the marginal product of labor exceeds the
wage by a fair margin—recruiting is enthusiastic and the labor market is tight. Job-seekers
find new jobs quickly and unemployment is low. In frictional markets, such a gap always
exists—it is the employer’s share of the search capital that rewards the eventual match.
In the DMP models, the amount of the search capital and its sharing between employer
and worker are central to the determination of unemployment. Although the canonical
DMP model—Mortensen and Pissarides (1994)—views the employer as the active decision
maker and denies the job-seeker any role in choosing the resources devoted to matching,
more recent models in the DMP class take a more symmetric view.
   Kennan (2005) develops an alternative theory of sticky wages in the DMP framework.
In his model, workers are heterogeneous. The job-seeker’s productivity is known to the
employer but is hidden from the job-seeker. The job-seeker makes a wage bid which the
employer either accepts or rejects; there is no opportunity for further negotiation. The
job-seeker is in the same position as a bidder in a first-price sealed-bid auction. Kennan
makes assumptions that cause the job-seeker to bid a wage that is insensitive to current
conditions. Thus he reaches a sticky-wage property as a derived conclusion rather than as a
bald assumption. Kennan’s model delivers a high sensitivity of unemployment to changes


                                            37
in productivity for the same reasons I just discussed in connection with my model with
arbitrarily sticky wages.
   In a more general version of the model, the job-seeker will make a higher bid when con-
ditions are better, using the general principles of first-price auction theory. Wages will not
be completely sticky. Rather, stickiness will be a feature of certain types of distributions.
Kennan’s model is one of several new models in the DMP class that make outcomes in the
labor market depend on features of the distribution of information among participants in
the market. Tawara (2004) is an example.
   Hall and Milgrom (2005) reconsider the bargaining setup in the standard DMP model.
In that setup, the job-seeker and employer take an all-or-nothing view about the bargain.
Either they make a deal immediately or they make no deal at all. In the latter case, the
worker remains unemployed and the employer loses the benefit for a period of filling the
job. We point out that, in reality, people try again to make a deal, because if they walk
away, they lose the entire surplus. A basic idea of bargaining theory, introduced formally
by John Nash, is that the parties’ outside options or threat points determine the outcome
of bargaining. The standard DMP model links the outcome of the bargain directly to the
unemployment rate and other determinants of the outside options. A more realistic view
is that a job-seeker or employer dissatisfied with a proposed bargain will delay briefly and
make a counter-proposal. Bargaining theory in this framework—Binmore, Rubinstein and
Wolinsky (1986)—shifts the emphasis from values relating to the labor market to values
and costs of delay.
   Our model delivers wage rigidity by disconnecting wage bargaining from conditions
in the labor market. Once a qualified worker and an employer have found each other and
determined that they have a joint surplus, costs of delay, not outside conditions, determine
the bargain they make.
   The wage does respond to productivity, but only half as much as in the standard model.
The result is a strong response of unemployment to productivity and other driving forces.


                                             38
The wage no longer has a strong equilibrating role. If productivity falls, the part of the
surplus accruing to employers falls sharply and they cut back on recruiting effort. The
labor market softens dramatically.

4.3    Unemployment volatility with flexible wages
Though sticky wages make unemployment highly responsive to driving forces, other mech-
anisms may be even more important in understanding unemployment volatility. One key
issue from equation (8) is the volatility of the fraction of people separating from jobs who
become unemployed. Hall (2005c) shows that about half of departures are directly to new
jobs, without intervening unemployment. No theory of labor-market dynamics could pos-
sibly be complete without consideration of this key flow. Plainly, many job-seekers are
recorded as employed, not unemployed.
   Nagypál (2004) combines on-the-job search with a number of other key ingredients to
achieve quite substantial volatility of unemployment. In her model, workers have different
satisfaction levels with their jobs, hidden from employers. Workers hired from unemploy-
ment are less desirable because those who form matches will have a lower average job
satisfaction. They are more likely to leave the job soon because they search for better jobs
while employed. The final key element is a fixed cost of training a new worker. A quit
deprives the employer of the value of the training cost. Nagypál suggests that it is plausible
that the costs from the higher turnover of workers hired from the unemployed considerably
more than offsets the easier recruitment of the unemployed. In Nagypál’s calibration, the
elasticity of the unemployment rate with respect to productivity is about −5. A decline of
productivity of one percent raises the unemployment rate by about 0.3 percentage points.
Thus on-the-job search and heterogeneous job satisfaction could play an important role in
the overall explanation of unemployment volatility.
   Hall (2005a) considers a rather different hidden-information problem in the labor mar-
ket. A job-seeker is either qualified or not qualified for a particular job. She has information


                                              39
about her likelihood of being qualified prior to applying for a job with an employer. That
information is hidden from employers until they test and otherwise evaluate a job appli-
cant. Making an application is costly to the applicant. Job-seekers set a cutoff level of the
likelihood and apply for every job that meets the cutoff. Employers know the fraction of
applicants who are qualified and expand job openings up to the point that the surplus they
enjoy from testing and hiring the average applicant exhausts the testing cost. Job-seekers
are in equilibrium when the anticipated share of the surplus exhausts the application cost.
Once an applicant is tested and found qualified, the job-seeker and employer make the
standard Nash bargain.
   The key determinant of equilibrium in the labor market in the model is the cutoff level of
the qualification likelihood. The equilibrium is fragile because a higher cutoff is beneficial
to both job-seekers and employers. The equilibrium is at the intersection of two curves in
surplus-cutoff value space and the two curves may have almost the same slope. If the cutoff
level is low, the market is in an undesirable equilibrium—employers are receiving large
numbers of applications from unqualified workers. Employers recruit correspondingly less,
so the market is slack. In a slack market, job-seekers set low cutoffs because jobs are hard to
find. When the cutoff level is high, the market equilibrium induces efficient self-selection.
Employers hire enthusiastically because each costly test is likely to yield a new employee
who is qualified. Workers set high cutoffs because jobs are easy to find.
   This description suggests that the equilibrium is indeterminate, which is definitely a
possibility and is not a borderline case. If the equilibrium is determinate and satisfies a
standard stability condition, the equilibrium is fragile—it responds sensitively to driving
forces.
   The driving forces that alter the cutoff qualification level and thus the job-finding rate do
not include productivity. Shifts in productivity alter the employer’s and worker’s surplus
in proportion so the intersection in cutoff-surplus space occurs at the same cutoff level.
The most interesting potential driving force is a property of the probability distribution


                                              40
of the signal that job-seekers receive about the likelihood of qualification for a job. The
property is the relation between the cutoff level adopted by the job-seeker and the average
likelihood of qualification of applicants employing the rule of applying for every job where
the information conveys a likelihood at least as high as the cutoff. The latter controls the
employer’s payoff from testing. The elasticity of the ratio of the two is key. If the elasticity
is one, equilibrium is indeterminate. Small changes in the elasticity are a potent driving
force for large fluctuations in the job-finding rate and other aspects of the labor market.

4.4    Sources of recessions
When asked to describe a particular recession or recessions in general, the practical macroe-
conomist will tell a story that focuses on the collapse of purchases of certain categories of
products—producer and consumer durables. For example, all practical accounts of the re-
cession of 2001 emphasize the huge decline in high-tech investment. In earlier recessions,
declines in home-building were prominent features. On the other hand, more theoretically
inclined macroeconomists tend to take a decline in productivity—or at least a pause in the
normal growth of productivity—as the central driving force. New ideas discussed here may
help bridge this important gap between practical and theoretical macroeconomists.
   Some of the new models emphasize the shapes of distributions of hidden information.
In the self-selection and on-the-job-search models, employers make decisions knowing
the shape of a distribution of job-seeker characteristics, but not the hidden value for a
particular job-seeker. In Kennan’s model, a job-seeker makes a wage demand without
knowing the employer’s reservation wage based on hidden match productivity. This type
of model opens the possibility of subtle driving forces involving changes in the shapes of
those distributions.
   Changes in distributions may provide the needed link between the practical macroe-
conomist’s notion of a recession and the class of theories considered in this paper. The data
show unambiguously that construction, durables, and non-durables manufacturing suffer


                                              41
large employment reductions in recessions, while other industries shrink only slightly or
continue to grow—see Hall (2005c).
   The older models in the DMP tradition do not provide an immediate analysis linking
changes in the industry composition of employment to the aggregate unemployment rate.
The rise in unemployment in a recession is the result of diminished job-creation among
employers in general. If recessions were periods of generally higher re-allocation of labor,
the traditional DMP model would predict rising recruiting effort in recessions, as employers
in other industries took advantage of the availability of workers released from shrinking
industries. But the data show amazing declines in recruiting effort in recessions—help-
wanted advertising usually falls in half from peak to trough.
   The new additions to the DMP class of models may offer some hope of connecting
declines in manufacturing and construction to the dramatic rise in unemployment that ac-
companies every recession. For example, the events leading to a large decline in employ-
ment in durables might shift the economy from the favorable equilibrium described in the
self-selection model to the unfavorable one. In the favorable equilibrium, the applicants
for a job opening are largely people who know they are qualified. Employers waste few
resources screening out unsuitable applicants. They are correspondingly enthusiastic about
creating jobs, so the market is tight. A subtle change in the distribution of the signal that
workers receive about their likelihood of qualification can move the equilibrium perversely.
Applicants, finding it difficult to locate any job, apply for jobs where they are less likely to
be qualified. Employers are overwhelmed by applicants and dissipate resources screening
out the unqualified ones. The market becomes slack, with high unemployment.
   In Kennan’s model, the shape of the distribution of match productivity, a variable ob-
served only by the employer, has two key roles. Job-seekers know the distribution but not
the realization, so they solve a wage-bidding problem defined by the distribution. Firms
earn an informational rent on the difference between the productivity realization and the
wage bid. Shifts in the distribution induced by changes in the composition of employment


                                              42
might result in changes in the rent.
    The new research offers some new mechanisms that may advance understanding of
both the business cycle and the important sub-cyclical movements of unemployment and
other key variables. Notice that none of the driving forces of unemployment fluctuations
discussed here are explicitly transitory. They do not disappear after firms and workers get
around to changing prices and wages. They can explain the highly persistent sub-cyclical
movements that elude the call-option sticky-price model and the neoclassical model.
    My purpose here is to advocate the new models as useful additions to our toolbox of
macro fluctuation studies. I do not suggest that we can dispense with the call-option sticky-
price model. In addition, all macroeconomists should be aware of the importance of fluc-
tuations in productivity and exogenous spending, operating through neoclassical channels,
in fluctuations at every frequency.

4.5    *-Variables in future models
Although the idea of *-variables as the equilibrium of a friction-free economy does not
seem to be useful, either in theory or in practice, something like *-variables may be im-
plicit in future macro models. Dynamic systems often have representations in terms of
adjustment processes in which current values of variables adjust toward *-values. My re-
marks in this paper are not intended as a criticism of that type of representation. Rather,
I believe that these representations depend critically on the assumptions of the underlying
model. For example, the assumption that sellers grant call options to buyers is central to
the standard sticky-price model in use today. New models based on different and perhaps
more realistic assumptions have different representations. Further, and most important, all
models imply that the *-variables are in constant motion and extraordinarily difficult to
infer in real time.




                                             43
5 Modeling Real Returns
Research has been active in developing models that attempt to match the puzzling facts
about real returns. The failures of the standard model of the joint behavior of real returns
and consumption growth are well known.
   Much of the research has focused on basic aspects of the failure of the standard model.
These are the high average return earned in the stock market and the low average return for
treasury bills. The standard model sees both of these investments are having low financial
risk—their payoffs are not systematically low during bad times, as signaled by low con-
sumption. The reason is that consumption is not terribly volatile. It grows a bit in most
years and shrinks only in the rare severe recession. Consumption has not declined, year
over year, in the past 25 years and declined only twice, in 1973-1974 and 1979-1980, since
1948. Research that measures risk by consumption growth in the past 50 years finds little
demand for insurance against risk and little aversion to risky assets, such as stocks, because
bad times have not occurred. It is a paradox that stocks have returned so much more over
that period than treasury bills, because investors should not care about the variability of
returns to stocks.
   One idea proposed by many authors over the years is that investors apply a subjective
probability distribution about future consumption that puts some weight on true disasters,
even though none has occurred in our lifetimes. A simple version is that people know that
consumption fell by 20 percent from 1929 to 1933. Even after 50 years of smooth sailing,
investors might put some probability on a repetition of the disaster and know as well that,
far from providing insurance against the disaster, the stock market yielded negative returns
over the same period. But this explains only a small fraction of the gap between stock
and treasury bill returns. Probability distributions that permit consumption to fall to a
billionth of its current value are capable of explaining the gap. Whatever event has this
effect must leave the federal government able to meet its treasury-bill obligations, else the
equity premium would not prevail.

                                             44
   Though thousands of papers have tried to explain the equity premium and hundreds
more appear every year, it remains a puzzle as far as I am concerned. The answer may lie
in non-standard or behavioral principles, though I am not aware of any convincing research
on this point to date.
   Other aspects of returns remain equally puzzling. First, the volatility of financial re-
turns is much higher than models predict. One of the important assets in equation (5) is
productive capital—plant and equipment. Figures 7 and 8 show that the return to capital,
measured either as a residual or as the marginal product of the Cobb-Douglas technology, is
quite smooth. I have already noted that consumption growth is smooth. The non-financial
variables obey the equation quite well. Further, the general-equilibrium model I discussed
earlier, in Section 2.2, can match the volatility of the return to capital and consumption
growth.
   Financial returns are quite another matter. The volatility of the real return to treasury
bills should be unambiguously lower than the volatility of capital, according to the standard
model. Markets determine the nominal bill rate in advance—the only expectation error
arises from small errors in forming expectations in inflation over the coming year. But, in
fact, Figure 6 shows that the treasury bill rate is rather more volatile than either measure
of the return to capital. Moreover, while the average level of the return to capital remains
roughly constant, the real treasury-bill rate is low for long periods and then high for long
periods. Its low-frequency movements are paradoxical in the light of the standard model.
This topic has attracted almost no research.
   The volatility of the return to debt is nothing compared to the volatility of the stock
market. Shiller (1981) showed that the stock market varies far too much to fit a model
in which investors discount future dividends at a constant rate. Though many of us have
suspected ever since that this result supports the hypothesis of excess volatility, subsequent
commentary made it clear that variations in discount rates need to be brought into the anal-
ysis. Working this out takes us back to equation (5). Excess volatility of the stock market


                                               45
shows up as movements of stock-market returns that are inconsistent with the restrictions in
that equation. Although research has consistently rejected those restrictions, the potential
sources of the rejections are numerous. Irrational investors are only one. Variation over
time in the ki parameters is an explanation potentially consistent with standard ideas about
rationality.
    A totally different line of attack suggests excess volatility of financial markets. By
buying a suitable portfolio of equity and debt claims on a corporation, an investor can
synthesize ownership of a share of the corporation’s real assets. The return to the portfolio
should be the same, period by period, as the return to those assets. In fact, the return to the
financial portfolio differs wildly from the return to underlying corporate assets, both in its
year-to-year movements and in its volatility. The financial claim on the real assets leads a
completely separate life from the assets themselves, both in terms of levels of value and in
terms of annual returns.
    In some ways, the most telling evidence of the failure of our basic ideas about finan-
cial markets is the difference between the value of corporations in financial markets and
the apparent value of the capital the corporations own. Figure 11, taken from Hall (2001),
shows the ratio of the market value of all financial claims (equity and debt outstanding net
of equity and debt held) to the estimated value of the business assets of U.S. non-financial
corporations. This measure is Tobin’s q. The ratio has huge sub-cyclical movements that
do not fit any simple theory. Tobin offered the hypothesis that q fluctuates because corpora-
tions earn rents on capital made temporarily scarce or plentiful by adjustment costs. But the
costs implied by the magnitude and persistence in the figure are far beyond the plausible.
My work suggested the corporations were accumulating intangibles, which, if added to the
denominator of q, would result in a measure that stayed closer to its logical value of one.
But this view fails to explain the period from the early 1970s to the late 1980s when q was
so far below one.




                                              46
 3.5



 3.0



 2.5



 2.0



 1.5



 1.0



 0.5



 0.0
       1949 1952 1955 1959 1962 1965 1968 1972 1975 1978 1981 1985 1988 1991 1994 1998


Figure 11. Ratio of the Market Value of Corporations to the Value of Corporate
Assets (Tobin’s q)




                                              47
6 Concluding Remarks
Discussions of practical macroeconomics, especially those relating to monetary policy, rely
heavily on three concepts: potential GDP, the natural rate of unemployment, and the nor-
mal real interest rate. To measure potential GDP, practitioners use a statistical smoothing
approach, such as the Hodrick-Prescott filter, or a neoclassical growth model. The smooth-
ing approach makes little sense in view of the evidence that a fully neoclassical economy,
buffeted by changing rates of productivity growth and changing levels of exogenous spend-
ing, does not evolve at all smoothly. In fact, the evidence shows that most of the variation
in real GDP growth over short and medium horizons arises from productivity growth. The
approach based on a neoclassical growth model enters the thicket of controversy over the
proper specification of a real business-cycle model. Potential GDP is not a useful guide to
making monetary policy.
   The U.S. unemployment rate is a stationary variable. In that respect, the idea of a nat-
ural rate is on firmer ground than is the idea of potential GDP. But the natural rate cannot
be a constant, else one would be required to believe that the economy spends long periods,
such as the 1970s and 1980s, with unemployment above the natural rate, and other long
periods below the natural rate. Because the neoclassical model has zero unemployment,
the model provides no guidance about variations in the natural rate. Modern theories of
unemployment say nothing about the natural rate either—they regard every observed level
of unemployment, whether in a recession, boom, or normal period, as a full economic equi-
librium. These theories are unitary. They do not separate unemployment into equilibrium
and cyclical components. Again, the natural unemployment rate is not a useful concept in
the execution of monetary policy.
   New thinking about unemployment departs from the framework in Friedman (1968), in
that Friedman distinguished between the natural rate and the actual rate of unemployment.
He viewed the natural rate as varying over time, based on “...the actual structural charac-
teristics of the labor and commodity markets, including market imperfections, stochastic

                                            48
variability in demands and supplies, the cost of gathering information about job vacancies
and labor availabilities, the costs of mobility, and so on” (p. 8). The new theories see those
forces as determining the actual unemployment rate. Nothing in new thinking has shaken
Friedman’s basic message, however, that unemployment is invariant to the monetary policy
regime. In that sense, natural-rate theory is thoroughly embedded in all modern thought.
   The situation with respect to the real interest rate is similar. Wicksell’s natural or normal
interest rate, as distinguished from the actual market rate, is not a feature of modern macro-
finance models. Each of the many real interest rates in the economy moves differently—
they do not obey even the relatively unrestrictive principles of basic finance models. We
are not equipped to judge when monetary policy is neutral in terms of interest rates.
   None of these conclusions stands in the way of intelligent monetary policy-making.
Under Alan Greenspan’s stewardship, the U.S. has achieved remarkably low levels of in-
flation and inflation volatility, despite the lack of real reference points. We do not need
to know the GDP gap, the unemployment gap, or the neutral real interest rate, to keep the
price level near constancy.




                                              49
References
Barro, Robert J., “Long-Term Contracting, Sticky Prices, and Monetary Policy,” Journal
    of Monetary Economics, July 1977, 3 (3), pp. 305–316.

Binmore, Ken, Ariel Rubinstein, and Asher Wolinsky, “The Nash Bargaining Solution
    in Economic Modeling,” RAND Journal of Economics, Summer 1986, 17 (2), pp.
    176–188.

Diamond, Peter A., “Aggregate Demand Management in Search Equilibrium,” Journal of
    Political Economy, October 1982, 90 (5), pp. 881–894.

Friedman, Milton, “The Role of Monetary Policy,” American Economic Review, 1968, 58
    (1), pp. 1–17.

Hall, Robert E., “The Stock Market and Capital Accumulation,” American Economic Re-
    view, December 2001, 91, 1185–1202.

     , “Corporate Earnings Track the Competitive Benchmark,” December 2003. NBER
    Working Paper 10150.

     , “The Amplification of Unemployment Fluctuations through Self-Selection,” 2005.
    NBER Working Paper 11186.

    , “Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage Stickiness,” American Economic
    Review, March 2005, 95 (1), 50–65.

    , “Job Loss, Job Finding, and Unemployment in the U.S. Economy over the Past Fifty
    Years,” NBER Macro Annual, 2005. Forthcoming.

     , “The Labor Market and Macro Volatility: A Nonstationary General-Equilibrium
    Analysis,” June 2005. Hoover Institution, Stanford University.


                                          50
     and Paul R. Milgrom, “The Limited Influence of Unemployment on the Wage Bar-
    gain,” February 2005. NBER Working Paper 11245.

Hansen, Lars Peter and Kenneth J Singleton, “Stochastic Consumption, Risk Aversion,
    and the Temporal Behavior of Asset Returns,” Journal of Political Economy, 1983,
    91 (2), 249–65.

Kennan, John, “Private Information, Wage Bargaining, and Employment Fluctuations,”
    May 2005. Department of Economics, University of Wisconsin.

Kydland, Finn and Edward C. Prescott, “Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations,”
    Econometrica, November 1982, 50 (00), 1345–1370.

Lucas, Robert E., “Expectations and the Neutrality of Money,” Journal of Economic The-
    ory, April 1972, 4 (2), pp. 103–124.

Mortensen, Dale T., “Property Rights and Efficiency in Mating, Racing, and Related
    Games,” American Economic Review, 1982, 72 (5), pp. 968–979.

      and Christopher Pissarides, “Job Creation and Job Destruction in the Theory of
    Unemployment,” Review of Economic Studies, 1994, 61 (0), pp. 397–415.

Nagypál, Éva, “Worker Reallocation over the Business Cycle: The Importance of Job-to-
    Job Transitions, Part 2: Theory,” August 2004. Department of Economics, North-
    western University.

Orphanides, Athanasios and Simon van Norden, “The Unreliability of Output-Gap Esti-
    mates in Real Time,” Review of Economics and Statistics, November 2002, 84 (41),
    569583.

Pissarides, Christopher, “Short-Run Equilibrium Dynamics of Unemployment, Vacancies,
    and Real Wages,” American Economic Review, 1985, 75 (4), pp. 676–690.


                                           51
Shiller, Robert J., “Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to be Justified by Subsequent Changes
    in Dividends?,” American Economic Review, June 1981, 71 (3), 421436.

Shimer, Robert, “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Vacancies,”
    American Economic Review, March 2005, 95 (1), 25–49.

Staiger, Douglas, James H. Stock, and Mark W. Watson, “How Precise Are Estimates of
    the Natural Rate of Unemployment,” in Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer,
    eds., Reducing Inflation: Motivation and Strategy, Chicago: University of Chicago
    Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research, 1997, pp. 195–246.

Tawara, Norikazu, “A DMP Model with Asymmetric Information,” August 2004. Depart-
    ments of Economics, University of Chicago.

Woodford, Michael, Interest and Prices, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2003.




                                          52
