NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHAT UNDERMINES AID’S IMPACT ON GROWTH?
Raghuram G. Rajan
Arvind Subramanian
Working Paper 11657
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11657
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2005

We are grateful to Simon Johnson for many useful conversations, and for helpful comments from Chris
Adam, Andy Berg, Abdoulaye Bio-Tchane, Aleš Bulí , Nancy Birdsall, Francois Bourguignon, Ajay
Chhibber, Michael Clemens, Tito Cordella, Shanta Devarajan, Alan Gelb, Ed Glaeser, Tim Harford, John
Hicklin, Nurul Islam, Aart Kraay, Pravin Krishna, Anne Krueger, Michael Nowak, Jonathan Ostry,
Alessandro Prati, Lant Pritchett, Rodney Ramcharan, Dani Rodrik, David Roodman, Shankar Satyanath, T.N.
Srinivasan, Quy Toan-Do, Thierry Tressel, Alan Winters, and participants at the Center for Global
Development Seminar in Washington D.C., and at seminars at Harvard and George Mason Universities.
Manzoor Gill, Naomi Griffin, and Ioannis Tokatlidis provided superb research assistance. This paper reflects
the authors'views and not necessarily those of the International Monetary Fund, its management, or its
Board. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Raghuram G. Rajan and Arvind Subramanian. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

What Undermines Aid’s Impact on Growth?
Raghuram G. Rajan and Arvind Subramanian
NBER Working Paper No. 11657
September 2005, Revised July 2006
JEL No. 1, 4
ABSTRACT

We examine one of the most important and intriguing puzzles in economics: why it is so hard to find
a robust effect of aid on the long-term growth of poor countries, even those with good policies. We
look for a possible offset to the beneficial effects of aid, using a methodology that exploits both
cross-country and within-country variation. We find that aid inflows have systematic adverse effects
on a country'
s competitiveness, as reflected in a decline in the share of labor intensive and tradable
industries in the manufacturing sector. We find evidence suggesting that these effects stem from the
real exchange rate overvaluation caused by aid inflows. By contrast, private-to-private flows like
remittances do not seem to create these adverse effects. We offer an explanation why and conclude
with a discussion of the policy implications of these findings.

Raghuram Rajan
International Monetary Fund
Research Department, Rm 10-700
700 19th Street, N.W.
Washington, DC 20431
and NBER
rrajan@imf.org
Arvind Subramanian
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street NW
Washington, DC 20431
asubramanian@imf.org

-1I. INTRODUCTION
Why is there little robust evidence that foreign aid significantly enhances the
economic growth of poor countries? 1 For a while it appeared that we had learnt the answer;
aid is frittered away by some recipient countries through corruption and mismanagement. So
while on average aid does not seem to have a positive impact on growth, in countries with
good policies it does (see Burnside and Dollar (2000)). Recently, however, a number of
studies question this explanation.2 These studies suggest that even in countries with good
policies, there is no robust association between aid and growth. The search for an alternative
explanation is becoming immensely important as industrial countries are being exhorted to
increase their aid budgets in order to help developing countries achieve the Millennium
Development Goals.
What then could be the explanation? It may well be that resources are not everything.
While schools may require textbooks or classrooms, they may also need teachers to show up
regularly. By focusing on easy-to-provide resources, aid advocates may miss the harder-toprovide incentives that are critical (see Banerjee et. al., (2004) for examples in relation to
education, Kremer et. al. (2004) for health-related interventions, and World Bank (2004) for
illustrations of this point based on a wide variety of experiences in the developing world).
While the construction of classrooms may spur economic activity in the short run, in the long
run without dedicated teachers in the classroom the critical impetus that good education

1

There is a voluminous literature on aid effectiveness. Important work, in addition to that
cited in the text includes Alesina and Weder (2000), Bauer (1971), Collier and Dollar (2002),
Dalgaard, Hansen, and Tarp (2004), Friedman (1958), Hansen and Tarp (2000), Svensson
(2003), and World Bank (1998). Recently, Clemens, Radelet, and Bhavnani (2004) make the
case that the some kinds of aid is indeed effective over short horizons, though Subramanian
and Kumar (2005) question the findings and their robustness.
2
See, for example, Easterly (2003), Easterly, Levine, and Roodman (2004), Hansen and Tarp
(2001), Roodman (2004), and Rajan and Subramanian (2005).

-2provides to growth will be missing. Nevertheless, that resources are not everything does not
imply they are nothing. What offsets the undoubted benefits of additional resource flows to a
resource-poor country? Also, if program design and incentive design are key, why do
countries with better policies and governance not seem to use aid any better?
A second explanation is that aid has detrimental long-term effects. Even though aid
resources are initially additional to the budget, eventually the country becomes more lax on
raising tax revenues, and more aid is necessary just to keep the country on even keel. If that
aid is not forthcoming, and if the country’s tax raising mechanisms have atrophied, all the
short-term beneficial effects of aid may dissipate over the long run as it creates a culture of
dependency (see Azam, Devarajan, and O’Connell, 1997 and Adam and O’Connell, 1999). A
related explanation is that by expanding a government’s resource envelope, aid relaxes its
need to explain its actions to citizens, which may have a corrupting influence even on the
best intentioned of governments in the long run. In sum, aid may not have discernible
positive effects in the long run because it weakens institutions, and this offsets any positive
effect it may have in the short run (Knack (2001) and Brautigam and Knack (2004)).
We want to focus on a third possible explanation though. To motivate that
explanation, examine Figure 1. We plot the log of the manufacturing to GDP ratio in a
country against the log of the ratio of aid received to GDP for that country for two separate
dates (the late 1990s and the early 1980s, separated by about 15 years), after correcting for
the country’s per capita PPP GDP, per capita PPP GDP squared, and country and time fixed

-3effects.3 As the figure suggests, the more aid a country has received, the smaller its share of
manufacturing. The coefficient estimate suggests that a 1 percentage point increase in the
ratio of aid-to-GDP is associated with a reduced share of manufacturing in total GDP of
about 0.2-0.3 percentage points.4
Without further analysis, we do not know if this relationship is causal – though the
simple argument for reverse causality that as a country gets poorer (and manufacturing
shrinks) it gets more aid is unlikely to be the entire explanation because we correct for per
capita income. Yet the relationship is striking enough to warrant further analysis. Indeed, if
causal, the relationship highlighted by the chart offers an explanation for why aid may not
have led to substantial growth. As pointed out by Jones and Olken (2006), and Johnson,
Ostry, and Subramanian (2006), virtually all countries that have had a sustained period of
growth in the post-war period have seen a large increase in their share of manufacturing and
manufacturing exports.
One reason manufacturing may be so important for growth is that manufacturing is
tradable. Not only could tradable sectors be the source of productivity improvements or
learning, these industries, which by necessity are on the efficiency frontier, could also be a
3

The residuals are obtained in a panel regression where the dependent variable is log of the
ratio of the share of value added in manufacturing to GDP for a country (at two dates, the late
1990s and the early 1980s, separated by about 15 years), and the explanatory variables are
the country’s per capita GDP, per capita GDP squared (to allow for the U-shaped relationship
postulated by Kuznets), and fixed effects for the country and the time period. All variables
are averages for the period 1980-85 and 1995-2000, respectively. We focus on the period
after 1980 because the coverage of the World Bank data on sectoral output increases
substantially and also because the core analysis in the paper below is on the 1980s and 1990s.
The sample was chosen according to the same criteria as that used for our core sample,
namely, comprising countries that received aid to GDP ratio greater than 1 percent or are low
income countries. The relationship depicted in the graph is robust to changes in samples and
to additional controls such as the terms of trade.
4

Because we include fixed effects, the association between aid and manufacturing depicted
in the chart is a temporal one, that is, within countries over time rather than one between
countries.

-4strong political force pushing for sensible government policy to ensure their continued
competitiveness. Their shrinkage could have wider repercussions. But why might more aid
be associated with a smaller share for manufacturing? The explanation cannot be that the
share of agriculture is larger: as Figure 2 suggests, we obtain a similar negative relationship
when we plot the log of the ratio of manufacturing share to the share of services against the
log of aid to GDP after similar corrections. This then suggests the problem may lie with the
very tradability of manufacturing. If aid reduces competitiveness, then countries that receive
more aid would have a lower share of (tradable) manufacturing even relative to (nontradable) services, and this could lead to lower growth.
Indeed a well-developed theoretical literature emphasizes the macroeconomic effect
on a country’s competitiveness of large windfalls of resources and its associated spending
(also referred to in the literature as “Dutch Disease”—see Krugman (1987), Corden and
Neary (1982), van Wijnbergen (1986), and Yano and Nugent (1999) for theoretical
treatments). When resources are spent on the non-traded sector, rather than on imports, it
could raise the country’s real exchange rate in the short run and make it harder for the
country to export. If aid does not increase the supply of non-traded goods, the country’s real
exchange rate could be permanently higher, leading to a long-run loss of competitiveness
proportional to the aid received and spent.
“Dutch Disease” offers a possible explanation of the striking relationships in the
charts and, more generally, a reason why it has been so hard to find a positive effect of aid on
growth. Nevertheless, the theory suggests the importance of aid-induced “Dutch Disease” is
likely to be an empirical question, with even the sign of the effect of aid on the real exchange
rate, and thus on competitiveness, ambiguous.

-5Cross-country studies have not offered compelling evidence, one way or the other, on
whether the channel is meaningful (see Adam (2005) for a comprehensive survey). Given
that significant effort in the fight against poverty in coming years will be devoted to
enhancing aid flows, it is of immense practical importance to attempt more direct tests of the
phenomenon. This paper attempts to set the evidence on firmer footing, so that we can be
better informed about how to manage aid.
There are three notable differences between our approach and that of prior empirical
work. First, because Dutch Disease will have effects on the relative growth rates of tradable
versus non-tradable industries in a country, we examine the within-country cross-industry
variation in growth to get a more powerful test of the phenomenon. Previous studies have
been at the cross-country level. By absorbing country specific variation in country indicators,
we go some way in addressing the specification problem that plagues standard cross-country
regressions – that some omitted country-specific variable might explain the observed
correlation. We devote considerable effort to establishing the robustness of these results.
Second, we provide direct and indirect evidence on the intermediate channels from
aid to exchange rates and from exchange rates to relative industry growth rates. In other
words, we seek to establish that aid is the deep determinant, while identifying exchange rates
as the proximate transmission mechanism.
Third, countries may get more aid if they perform particularly badly so aid is clearly
endogenous to growth (though less clearly linked to relative industry growth rates). We
address the issue of endogeneity by using plausibly exogenous instruments for aid.
To preview our results, we find strong evidence that aid undermines the
competitiveness of the tradable sectors. In particular, in countries that receive more aid,
manufacturing industries that are likely to be more affected by aid-induced Dutch Disease,
namely labor-intensive and exportable industries, grow slower than manufacturing industries

-6that are less likely to be affected. Furthermore, as suggested by the figures above and which
we show more formally below, to the extent that aggregate manufacturing itself is more
tradable than services, we find the growth of value added in manufacturing is slower in
countries that get more aid.
If indeed the channel is through aid’s effect on real exchange rates, we should see
that: (1) aid does affect exchange rates and leads to overvaluation in our sample; (2) in
countries with either a greater overvaluation of the real exchange rate or with a greater aidrelated component of overvaluation, more exposed industries grow relatively more slowly;
(3) the independent effect of aid is somewhat attenuated when we include overvaluation.
Indeed, this is what we see.
In sum, our work provides one reason why aid does not seem to help growth even in
countries with relatively good policies -- the loss of competitiveness as aid pours in, and the
consequent shrinkage of the manufacturing sector. This suggests that as aid flows ramp up,
policymakers should pay particular attention to the macroeconomic management of aid
inflows, to ensuring effective expenditures, and to the capacity of economies to absorb aid, if
the world is not to be disappointed once again in the fight against poverty.
This paper is structured as follows. In section II, we outline our empirical strategy. In
section III, we present our main results on the effect of aid on the relative growth of sectors
whose competitiveness is most likely to be adversely hit, and establish its robustness. In
section IV, we provide evidence that exchange rate overvaluation is the proximate channel
through which aid has an effect. In section V, we show that the effect of aid is to depress the
growth of the manufacturing sector and not just a relative effect within it. In section VI, we
discuss the relevant literature on aid and Dutch disease and contrast our approach with it. In
section VII, we offer some concluding remarks.

-7II. AID AND GROWTH: A CHANNEL
A. Theory
We focus on an important reason why aid could hurt growth – that it reduces the
competitiveness of the traded goods sector and results in a re-allocation of resources away
from it and towards the non-traded sector. There are at least two possible channels through
which this might work, depending largely on the exchange rate regime. First, aid inflows
could push up the price of some critical resources that are common to both the traded and
non-traded goods sectors. For example, aid could be spent on fees to contractors, as well as
salaries to engineers, doctors, teachers, civil servants, and aid administrators. Because the
non-traded goods sector (or the social sector) does not have external competition, it can raise
output prices to compensate for the higher wages. But if the tradable sector competes in the
same pool for its managers and foremen, then this sector whose output prices are fixed by
foreign competition will lose competitiveness and profitability.
The second channel is that in a flexible exchange regime, aid inflows may also push
up the nominal exchange rate (for example when the central bank sells the aid inflows in the
domestic foreign exchange market), rendering the traded goods sector uncompetitive if
wages in that sector do not adjust downwards. These two effects are not mutually
exclusive—they lead to the same ultimate effect of a real exchange rate appreciation.
Another way of putting it is that in either case, the traded sector becomes uncompetitive and
shrinks, but whether this happens in a more or less inflationary environment for wages and
prices depends on the exchange rate regime.
Aid inflows do not make these effects inevitable. The more aid is spent on traded
goods or factors (imported capital goods, foreign consultants) and on factors that are not in
limited supply (unskilled labor), the more the supply of factors and non-traded goods respond
to aid inflows, and the more domestic fiscal contraction takes place, the less likely will wages

-8and prices be bid up to an excessive degree and the less likely will the real exchange rate
appreciate (see Berg et al. (2005)). Thus whether aid reduces competitiveness by pushing up
the real exchange rate is indeed an empirical question.
The following schematic representation of the effects of aid on prices and quantities
will make clear the hypothesis in this paper.
A

Foreign
aid

Decline in
relative share
of tradables;
and/or
absolute
decline in
tradables

Real exchange rate
appreciation (i.e.
increase in relative
price of
nontradables)
B

C

Decline in
aggregate
growth

D

Simply put, we hypothesize a relationship from aid to the growth of the tradable
sector (channel A) which in turn could have adverse consequences for long-run aggregate
growth (channel D). Channel A can in turn be broken down to two mediating channels: from
aid to exchange rates (B) and from exchange rates to the growth of the tradable sector (C).
This paper will mainly be devoted to channels A, B, and C. We will not spend much
time on channel D, taking as largely given the fact that growth in the tradable sector is a
close correlate, if not a prerequisite, of overall growth.
B. Empirical Strategy
We use the methodology in Rajan and Zingales (1998) to test the hypothesis that aid
might reduce the competitiveness of the traded goods sector. They suggest that one way to
check whether a channel is at work is to see whether industries that might be most affected
by a channel grow differentially (faster or slower depending on the nature of the effect) in
countries where that channel is likely to be more operative. The industry characteristic we are
interested in is the degree to which an industry’s competitive position is affected by

-9overvaluation, the channel is real exchange rate overvaluation, and countries that get more
aid are likely to be the ones where the channel is most operative. The estimation strategy is
then to run regressions of the form:
Growthij = Constant + 1.....m*Country Indicators + m+1....n* Industry Indicators +
n+1*(Industry i’s share of manufacturing in country j in the initial period) +
(Aid to country j* Sensitivity of industry i to Dutch Disease) + ij

(1)

where Growthij is the annual average rate of growth of value added of industry i in
country j over a ten-year period, obtained by normalizing the growth in nominal value added
by the GDP deflator;

1.....m

are the coefficients of the country fixed effects;

coefficients of the industry fixed effects;

n+1 is

m+1....n

are the

the coefficient of the initial period share of

industry i in total value added in country j (which controls for convergence-type effects); Aid
to country j is the average aid to GDP ratio for that country over the sample period. The
coefficient of interest for us is . It captures an interaction between a country-specific aid
variable and an industry’s sensitivity to the debilitating effects of Dutch Disease. We posit
that countries that receive more aid should see a more negative impact in industrial sectors
that are more sensitive, so that we would expect the coefficient

to be negative.

The chief advantage of this strategy is that by controlling for country and industry
fixed effects, the problem of omitted variables bias or model specification, which seriously
afflicts cross-country regressions, is diminished. Essentially, we are making predictions
about within-country differences between industries based on an interaction between a
country and industry characteristic. Moreover, because we focus on differences between
manufacturing industries (rather than between, say, manufacturing and services industries),
we can rule out factors that would keep manufacturing underdeveloped as explanations of
our results – for these factors should not affect the differences between manufacturing
industries.

- 10 C. Implementing the Strategy
However, this focus on manufacturing only (driven also by data availability) comes at
a cost. The manufacturing sector, by and large, is tradable. So how do we develop a proxy for
the sensitivity of an industry to Dutch disease?
One way forward is to note that if Dutch disease “works” through an increase in real
wages, then industries that have relatively higher labor costs should be affected more. We
measure labor costs (which we can also call labor-intensity) as the average across the
countries in our sample of the share of labor compensation to value-added in each industry.
As can be seen in Appendix Table 1c, wearing apparel, printing and publishing, and
machinery (except electrical) score high on labor intensity.
Another approach is to recognize that in a poor developing country, the lack of
competitiveness is likely to show up to a greater extent in exports, than in import-competing
industries. This is in part because, during the time-period under study, government action to
support import-competing industries if the exchange rate were overvalued (for example,
through import tariffs and non-tariff barriers) was easier for poor governments than actions to
support exporting industries (for example, cash or tax subsidies). Our proxy for exportability
is an indicator variable for each industry, which takes the value 1 if the industry has a ratio of
exports to value added (averaged across all countries in the sample) greater than the median
across industries.5 The indicator takes the value zero otherwise. We call this indicator
“exportability.”6
Of course, not all exports are likely to be subject to Dutch Disease. In particular,
exports of extractable resources where labor intensity is low are unlikely to be affected by an
5
6

We obtained these data from Nicita and Olarrega (2001).

By discretizing our index we lose some information, but we also eliminate noise in
classification. We also stay closer to the notion that either a product is exportable or it is not.

- 11 overvalued real exchange rate. Fortunately, by focusing on manufacturing, we largely
exclude such industries. Nevertheless, we also examine if the results are robust to our
dropping “Petroleum refineries” and “Misc. petroleum and coal products”, two industries that
have high exportability, low labor intensity, and are based on extractable resources.
In sum, we will use “labor intensity” as our primary measure of the degree of
exposure of industries to Dutch Disease and “exportability” as an alternative which will
allow us to check robustness. The correlation between the labor-intensity and exportability is
0.34, suggesting that they are capturing similar things. Indeed, insofar as developing
countries have a comparative advantage in labor-intensive sectors, our measure of laborintensity is also likely to be a proxy for exportables. But they are not exactly the same—for
instance, printing and publishing which has high labor intensity has low exportability.
Because we examine growth differentials between industries within countries, the
results are less sensitive to the rationale for why aid is given. For example, even if aid is
given only to countries that display poor growth, inter-industry growth differentials should
not be seriously affected. However, suppose low growth is primarily because countries have
overvalued exchange rates, and aid is systematically given to countries that have more
overvalued exchange rates. In this case, we might be attributing to aid what is actually driven
by trade and exchange rate policies. One way to address this is to correct directly for policy,
which we do. Another is through instrumentation, which allows us to disentangle the
direction of causality.

- 12 D. Instrumentation Strategy
We instrument for aid based on strategic, historic, and cultural links between donor
and recipient.7 We exploit the fact that aid is often extended for non-economic reasons. Our
main identification assumption is that non-economically-motivated aid is unlikely to be
driven by economic outcomes. This notion is far from new. A number of papers have used
this to explain aid flows (Alesina and Dollar, 2001; and Barro and Lee, 2004). But we are not
aware of papers that have taken the obvious next step of exploiting it to systematically
develop instruments for aid which could be used in aid-growth analyses.
We derive our aid instruments along the lines of Frankel and Romer (1999). Our
basic model is as follows. Once a donor d decides on a total quantum of aid, it allocates it to
a recipient r using the following equation:

θ drt = β '
Ydrt + υ drt
= β 0 + β1 STRATdrt + β 2 USISEGdrt + β 3 COMCOLdr + β 4 COMCOLUKdr + β 5COMCOLFRAdr
+ β 6COMCOLSPAdr + β 7COMCOLPORdr + β 8CURCOLdrt + β 9COMLANGdr + υ drt
(1)
where θ drt is the share of donor country d’s aid allocated to recipient r in year t, and Y is the
vector of explanatory variables that capture different (non-economic) aspects of donorrecipient relationships.8 The variables include: STRAT takes on a value of 1 if the donor and
recipient are common members of, or signatories to, an Entente or Alliance in any given time

7

Given the rationale for instrumenting, all we need are predetermined instruments that
correlate with aid but not with a country’s policies. We do not need to ensure our instruments
are uncorrelated with aggregate growth.
8

In order to estimate equation 1, we need to compute the share of a country’s total (i.e.
bilateral and multilateral) aid that goes to any particular recipient. To do this, we obtain a
decomposition of multilateral aid into its underlying bilateral constituents. The OECD DAC
database contains a series called “imputed” bilateral aid, which does precisely this.

- 13 period;9 USISEG takes on a value of 1 for US-Egypt and US-Israel observations after the
Camp David agreement; COMCOL a value of one if the recipient was ever a colony of the
donor, COMCOLUK, COMCOLFRA, COMCOLSPA, and COMCOLPOR refer in turn to
colonial relationships involving respectively the U.K. France, Spain and Portugal); CURCOL
a value of one if there is a contemporaneous colonial relationship between donor and
recipient; and COMLANG is a dummy that takes a value of one if the donor and recipient
share a common language. A key identifying assumption is that the right hand side variables
proxy for reasons for giving aid that are uncorrelated with the recipient country’s economic
performance. The data to estimate these equations are discussed in Appendix 1.10
The predicted share θˆdrt = β '
Ydrt (where Y are the regressors in matrix notation) is

then used to calculate the (instrumented) aid to GDP ratio received by country r in year t as
follows:
Aˆ rt =

GDPdt Adt .θˆdrt
d

GDPrt

(2)

where GDPdt is the GDP of the donor country d in dollars in year t and Adt is the Aid to GDP
ratio for that donor country in that year. Aˆ rt averaged over the relevant period will be the

9

In the Correlates of War database from which these data are obtained, there are 4 types of
alliances: a common alliance; a defense alliance; a neutrality or non-aggression alliance; and
an entente alliance. We use the last as it seems the most consistent with the strategic ties we
are interested in.
10

So, our construction of instruments starts from the bilateral (donor-recipient) relationship
and aggregates up. This is in contrast to the literature that pick instruments directly at the
level of the recipient country.

- 14 instrument we use in much of the paper for aid.11
E. Data and their Sources

The data and their sources are described in detail in Appendix 1. The data for industry
value added growth comes from the Industrial Statistics Database (2003) of the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO). The data are at the 3-digit level of
the International Standard Industrial Classification of All Economic Activities (ISIC,
Revision 2) and are available for the 1980s and 1990s.
In order to keep the sample as large as possible without compromising our focus on
long-term growth, we include all those industry observations where the average growth rate
can be computed over at least a seven-year period in the decade. On this criterion, the
UNIDO database has data for 47 developing countries for the 1980s and 31 countries for the
1990s.
But our methodology is most applicable when we include broadly similar countries
with roughly similar levels of technological endowments. Therefore, we want to exclude, but
using an objective criterion, richer emerging market countries such as Malta, Cyprus,
Hungary, Korea, Kuwait, and Singapore and focus on the poorer ones. At the same time, we
do not want to exclude recipients of significant aid. Our final sample therefore comprises
countries that receive aid greater than 1 percent of GDP or are low-income countries
according to World Bank definitions in the initial year of the sample. Our sample then has 33
11

One major concern with our instrumenting variables (strategic variables, colonial
relationships, and proximity to donors etc.), is that they induce or are correlated with some
country-specific attribute: for example, proximity (geographical and strategic) to donors
might be bad because donors require bad policies or support bad leaders or require greater
defense-related spending. Alternatively, proximity to donors might be good because they
impose good conditionality. Also, certain colonial relationships may imply a certain quality
of current institutions with impacts on growth. In our framework, however, any impact on
country-specific attributes is absorbed in the country fixed effects. It is harder to see why
relationships with donors should systematically affect growth in particular industrial sectors.

- 15 countries for the 1980s and 15 countries for the 1990s. The UNIDO database contains data
on 28 industries in these countries.12
In Table 1, we present means, medians, and standard deviations for the key variables
in the analysis. The median growth rate of value added for industries is 1.5 percent for the
decade 1980-90 and 3.7 percent for 1990-2000. The average aid inflow into the 33 countries
in the 1980-1990 sample is 5.8 percent of GDP and the average aid inflow into the 15
countries in the 1990-2000 sample is 5.0 percent of GDP. The average labor intensity of
industries is about 40 percent and 36 percent in the two decades, respectively. In much of the
paper we will focus on the results for the 1980s because our sample is twice as large (33
countries and 712 observations) as for the 1990s (15 countries and 357 observations). But the
results and robustness checks that we present for the 1980s are qualitatively similar for the
1990s (see the working paper version).13
One concern, given that a number of countries are not covered by the UNIDO
database, is whether the countries in our sample differ from the typical aid recipient.
Comparing the core 1980s sample that we use in this paper with a larger sample (comprising
all countries selected on the same criteria as in this paper and for which manufacturing data
are available in the World Bank’s World Development Indicators), we find countries in our
sample receive moderately less aid (5.6% relative to 7.0%) and grow somewhat faster (GDP
growth 1.0 % vs 0.7%, manufacturing growth 4.8% vs 3.6%). Countries in our sample are
neither considerably worse in performance, nor indeed very different from the larger sample.

12

Appendix 1 lists all countries for which data were available as well as those countries that
were included in the econometric analysis.
13

The limited availability of data for the 1990s militates against panel estimations. Indeed, if
we formed a panel, the set of countries for which we had data for the 1990s and 1980s would
only be 14.

- 16 The variation in our sample on these indicators is also not very different (see Appendix Table
1D). Prima facie, there is little to suggest our sample is “special.”

III. AID AND SENSITIVITY TO DUTCH DISEASE
A. The Core Specification

We present our core specifications in Table 2, Panel A for the 1980s corresponding to the
relationship depicted as channel A in the schema in Section II.A. In column 1 we report the
OLS estimate, in column 2 the “reduced form” OLS estimate in which the instrument for the
aid term is entered directly in the second-stage regression instead of the aid term itself, and in
column 3, the IV specification where aid is instrumented. In all cases, the labor intensity
interaction term is negative and statistically significant at the 5 percent confidence level. The
value added by labor-intensive industries grows relatively more slowly than for other
industries in countries that receive more aid. It is worth noting that our core result does not
depend on instrumentation, although instrumentation increases the magnitude of the
measured interaction effect.14
What can we say about magnitudes? Since all the regressors are normalized, the
interaction term measures the impact of a one standard deviation increase in aid in country j
and a one standard deviation increase in the labor intensity of the industry on the growth rate
of industry i in country j.15 Take 2 countries, Zambia and Honduras that are roughly one

14

In Table 2, Panel B, we present our first-stage results corresponding to the core
specifications for the 1980s. The instrument is very precisely estimated (the coefficients are
always significant at the 1 percent level), corresponding to an F-statistic of 23.5, which is
large, comfortably exceeding the Staiger-Stock (1997) threshold of 10 for strong instruments.
15

The standard errors in the second-stage regressions can be corrected to take account of the
fact that the instrument used in the first-stage is estimated. We used the the procedure in
Frankel and Romer (1999) to check if this correction led to significant changes and found
that it did not.

- 17 standard deviation (about 4.2 percentage points) apart in terms of aid to GDP. And take
2 industries, apparel and rubber products that are also about 1 standard deviation (about
8.4 percentage points) apart in terms of their labor share. Using our core IV specification in
column 3, the apparel sector should grow 3.5 percent per year slower relative to glass and
products in Zambia than in Honduras. This is quite substantial when compared with the
average growth rate in the sample of 1.8 percent.
We depict this core result in a non-parametric form in Chart 3. We divide the
industries into two groups (above- and below-median) depending on their labor intensity.
Next we estimate for each country the difference in average growth in annual value added
between above- and below-median industries. We plot this difference against the aid-toGDP received by each country. Chart 3 shows that the difference in growth is negatively
related to the aid received by a country, and no single country drives it.
B. Robustness to Time Periods, Sample, and Measures of Aid

We subject the core IV results in Table 2 to a number of other robustness checks. In
Table 3, we check for robustness to time periods. So we reproduce Table 2 for the 15
countries for which we have data for the 1990s. Our results remain unchanged, although the
magnitude of the aid-labor intensity interaction is slightly reduced. And in Panel B, the
results confirm that our instrument remains strong (an F-value of over 50, sufficiently high to
ensure we do not have a problem with weak instruments).16
In Table 4, we check for robustness to samples. In column 1, we exclude outliers,
and the coefficient is still negative and significant. Since the datasets are inherently noisy, we
check whether “winsorizing” makes a difference. In column 2 we set all values of the left and
right hand side variables that are above (below) the value of the 99th (1st) percentile to the
16

We would note here that the robustness results that we report below hold for the 1990s
sample (see the working paper version) as well.

- 18 value of the 99th (1st) percentile observation. In column 3, we do the same, but at the 95th/5th
percentile. In column 4, we exclude three countries—Israel, Poland, and Thailand-- that
might be considered different from the rest of the sample. The coefficient estimate for the
interaction is significant and broadly unchanged in magnitude across the columns.
In addition to these checks, we perform a battery of tests, involving the deletion of
one country and one industry at a time (available from the authors upon request). For the
1980s, this amounts to checking robustness to 60 different sub-samples and to 43 different
sub-samples for the 1990s. In all (103) cases, the coefficients were statistically significant,
with coefficient values remaining broadly unchanged. This is reassuring about the robustness
of our core result.
In Table 5, we perform other robustness checks. In column 1, we restrict the sample
to countries whose labor-intensity values are highly correlated, industry by industry, with the
average across countries,17 and in column 2, we use initial rather than contemporaneous labor
shares. In column 3, we check if our results are robust to using an alternative instrument for
aid; in our core specifications in Table 2, the instruments exploit only one source of
exogenous cross-country variation, namely the traditional or strategic relationships between
donors and recipients of aid. In column 3, we exploit an additional source of exogenous
variation, namely the donor’s budgetary position which determines how much aggregate aid
it can give, in devising the instrument (see Appendix 2 for details). The results are
qualitatively similar to our core result in all cases.

17

This procedure may drop the countries in which labor is most distorted, either because of
aid flows themselves pushing up wages and moving labor intensity away from the average or
because of other distortions. This is why one cannot use such correlations to examine
whether the maintained assumption of a technological propensity to use labor is valid across
countries. However, it is a useful robustness check.

- 19 In columns 4 and 5, we present results based on clustering of the standard errors, first
by industry then by country. Essentially, this recognizes that observations may not be
independent. The coefficient estimates continue to be significant, with the standard error
increasing only slightly.
So far our measure of aid has been total aid. We need to check whether our results are
robust to alternative definitions of aid, and whether there is any pattern when we do so. In
particular, aid should have less of an impact on domestic wages or on the exchange rate the
more it is spent on imports. Ideally, if we could measure ex ante the import-intensity of the
usage of different types of aid, we could test whether the coefficient on the aid-labor intensity
interaction term varies according to the type of aid. In practice, it is very difficult to do this,
not least because aid is fungible. However, there seems to be a widely shared view that
technical assistance is very import-intensive because it largely goes as payments to foreign
consultants. We exploit this fact by testing whether the adverse competitiveness effect is
mitigated in the case of technical assistance.
In column 1 of Table 6, we use a measure of total aid without the technical assistance
component. We continue to find evidence of a negative impact on labor-intensive industries.
And, consistent with our prior that technical assistance is more import-intensive, the
magnitude of the coefficient is larger than in the core specification (-4.1 percent compared to
-3.5 percent). In column 2, we introduced technical assistance as the aid measure and find
that the coefficient, though still negative and significant, is smaller in absolute value (-2.6
percent). Nevertheless, the coefficient is still negative and significant, which may, in part, be
explained by the fact that technical aid may proxy for all forms of aid or that there is
fungibility between types of aid.
Clemens et al. (2004) argue that one should distinguish between aid meant to produce
results in the short term, and aid meant to produce results in the long term. From our

- 20 perspective, however, the horizon over which spending should have effect is immaterial,
what matters is when spending occurs. This then offers a natural robustness check of our
results. Using the Clemens et al. database, which the authors kindly shared with us, in
column 3 we include aid that is likely to have impact in the short term and in column 4, aid
that is likely to have an impact in the long term. In both columns, the estimate of the
interaction term is negative and is statistically significant. These results suggest that while
there may be some differences in the impact depending on the type of aid, all forms of aid
yield the same robust result of an adverse competitiveness effect.
C. Robustness to Outcome Measures

The share of nominal value added of an industry in nominal manufacturing value
added reflects its economic importance – its share of value created at market prices. Given
that common deflators like a GDP deflator or the growth rate of the manufacturing sector are
absorbed by the country fixed effect, our dependent variable could also be seen as the growth
in a sector’s nominal share. If the external sector’s indirect contribution to economic growth
(through increases in productivity and increases in foreign exchange earnings) depends on its
nominal share, then this is the dependent variable we want to focus on for our analysis.
However, it is also interesting to examine the growth in real value added. This poses a
special problem: the increase in nominal value added in each sector is composed of two
parts; the increase in real value added and the increase in output prices in that sector. We
have already argued that if the effect we have hypothesized is at work, aid increases the rate

- 21 of output price increases in the non-traded, capital-intensive industries relative to the traded,
labor-intensive industries. This means that if we want to compute the growth in real valueadded in an industry, we have to deflate nominal growth in that industry by a industryspecific price deflator, rather than the country-wide, industry-invariant GDP deflator.
Unfortunately, we do not have an industry-specific price index. So, we look at two
other measures of real activity, employment and industrial production. In Table 7, column 1
the dependent variable is average annual employment growth in an industry in a country, and
in column 2 it is the index of industrial production. The aid interaction term has the predicted
negative sign in both cases and is significant.
D. Robustness to Measure of Sensitivity to Dutch Disease

We want to establish that our results are robust to other measures of sensitivity to
Dutch disease. As we argued earlier, variation in labor-intensity allows us to test whether the
wage channel associated with Dutch disease is at work. An alternative way of testing for
Dutch disease is to see whether export sectors are differentially affected by aid.
In Table 8, we present another set of core specifications with labor intensity replaced
by the exportability index. In column 1 we report the OLS estimate, in column 2 the “reduced
form” OLS estimate in which the instrument for the aid term is entered directly in the
second-stage regression instead of the aid term itself, and in column 3, the “pure” IV
specifications. In all cases, the aid-exportability interaction term is negative and statistically
significant at the 5 percent confidence. That is, exportable industries grow slower in
countries that receive more aid.

As discussed earlier, some exportables, such as commodity exports that require little
labor intensive processing, may not be much affected by Dutch Disease. Amongst our

- 22 industries, “petroleum refineries” and “petroleum and coal products” stand out as two
commodity-based exports that have low labor intensity. If we exclude these two industries
from the dataset, the IV estimate of the interaction goes up in magnitude as one might expect,
and it remains significant (available from the authors).
Finally, the robustness checks that we report for the core sample in Sections III.B and
III.C above are also substantially borne out when we use the exportability indicator rather
than labor intensity as our measure of susceptibility to Dutch Disease (available upon
request).18 Thus, our results do not seem overly dependent on a particular measure of a
sector’s vulnerability to aid-induced Dutch Disease. Given that neither proxy is ideal, this is
reassuring.

IV. THE TRANSMISSION MECHANISM FROM AID TO SECTORAL GROWTH

To summarize, we have shown the link between aid and the relative growth of the
labor-intensive and exportable industries. We claim that this arises because of the effect of
aid on the real exchange rate, which in turn adversely affects the labor-intensive and
exportable industries. This then leads to the natural question: how can we be sure that our
core result does indeed reflect such an overvaluation effect and what is the connection
between aid and overvaluation? To answer these questions we can bring to bear more
evidence, direct and indirect, relating to real exchange rate overvaluation.

18

The one exception is the regression corresponding to Table 7, column 2, where the
coefficient on the aid exportability interaction is statistically insignificant.

- 23 A.

Does aid “Cause” Overvaluation?

If overvaluation is the channel, then overvaluation, like aid, should particularly affect
exportable and labor intensive sectors. In other words, in countries with more overvalued
exchange rates, exportable and labor-intensive sectors should grow relatively slower than
other sectors. We therefore estimate equation 1 above with the difference that we replace the
aid variable with a measure of overvaluation due to Easterly and Levine (2003) which is
based on updating Dollar (1992).19 We report the results in Table 9A.
In column 1, we estimate using OLS. The coefficient estimate for the interaction is
negative and statistically significant. Clearly, if slow growth draws in aid, which in turn
causes overvaluation, we have a problem of endogeneity. Fortunately, we already have the
means to deal with it. The component of overvaluation stemming from exogenous aid flows
is likely to be exogenous. This then calls for instrumental variable estimation where we use
fitted aid (using the instruments described earlier) interacted with labor share in explaining
the degree of overvaluation interacted with labor share in the first stage, and use the predicted
interaction in the second stage.
In Table 9B, we present the results of the first-stage regressions of overvaluation on
the instrument for aid. In column 1, which is the first-stage corresponding to the second stage
in Column 3 of Table 9, the dependent variable is overvaluation times labor share and the
explanatory variable is fitted aid times labor share. The coefficient on the instrument is
positive and significant at the 1 percent confidence level (t-value of 3.4), as predicted.

19

Dollar (1992) computed exchange rate overvaluation as the deviation of a country’s price
level relative to the US from its equilibrium level, which is related to a country’s income
level. Specifically, he regressed a country’s price level on its per capita PPP GDP and its
square along with an indicator for sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America, and used the
residual as the measure of real exchange rate overvaluation. Easterly and Levine (2003)
update this data for the 1990s. A value of 1 on the index signifies no under-or over-valuation,
with increases representing more overvaluation.

- 24 The second stage or IV result (Table 9A, column 3) suggest that the component of
overvaluation caused by exogenous aid inflows does hurt competitiveness. The pattern of the
interaction coefficients is also similar to those in Tables 2; that is, the IV estimations yield
significantly greater coefficients than OLS estimations.
In columns 4, 5 and 6, we repeat this exercise replacing the labor-intensity measure
with the exportability indicator. Again, in OLS, reduced form, and IV variants, the
coefficient is significant, albeit at the 10 percent level. As a further robustness check, we use
an alternative measure of overvaluation, which we compute based on Frankel (2004) and we
get similar results (estimates presented in the working paper version).20
We have just established that exchange rate overvaluation, especially that caused by
exogenous aid, has a similar effect as aid on industries sensitive to Dutch Disease. Another
way to check this is to introduce both the aid and overvaluation interactions in the same
regression. If aid is indeed the deep causal determinant, and overvaluation the main
mediating channel, we should find that the direct effect of the aid interaction should be
attenuated in the presence of the overvaluation interaction.21 In Column 1 of Table 10, when
we introduce both aid and the overvaluation term, both interacted with the labor intensity
measure, we find that the coefficient estimate for the overvaluation interaction is significant
but that for the aid interaction drops in magnitude and ceases to be statistically significant,
suggesting that aid and overvaluation represent the same channel. Of course, one caveat in
interpreting this exercise is that we cannot instrument either interaction because we have only
one instrument.
20

This method is similar to Dollar (1992) except that we do not use region fixed effects or
the squared per capita PPP GDP term in the long run price level equation.
21

In two different contexts, Banerjee and Iyer (2005) and Acemoglu et. al. (2003) rely on
similar arguments and a similar econometric specification to establish the mediating channel
for their deep determinants.

- 25 B. Is the Overvaluation a Reflection of other Policies Rather than Aid?

Is the observed significant estimate for the aid labor intensity interaction a proxy for
other policies than aid? Consider trade reform. It is well-known that trade reform alleviates
the anti-export bias of a regime. Is it possible that countries are poor because they have bad
trade policies, and this, not aid, is responsible for the pattern of industry growth we observe?
Indeed, could restrictive trade policies themselves be responsible for the observed
overvaluation (see, for example, Bhagwati and Desai (1973) or Krueger (1975)) One way to
test this is to include an interaction between the strength of trade liberalization policies and
labor intensity. If the trade reform interaction swamps the aid interaction, we would have less
confidence that aid causes the differential growth patterns we observe.
In Table 10 column 2, we include the Sachs-Warner measure of trade reform
interacted with the labor intensity measure. We find that the coefficient on the trade policy
interaction is insignificant but the aid interaction is relatively unchanged in magnitude and
statistical significance.
In a similar vein, one could argue that exchange rate mismanagement and distortions
result in slow growth, aid inflows, and the observed relative growth patterns of industries. In
column 3, we use a measure of the black market premium (from Reinhart and Rogoff (2003))
instead of the trade policy measure, and obtain similar results.22 Hence, the results in
columns 2-3 suggest that it is aid rather than trade or macroeconomic policies that are
“causing” exchange rate overvaluation, reinforcing the message obtained from
instrumentation.

22

Rodriguez and Rodrik (1999) argue that both the Sachs-Warner and black market premium
measures are measures not just of trade policy but of broader macroeconomic stability.

- 26 C. Is it Resources Provided by Aid Rather than Aid-induced Overvaluation?

The next step is to show that aid does not affect sectoral growth through channels
other than overvaluation. One alternative explanation of the basic interaction between labor
intensity and aid is that industries with a high need for capital (and thus lower labor share)
grow relatively faster as a country receives aid inflows. This would be a relatively benign
explanation of our basic findings, suggesting that aid relieves financing constraints and
increases the overall resource envelope.23
There are three reasons why this is an unlikely explanation. First, as we will show
below, the effect of aid on the average growth of manufacturing industries in a country is
negative, not consistent with the benign “aid is financing” explanation. Second, we have also
seen the adverse effects of aid on the relative growth rates of labor intensive industries
comes through an overvaluation of the real exchange rate. Again, this is inconsistent with the
benign explanation.
Third, if the capital-enhancing channel is at work (rather than the real-exchange-rateovervaluation channel), countries that receive more aid should see an increase in the output
of industries that are more dependent on external financial resources. To control for any
possible effect of aid in alleviating financing constraints, we include the interaction of aid
inflows with the Rajan and Zingales (1998) variable that measures the dependence of a
particular industry on external resources to finance investment. Thus, if aid increases the
resource envelope available to the industrial sector, we should expect the coefficient of this
interaction term to be positive. Moreover, if the availability of capital rather than labor

23

The simplest example of aid providing more resources to the private sector would be one
where the government reduces its borrowing from the banking system in response to the aid,
and hence makes more credit available to the private sector.

- 27 intensity is what matters, the coefficient on the labor intensity-aid interaction term should fall
in magnitude when we include the financial dependence-aid interaction.
In Table 10, column 4, we estimate the coefficient of the aid financial dependence
interaction separately and together with the aid labor intensity interaction in column 5. Only
the labor intensity interaction is statistically significant (and negative). Therefore, it does not
appear that the channel through which the relative growth rates are affected by aid is via
capital-intensive sectors getting increased access to resources. The magnitudes of the aidlabor interaction coefficient is similar to that estimated in column 3 of Table 2, suggesting
that labor intensity is not an indirect proxy for resource intensity.24
Finally, we repeat the exercise just conducted with exportability instead of labor share
as the measure of sensitivity to Dutch Disease (Table 10, cols 6-9). As can be seen, the only
significant difference is that when the aid exportability interaction and the overvaluation
exportability interaction are both included, it is the latter that loses significance (see col. 6),
even though both coefficient estimates shrink in magnitude.25 Again, given the earlier caveat,
the main takeaway is that the two interactions represent similar effects.
By contrast, when we introduce the policy exportability interaction (col 7), even
though the coefficient of this interaction is positive and significant (countries with more
liberal trade policies have more growth in typically exportable sectors), the coefficient of the

24

Another proxy for reliance on external finance may be the average size of establishments,
with small (and thus young) establishments requiring more external finance than large
establishments. When we include the average size of establishments in an industry in a
country interacted with aid inflows, the coefficient for the labor intensity aid interaction still
remains unchanged (estimates available from the authors).
25

When we drop the petroleum related industries, coefficient estimates for both interactions
are significant but shrunken in magnitude. Again, the implication is that they proxy for
similar channels.

- 28 aid exportability interaction remains negative and significant, and relatively unchanged in
magnitude. Thus these interactions represent different effects, in contrast to the earlier ones.

V. RELATIVE OR ABSOLUTE EFFECTS?

The difference-in-difference methodology only allows us to measure relative growth
rates of different sectors. Specifically, our result shows that labor-intensive and exportable
sectors grow slower than capital-intensive and domestic-oriented sectors in countries
receiving aid. Coupled with the other checks we have provided, this offers plausible evidence
that the channel we have postulated – exchange rate overvaluation as a result of aid inflows –
is at work. We believe this is a step forward in the literature. However, our methodology thus
far does not allow us to say whether aid merely causes a relative slowing of labor-intensive
sectors or whether aid depresses the overall growth of the manufacturing sector. To see this
more clearly, consider the basic model represented in equation 1.
Growthij = Constant + 1.....m*Country Indicators + m+1....n* Industry Indicators +
(Aid to
n+1*(Industry i’s share of manufacturing in country j in the initial period) +
country j* Sensitivity of industry i to Dutch Disease) + ij
The derivative of growth in industry i in country j with respect to aid is not
tradability (i). It is ( +

times

labor-intensity (i)) where is an unidentified effect of aid on the

overall growth rate of industries in a country, which is absorbed in the country fixed effects,
1.....m.

Our results thus far shed no light on , so we cannot sign the impact of aid on the total

growth of tradable sectors, only on their relative growth.
One way to estimate is to drop the country fixed effects and substitute them with
aid as well as range of country-level variables that should affect average growth rates for
industries in countries. In departing from the Rajan-Zingales methodology, we open
ourselves to the standard criticism of cross-country regressions—that we may not have

- 29 included all the country-level variables that might matter. But in return for this, we obtain a
rough estimate of the average effect of aid. In Table 11, moving across the columns, we add
variables that are typically considered important determinants of overall growth, including
initial income per capita, trade policy, institutional quality, life expectancy, and geography.
What is remarkable is that we find a robust negative effect for the aid coefficient while the
coefficient of the aid-labor share interaction term remains negative and significant as in the
core specification.
Taking column 6 as the most general specification, we find that a one percentage
point increase in the ratio of aid-to-GDP reduces average annual manufacturing sector
growth (when evaluated at the mean value of labor intensity) by 0.45 percent in the 1980s.26

VI. RELATIONSHIP TO THE LITERATURE

We are not the first to examine the possibility that aid contributes to Dutch Disease.
Yano and Nugent (1999) find mixed evidence on the relationship between aid flows, real
exchange rates, and the structure of production in a set of 44 aid-dependent economies
(receiving more than 5 percent annually in aid) during 1970-1990. The authors find that aid is
associated with an appreciation of the real exchange rate in less than half the countries, and
find the reverse in the rest. In only one or two of the countries is aid determined to be
immiserizing.
By contrast, Elbadawi (1999) using panel data for 62 countries, including 28 African
countries, shows that aid is positively correlated with the real exchange rate, with a 35

26

We get similar results for the 1990s. In this decade, an increase of one percentage point
increase in the ratio of aid-to-GDP reduces average annual manufacturing sector growth
(when evaluated at the mean value of labor intensity) by 0.52 percent.

- 30 percent increase in the ratio of aid to GDP correlated with a 3 percent real overvaluation.27
He also finds that aid has a deleterious impact on nontraditional exports, with the relationship
being an inverted U and the level of nontraditional exports being maximized at an aid-toGDP ratio of about 22 percent. Interestingly, though, his estimates would suggest that aid
helps non-traditional exports for most aid receiving countries, because the significant
majority of them receive aid less than the threshold number.28 Put another way, his findings
cannot explain why the manufacturing sector is so small in aid-receiving countries.
Other papers are less explicit about the real exchange rate channel but focus more on
outcomes. Prati and Tressel (2006), using a panel framework, demonstrate that aid has a
negative effect on overall exports but only in normal times, defined as those periods that are
not characterized by shocks (droughts, hurricanes, earthquakes, or plummeting commodity
export prices). During normal times, which constitute about 60 percent of total country-year
observations, they estimate that a 1 percentage point increase in the ratio of aid to GDP
reduces the ratio of exports to GDP by 0.3-0.6 percent of GDP at impact, with a long run
effect that is about 5-6 times as large.
Arellano et. al. (2004), drawing on panel data regressions for 73 aid-receiving
developing countries during 1981-2000 find a strong and significant negative relationship
between aid and the share of manufactured exports in total exports. They find that a one

27

This mixed relationship between aid and real exchange rates in these first two cited studies
is also found more generally found in the literature. Younger (1992), Vos (1998), and AtingiEgo and Sebudde (2000) find a positive relationship for Ghana, Pakistan, and Uganda
respectively, while Nyoni (1998) found aid led to a depreciated real exchange rate in
Tanzania).Given the difficulty in measuring the real exchange rate, and controlling for other
simultaneous events (such as liberalization), it is not surprising that country specific studies
offer mixed evidence. This is probably why the evidence on relative industry performance is
more compelling.
28
Whether “non-traditional” exports are more likely to be affected by Dutch Disease
depends, to some extent, on what the non-traditional exports are. So there is not an easy
correspondence between his work and ours.

- 31 percentage increase in the ratio of aid to GDP relative to the mean lowers manufactured
exports by 0.4 to 1 percentage points of total exports. Similarly, Bulir and Lane (2002) find
that the tradable sector has shrunk dramatically in more aid dependent countries between
1985 and 1999, by about 8 percentage points of GDP.
These studies, as indeed many others, are at the cross-country level and focused on
aggregate manufacturing or total production of tradable goods. Because our paper focuses on
differences in growth rates between industries, our work is less subject to the criticism that an
omitted country variable that is correlated with aid could explain our results. Not only would
the omitted variable have to be strongly correlated with aid, but also it would have to induce
a pattern of relative industry growth similar to the one observed. More important, our
specification allows us to focus more directly on the Dutch Disease channel, and thus it
provides a more powerful test of the phenomenon.
With notable exceptions (Prati and Tressel (2006), for example), papers in the
literature do not address the issue of endogeneity carefully – that a country may be poor and
receive aid because its manufacturing or tradable sectors are small rather than its
manufacturing sector being small because it receives aid. Our paper goes some way in
tackling this issue.
VII. CONCLUDING REMARKS

Taken together, our results suggest there is indeed an adverse impact of aid on
competitiveness – we provide evidence that aid inflows have systematic adverse effects on
the relative growth of labor intensive and export sectors, and that the channel through which
these effects are felt is the exchange rate overvaluation induced by aid. We can also assert
with some confidence that aid depresses the average growth rate of the manufacturing sector
in a country. Despite the fact that for many aid-receiving countries the manufacturing sector
might be less important currently than agriculture, it is worth remembering that that was also

- 32 true for many of the fast-growing countries when they first embarked upon development.
Manufacturing exports provided the vehicle for their growth take-off, so any adverse effects
on such exports should prima facie be a cause for concern about the effects of aid on growth.
Also, taking both the relative and average growth effects of aid together, we have shown the
employment generating labor-intensive sectors grow far more slowly in countries that receive
more aid. This should be a source of concern for those who see aid as an instrument to reduce
inequality, for labor intensive sectors are the ones that can absorb the poor and landless who
leave agriculture.
Our paper suggests that in the rush to ramp up aid, we should not lose sight of issues
like how much aid can be handled to begin with, how the aid should be delivered, and when.
At the very least, our work suggests a poor country need not have the absorptive capacity to
take in a massive quantity of aid up front without it creating substantial adverse effects on the
country’s export competitiveness. Far better to build up the supply of the other critical
resources that will be needed to use aid effectively such as a larger body of skilled workers.
Yet education and training of the unskilled, even if undertaken on a war footing, takes time.
A massive expansion of the resources devoted to education can create the very adverse
effects in the short term that it will hopefully avoid in the longer term. A better solution
might be to start slow but to accelerate as capacity is built. Even though the world is
impatient for the poor to develop, development, especially when mandated from the outside,
may require patience.
Because of the ambiguities in the theory, our evidence does not suggest that the
adverse effects of aid on competitiveness are inevitable, only that adverse effects have been
the historical experience. From a research perspective, it is perhaps more fruitful now to
move beyond the inconclusive debate of whether aid is effective, and focus on specific ways

- 33 it can be made to work better, by better understanding the reasons that might impair or
enhance its effectiveness.

- 34 Table 1. Summary Statistics

Variables

A. Across Countries and Industries in the Base Sample
Standard
Number of
Period
Mean
Median
Deviation Minimum Maximum Observations

Growth Rate of Value Added ij

1980s
1990s

Initial Industry Share ij

1980s
0.044
0.022
0.067
1990s
0.041
0.020
0.064
B. Across Industries in the Base Sample
Standard
Period
Mean
Median
Deviation
1980s
0.403
0.424
0.084
1990s
0.358
0.365
0.088

Variables
Labor Share i

0.018
0.030

0.015
0.037

0.119
0.108

Financial Dependence i

1980s, 1990s

Exportability Index i

1980s, 1990s
0.5
0.5
0.509
C. Across Countries in the Base Sample
Standard
Period
Mean
Median
Deviation
1980s
0.058
0.046
0.042
1990s
0.050
0.036
0.042

Variables
Aid to GDP j

0.243

0.219

0.336

-0.457
-0.530

0.754
0.337

712
357

0.00005
0.00007

0.562
0.525

712
357

Number of
Minimum Maximum Observations
0.193
0.515
28
0.174
0.515
28
-0.451

1.140

27

0

1

28

Number of
Minimum Maximum Observations
0.008
0.176
33
0.006
0.139
15

Real Exchange Rate Overvaluation j

1980s
1990s

1.186
0.919

1.074
0.951

0.488
0.354

0.406
0.426

2.204
1.787

31
15

Policy (Sachs-Warner) index j

1980s
1990s

0.152
0.467

0.000
0.000

0.364
0.516

0.000
0.000

1.000
1.000

33
15

Black Market Premium j

1980s
1990s

0.593
0.149

0.164
0.054

1.143
0.309

-0.008
0.017

5.936
1.247

31
15

Initial per Capita Income j (in log)

1980s
1990s

7.685
7.722

7.762
7.830

0.692
0.752

6.406
6.202

9.344
9.106

32
15

Life Expectancy j

1980s
1990s

56.56
60.37

54.83
61.71

7.85
8.05

44.21
45.00

72.85
70.31

33
15

Geography j

1980s
1990s

-0.678
-0.660

-1.014
-1.014

0.566
0.611

-1.040
-1.040

0.724
0.724

33
15

Institutional Quality (ICRG) index j

1980s
1990s

0.429
0.525

0.430
0.522

0.132
0.057

0.183
0.405

0.723
0.610

29
14

- 35 -

Table 2. Impact of Aid on Sectoral Growth: Core Specification for 1980s
Panel A: Dependent variable is the annual average rate of growth of value added
of industry (i) in country (j)
1
2
3
OLS
OLS
IV
(reduced
form)
Initial industry share(ij)
-0.026***
-0.027***
-0.026***
[0.005]
[0.005]
[0.005]
Aid/GDP(j)* Labor share(i)

-0.012**
[0.005]

Fitted Aid/GDP(j)*Labor share(i)
Observations
R-squared

712
0.41

-0.035**
[0.014]
-0.020***
[0.006]
712
0.42

Panel B: First Stage for IV in Column 3 of Panel A above
Dependent variable is Aid/GDP(j)*Labor Share(i)
Initial industry share(ij)

Fitted Aid/GDP(j)*Labor share(i)
Observations
R-squared

712
0.38

0.026
[0.049]
0.591***
[0.122]
712
0.25

All standard errors, reported below the coefficient estimates, are robust. ***, **, and * denote significance at
1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively. All equations include country and industry fixed effects. All regressors are
standardized so that the coefficients measure the impact of a one standard deviation increase in the j variable
times a one standard deviation increase in the i variable. Initial industry share (ij) refers to the share of industry i
in country j as a share of total manufacturing sector value added in country j. Aid/GDP (j) refers to the share of
aid to GDP in country j averaged over the period. Labor share (i) refers to the share of wages in valued added in
industry i averaged over all countries. In column (2) of Panel A, the instrument for the endogenous variable
(fitted aid) rather than the endogenous variable is included as the regressor. In column 3, the estimation uses
instrumental variables (IV) methods. In Panel B, the dependent variable (which is the endogenous regressor in
column 3 in Panel A) is the product of aid/GDP in country j times labor share (i). Fitted aid is obtained from
estimating a gravity-type model of bilateral aid flows as described in Section II of the paper.

- 36 Table 3. Impact of Aid on Sectoral Growth for 1990: Robustness to Time Period
Panel A: Dependent variable is the annual average rate of growth of value added
of industry (i) in country (j)
1
2
3
OLS
OLS
IV
(reduced
form)
Initial industry share(ij)
-0.015***
-0.013**
-0.016***
[0.005]
[0.006]
[0.006]
Aid/GDP(j)* Labor share(i)

-0.015***
[0.006]

Fitted Aid/GDP(j)*Labor share(i)
Observations
R-squared

357
0.33

-0.022**
[0.009]
-0.012**
[0.005]
357
0.32

Panel B: First Stage for IV in Column 3 of Panel A above
Dependent variable is Aid/GDP(j)*Labor Share(i)
Initial industry share(ij)

Fitted Aid/GDP(j)*Labor share(i)
Observations
R-squared

357
0.32

-0.145**
[0.072]
0.540***
[0.103]
357
0.33

All standard errors, reported below the coefficient estimates, are robust. ***, **, and * denote significance at
1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively. All equations include country and industry fixed effects. All regressors are
standardized so that the coefficients measure the impact of a one standard deviation increase in the j variable
times a one standard deviation increase in the i variable. Initial industry share (ij) refers to the share of industry
i in country j as a share of total manufacturing sector value added in country j. Aid/GDP (j) refers to the share of
aid to GDP in country j averaged over the period. Labor share (i) refers to the share of wages in valued added in
industry i averaged over all countries. In column (2) of Panel A, the instrument for the endogenous variable
(fitted aid) rather than the endogenous variable is included as the regressor. In column 3, the estimation uses
instrumental variables (IV) methods. In Panel B, the dependent variable (which is the endogenous regressor in
column 3 in Panel A) is the product of aid/GDP in country j times labor share (i). Fitted aid is obtained from
estimating a gravity-type model of bilateral aid flows as described in Section II of the paper.

- 37 Table 4. Impact of Aid on Sectoral Growth for 1980s: Robustness to Samples
Dependent variable is annual average rate of growth of value added of industry i in country j
1
Outliers
Excluded
Aid/GDP(j)* Labor share(i)
Observations
R-squared

-0.032**
[0.015]
683
0.42

2
"Winsorize"
sample at
1% and 99%
-0.031**
[0.013]
712
0.41

3
"Winsorize"
sample at
5% and 95%
-0.023**
[0.010]
712
0.43

4
Exclude higher
income countries
-0.028*
[0.014]
658
0.4

All columns use IV estimations. All standard errors, reported below the coefficient estimates, are robust. ***,
**, and * denote significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively. All equations include country and industry
fixed effects as well as the initial share of industry i in country j. All regressors are standardized so that the
coefficients measure the impact of a one standard deviation increase in the j variable times a one standard
deviation increase in the i variable. In column (1), outliers are excluded according to the Hadi (1992) procedure.
In column (2), values of all the left- and right- hand side variables that are greater (smaller) than the 99th (1st)
percentile are set at the 99th (1st) percentile. This is repeated in column (3), except that the cut-off is set at the
95th (5th) percentile. In column (4), three higher income countries—Israel, Thailand, and Poland—are excluded.

Table 5. Impact of Aid on Sectoral Growth for 1980s: Other Robustness Checks
Dependent variable is annual average rate of growth of value added of industry i in country j
1
2
3
4
Low labor
Initial labor
Alternative
Standard
share
share used
instrument
errors
correlation
for aid
clustered
countries
by industry
excluded
Aid/GDP(j)* Labor share(i)
-0.031**
-0.026**
-0.035**
-0.035**
[0.013]
[0.013]
[0.015]
[0.016]
636
712
712
712
Observations
0.41
0.39
0.38
0.38
R-squared

5
Standard
errors
clustered
by country
-0.035**
[0.017]
712
0.38

All columns use IV estimations. All standard errors, reported below the coefficient estimates, are robust. ***,
**, and * denote significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively. All equations include country and industry
fixed effects as well as the initial share of industry i in country j. All regressors are standardized so that the
coefficients measure the impact of a one standard deviation increase in the j variable times a one standard
deviation increase in the i variable. In column (1), countries whose labor share parameters are not significantly
correlated with the average labor share parameter for the whole sample are excluded. In column (2), the initial
value of the labor share rather than the average during the time period is used. In column (3), a different
instrument is used for aid which is described in the text. In columns (4) and (5), standard errors are clustered,
respectively, by industry and country.

- 38 -

Table 6. Impact of Aid on Sectoral Growth for 1980s: Robustness to Measures of Aid
Dependent variable is annual average rate of growth of value added of industry i in country j
1
Aid excludes
technical
assistance
Aid/GDP(j)* Labor share(i)
-0.041**
[0.019]
Observations
712
R-squared
0.35

2
Aid is
technical
assistance
-0.026***
[0.008]
712
0.42

3
Aid is
early impact
aid
-0.069**
[0.035]
712
0.21

4
Aid is
late impact
aid
-0.041***
[0.014]
712
0.38

All columns use IV estimations. All standard errors, reported below the coefficient estimates, are robust. ***,
**, and * denote significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively. All equations include country and industry
fixed effects as well as the initial share of industry i in country j. All regressors are standardized so that the
coefficients measure the impact of a one standard deviation increase in the j variable times a one standard
deviation increase in the i variable. Early and late-impact aid are from Clemens et. al. (2004).

Table 7. Impact of Aid on Sectoral Growth for 1980s: Robustness to Quantity-Based Outcome Variable
Dependent variable is
Dependent variable is
average of annual rate of growth
average of annual rate of growth
of employment of industry i in
of the index of industrial production
country j
of industry i in country j
1
2
Aid/GDP(j)* Labor share(i)
-0.021***
-0.012***
[0.008]
[0.004]
Observations
633
576
R-squared
0.29
0.44

All columns use IV estimations. All standard errors, reported below the coefficient estimates, are robust. ***,
**, and * denote significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively. All equations include country and industry
fixed effects; column 1 includes the initial share of employment and column 2 the initial share of industry i in
country j. Note that the decrease in sample size, relative to the core specification is because data on employment
and industrial production are available for fewer countries and/or industries.

- 39 Table 8. Impact of Aid on Sectoral Growth for 1980s: Robustness to Alternative Measure of Tradability
Dependent variable is annual average rate of growth of value added of industry i in country j
1
2
3
OLS
OLS
IV
reduced
form
Initial industry share(ij)
-0.022***
-0.024***
-0.024***
[0.006]
[0.005]
[0.005]

Aid/GDP(j)*Exportability index(i)

Fitted Aid/GDP(j)*Exportability index(i)

Observations
R-squared

-0.052**
[0.023]

-0.021**
[0.009]

712
0.41

-0.027**
[0.011]
712
0.41

712
0.4

Panel B: First Stage for IV in Column 3 of Panel A above
Dependent variable is Aid/GDP(j)*Exportability index(i)
Initial industry share(ij)

Fitted Aid/GDP(j)*Exportability index(i)
Observations
R-squared

0.038
[0.028]
0.513***
[0.074]
712
0.6

All standard errors, reported below the coefficient estimates, are robust. ***, **, and * denote significance at
1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively. All equations include country and industry fixed effects. All regressors are
standardized so that the coefficients measure the impact of a one standard deviation increase in the j variable
times a one standard deviation increase in the i variable. Initial industry share (ij) refers to the share of industry i
in country j as a share of total manufacturing sector value added in country j. Aid/GDP (j) refers to the share of
aid to GDP in country j averaged over the period. Exportability (i) is a dummy that takes a value of 1 if industry
i has a ratio of exports to value that exceeds the industry median value. For each industry, the ratio of exports to
value added was averaged over the set of developing countries in our core sample for which data were
available. In column (2) of Panel A, the instrument for the endogenous variable (fitted aid) rather than the
endogenous variable is included as the regressor. In column 3, the estimation uses instrumental variables (IV)
methods. In Panel B, the dependent variable (which is the endogenous regressor in column 3 in Panel A) is the
product of aid/GDP in country j times exportability index (i). Fitted aid is obtained from estimating a gravitytype model of bilateral aid flows as described in Section II of the paper.

- 40 -

Table 9A. Impact of Real Exchange Rate Overvaluation on Sectoral Growth for 1980s
Dependent variable is annual average rate of growth of value added of industry i in country j
1
2
3
4
5
OLS
OLS
IV
OLS
OLS
reduced form
reduced form
Initial industry share(ij)
-0.027*** -0.027***
-0.027*** -0.026***
-0.025***
[0.005]
[0.005]
[0.006]
[0.006]
[0.006]
Overvaluation(j)* Labor share(i)
-0.020***
-0.073***
[0.004]
[0.025]
Fitted Aid/GDP(j)* Labor share(i)
-0.024***
[0.007]
Overvaluation(j)*Exportability index(i)
-0.013*
[0.007]
Fitted Aid/GDP(j)*Exportability index(i)
-0.021*
[0.013]
Observations
674
674
674
674
674
R-squared
0.44
0.42
0.24
0.41
0.41

6
IV
-0.025***
[0.006]

-0.080*
[0.048]

674
0.33

All standard errors, reported below the coefficient estimates, are robust. ***, **, and * denote significance at
1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively. All equations include country and industry fixed effects. All regressors are
standardized so that the coefficients measure the impact of a one standard deviation increase in the j variable
times a one standard deviation increase in the i variable. The overvaluation variable is from Easterly and
Levine (2003). In columns 2 and 5, the instrument for the endogenous variable (fitted aid) rather than the
endogenous variable is included as the regressor. In columns 3 and 6, the estimation uses instrumental variables
(IV) methods. Fitted aid is obtained from estimating a gravity-type model of bilateral aid flows as described in
Section II of the paper. Note that the sample size is smaller than in the core specification because data on
overvaluation are available for two fewer countries.

Table 9B. Impact of Exogenous Determinants of Aid on Overvaluation for 1980s

Fitted Aid/GDP(j)* Labor share(i)

1
Dependent variable is
Overvaluation(j)*
Labor share(i)
0.322***
[0.095]

Fitted Aid/GDP(j)*Exportability Index(i)
Observations
R-squared

674
0.05

2
Dependent variable is
Overvaluation(j)*
Exportability Index(i)

0.263***
[0.060]
674
0.5

All standard errors, reported below the coefficient estimates, are robust. ***, **, and * denote significance at
1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively. These equations are the first stage corresponding respectively to the IV
estimations in columns 3 and 6 of Table 9. They include country and industry fixed effects as well as the initial
share of industry i in country j. All regressors are standardized so that the coefficients measure the impact of a
one standard deviation increase in the j variable times a one standard deviation increase in the i variable. In
column 1, the dependent variable is the product of aid/GDP in country j and labor share (i) and in column 2 the
product of aid/GDP and the exportability index. Fitted aid is obtained from estimating a gravity-type model of
bilateral aid flows as described in Section II of the text. Note that the sample size is smaller than in the core
specification because data on overvaluation are available for two fewer countries.

- 41 -

Table 10. Aid, Real Exchange Rate Overvaluation and Alternative Transmission Mechanisms for 1980s
Dependent variable is annual average growth rate of industry i in country j
2
1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Aid/GDP(j)* Labor share(i)
Overvaluation(j)* Labor share(i)
Policy(j)*Labor share(i)
Black market premium(j)*Labor share(i)

OLS
IV
IV
-0.006 -0.034** -0.037***
[0.005] [0.014]
[.014]
-0.019***
[0.004]
0.01
[0.008]
-0.005
[.007]

Aid/GDP(j)*Financial dependence(i)

IV

IV
-0.042***
[0.013]

0.003
[0.010]

0.016
[0.011]

680
0.41

680
0.38

Aid/GDP(j)* Exportability index(i)
Overvaluation(j)*Exportability Index(i)
Policy(j)*Exportability index(i)
Black market premium(j)*Exportability index(i)
Observations
R-squared

674
0.44

712
0.05

678
0.05

OLS

IV

IV

IV

0.003
[0.010]
-0.019** -0.046** -0.056** -0.054**
[0.009] [0.021] [0.022] [0.025]
-0.009
[0.008]
0.023***
[0.009]
-0.003
[0.009]
674
712
678
680
0.42
0.12
0.4
0.41

All standard errors, reported below the coefficient estimates, are robust. ***, **, and * denote significance at 1,
5, and 10 percent, respectively. All equations include country and industry fixed effects as well as the initial
share of industry i in country j. All regressors are standardized so that the coefficients measure the impact of a
one standard deviation increase in the j variable times a one standard deviation increase in the i variable. The
overvaluation variable is from Easterly and Levine (2003), the policy variable from Wacziarg and Welch
(2003), the black market premium from Reinhart and Rogoff (2004), and the financial dependence variable
from Rajan and Zingales (1998) (see Appendix Table 1A for details). In columns 5 and 9, both the aid
interactions are instrumented. Note that the sample varies from the core because data on overvaluation and the
black market premium are available for two fewer countries than the core sample, and data on financial
dependence from Rajan and Zingales (1998) is available for one less industry. Note also that the sample varies
between columns 1 and 3, and 6 and 8, because although data on overvaluation and the black market premium
are missing for two countries (relative to the core), they are missing for different countries.

- 42 -

Table 11. Effect of Aid on Sectoral Growth for 1980s: Absolute and Relative Effects
Dependent variable is annual average rate of growth of value added of industry i in country j
1

2

3

4

5

6

Initial industry share(ij)

-0.025***
[0.005]

-0.024***
[0.005]

-0.025***
[0.005]

-0.029***
[0.006]

-0.029***
[0.006]

-0.029***
[0.006]

Aid/GDP(j)* Labor share(i)

-0.032**
[0.013]

-0.028***
[0.010]

-0.028***
[0.010]

-0.027***
[0.009]

-0.027***
[0.009]

-0.026***
[0.009]

-0.019
[0.013]

-0.020**
[0.008]

-0.021***
[0.008]

-0.025***
[0.008]

-0.022***
[0.008]

-0.018**
[0.009]

0.013**
[0.005]

0.006
[0.005]

0.006
[0.005]

0
[0.008]

0
[0.008]

0.026***
[0.005]

0.027***
[0.006]

0.027***
[0.006]

0.026***
[0.006]

0.003
[0.005]

0.002
[0.005]

0.001
[0.005]

0.008
[0.006]

0.007
[0.007]

650
0.16

0.016***
[0.006]
650
0.17

Aid/GDP(j)

Initial per capita GDP(j)

Policy(j) (Sachs-Warner index)

Institutional quality(j) (ICRGE)

Life expectancy(j)

Geography(j)
Observations
R-squared

712
0.09

702
0.11

702
0.16

650
0.15

The estimations in this Table are based on instrumenting for both the aid variables, using the instruments
described in Section II of the text. All standard errors, reported below the coefficient estimates, are robust. ***,
**, and * denote significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively. All equations include industry but not
country fixed effects. All regressors are standardized so that the coefficients measure the impact of a one
standard deviation increase in the j variable times a one standard deviation increase in the i variable. Initial
industry share (ij) refers to the share of industry i in country j as a share of total manufacturing sector value
added in country j. For details on the measures for policy, life expectancy, and geography, see Appendix Table
1A.

- 43 -

Chart 1: Manufacturing and Aid between 1980 and 2000
.4

AGO
SYC

GHA

GRD

ZMB

IDN
MRT
NPL
PRYBFA
CIV
ATG
MWI
ETH
LKA RWA
FJI
UGA
BLZ
CAF
GUY
BEN
VCT
LCA
PNG
GAB
ZWE
GMB
NGA
IND
PAK
DMA
HNDBDI
CHN
CMR
COG
KNA
MDG
NIC BWA
BGD
NER
MLI SEN
MAR
BOL
KEN
JOR SLV
BRB
DOM
THA
PHL
GTM
NAM
CRI
PAN
PER
TUN
MUS
JAM
KEN
BOL
SLV JOR
MAR
NER
SENMLI KNA
BGD
NIC
MDG CMR HND
COG
BWA
CHN
DMA
PAK
INDBDI
NGA
GMB
ZWE
GAB
PNG BEN
LCA
VCT
GUY
CAF
BLZ
UGA
FJI
ETHRWA LKA
ATG MWI
CIV
LSO
PRY
BFA
NPL
MRT
COM
TGO
IDN
TGO

Log Manufacturing/GDP
-.2
0
.2

COM
LSO

ZMB

GRD
GHA

-.4

SYC
AGO

-1

-.5

0
Log Aid/GDP

.5

1

coef = -.15726536, (robust) se = .05571313, t = -2.82

This plot represents the conditional relationship between the change in the size of the
manufacturing sector between 1980 and 2000 in a country and the change in aid over the
same period. It is based on running a panel regression where the dependent variable is log of
the ratio of the share of value added in manufacturing to GDP for a country (at two dates, the
late 1990s and the early 1980s), and the explanatory variables are the country’s per capita
PPP GDP, per capita PPP GDP squared, and fixed effects for the country and the time period.
All variables are averages for the period 1980-85 and 1995-2000, respectively. To facilitate
comparability with the core results in the paper, the sample was chosen according to the same
criteria as in the core the sample of the paper, namely to include countries that had an aid-toGDP ratio greater than 1 percent or are low-income countries. Data on manufacturing are
from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators.

- 44 Chart 2: Share of Manufacturing Relative to Services and Aid Between 1980 and 2000
.5

GHA
SYC
AGO

TGO
GRD

IDN
BEN MRT ZMB
CIV
NPLBFA
BWA
NGA
CAF
MLI
PRY
BDI
BLZ
LKA
FJI
ZWE
NIC
MWI ATG
GAB
IND
CMR
BGDLCA VCT DMA
COG
UGA
MDG
GUY
BOLSEN NER
HND
KEN
JOR
KNA
PNG
PAK MAR
SLV
GMB
CHN
BRB
DOM
THA
PHL
GTM
CRI
NAM
PER
PAN
JAM
TUN
MUS
MAR PAK
CHN
JORGMB
SLV
PNG HND
NER SENBOL KNA
KEN
MDG
GUY
UGA
DMA
CMR COG
LCABGD NIC
VCTMWI
INDGAB
ATG
FJI
LKA
BLZ
BDIZWE PRY
MLI
CAF
NGA
BWA
NPL
BFA
LSO
CIVZMB MRT BEN
RWA
COM
IDN
ETH
GRD
AGO
TGO
SYC

Log Manufacturing/Services

COM
LSO

0

ETH
RWA

GHA

-.5
-1

-.5

0
Log Aid/GDP

.5

1

coef = -.17473486, (robust) se = .06728294, t = -2.6

This plot represents the conditional relationship between the change in the size of the
manufacturing sector relative to the size of the services sector between 1980 and 2000 in a
country and the change in aid over the same period. The share of the services sector is
obtained as 1-(share of agriculture + share of industry). It is based on running a panel
regression where the dependent variable is log of the ratio of the share of value added in
manufacturing to GDP for a country (at two dates, the late 1990s and the early 1980s), and
the explanatory variables are the country’s per capita PPP GDP, per capita PPP GDP
squared, and fixed effects for the country and the time period. All variables are averages for
the period 1980-85 and 1995-2000, respectively. To facilitate comparability with the core
results in the paper, the sample was chosen according to the same criteria as in the core the
sample of the paper, namely, to include countries that had an aid-to-GDP ratio greater than 1
percent or are low-income countries. Data on manufacturing and services are from the World
Bank’s World Development Indicators.

- 45 -

.2

1980s

Banglade sh
Tunisia
Sri La nka
Mor
occo
Hond uras
Indone
sia
Guatemal
Pakistan
a
Maur
itius
Egyp t
Israe
Co lsta R
icavia Kenya
Zambia
Boli
Phili
ppine
s
Jamai
ca
Pap ua New Guinea
IndiaPolandFiji
Ghana
CoJordan
te d 'Ivoire
Ca
meroon
Mad aga scar Tanzania
Swa ziland
Burundi

-.1

0

.1

Thailand

Malawi

Co ngo
Sene gal

Botsw ana

-.2

Difference in the growth rates of value added (j)

Chart 3: Non-Parametric Depiction of Core Result

-.05

0

.05

.1

.15

Aid/GDP (j)
coef = -.58726191, se = .24648494, t = -2.38

We divide the industries into two groups (above and below median) depending on their labor share. Next we
estimate for each country the difference in average growth in annual value added between above and below
median industries. The y-axis measures this difference, which is plotted against the aid-to-GDP received by
each country (x-axis).

- 46 -

Appendix 1. Main Data Sources and Description

Industrial Statistics Database (2003) of the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization (UNIDO) for data on value added and labor share. Data are at 3-digit
level of the International Standard Industrial Classification of All Economic
Activities (ISIC, Revision 2). [UNIDO database].
World Development Indicators (World Bank) for the data on the share of
manufacturing and services in GDP.
WITS (World Integrated Trade Solution) data (World Bank) for exportability index.
OECD’s Development Assistance Committee (DAC) for data on aid.
1.

Growth Rate of Real Value Added:

The UNIDO dataset provides nominal value added both in terms of US dollars and
local currency. The value added figure in US dollars is used for all regression analysis. The
nominal value added (in current US dollars) was changed to a real value added (in constant
Year 2000 US dollars), using the U.S. Producer Production Index provided by the
International Monetary Fund’s International Financial Statistics (IFS). This measure was, in
turn, compared with the real value added in local currency to ascertain its reliability. 29 More
specifically, we required the correlation between the two be higher than 0.75 to be included
in our base sample.
We then calculated the average annual growth rate of real value added for industry i
in country j, for the 1980s and 1990s. We calculated this wherever data existed for at least a
seven-year period.
2.

Average Labor Share:

For each decade, the average labor share for industry i was computed by taking the
unweighted average of the labor share across developing (non-OECD) countries and across
years for which the data on the growth rate of real value added and initial industry share was

29

Since local PPI was not available for all developing countries in IFS, alternative deflators
needed to be used to construct the measure of real value added in local currency.
Accordingly, whenever PPI was not available, we used the effective deflator constructed with
the index of industrial production as in Rajan and Zingales (1998). This deflator is the ratio
of the growth rate of nominal value added in the entire manufacturing sector (from the
UNIDO database) to the growth rate of the index of industrial production (from IFS).
Alternatively, a GDP deflator was used whenever these two series were not available.

- 47 available in the UNIDO database.30 Here, the labor share refers to the ratio of ‘wages and
salaries’ to ‘value added’.
Countries with aid less than 1% of GDP are not included in the regression analysis
because they included a number of emerging market and other countries such as Malta,
Cyprus, and Kuwait that cannot be considered meaningful aid recipients. Peru is dropped
from the base sample due to its unusually high level of growth rates in all industries in the
UNIDO database (i.e. exceeds 100% in all sectors). Niger is dropped from the 1990s sample
as the data contained an observation where the ratio of wages to value added exceeded 17.
We also dropped observations when this ratio exceeded one (this resulted in 10 and 12
observations being dropped respectively from the sample for the 1980s and 1990s). In
addition, the following countries’ labor share parameters are not significantly correlated with
the average labor share parameter: Bolivia, Egypt, Jordan, Mauritius and Zambia for the
1980s, and Egypt, Ethiopia, and Syrian Arab Republic for the 1990s.

30

954 observations for forty countries are used for the 1980s, and 642 observations for
twenty eight countries are used for the 1990s.

- 48 -

Appendix Table 1A. List of Variables and Data Source
Variable Names

Description

Source

Growth Rate of Value
Addedij

Industry i’s annual growth rate of value added in
country j, averaged over each decade.

UNIDO (2003).

Initial Industry
Shareij

Industry i’s share in country j’s total manufacturing
value added at the beginning of the decade.

UNIDO (2003).

Labor Sharei

The labor share index for industry i, measured in terms
of the ratio of wage to value added. The industry index
was constructed by taking the average across years and
countries for each industry and decade.

UNIDO (2003).

Financial
Dependencei

The measure of external financial dependence for all
firms in industry i during the 1980s.

Rajan and Zingales
(1998).

Overvaluation j

The degree of a country’s real exchange rate
overvaluation. See Footnote xx in text for description.

Easterly and levine
(2003).

Exportability indexi

A dummy that takes a value of 1 if industry i has a ratio
of exports to value that exceeds the industry median
value. For each industry, the average ratio of exports to
value added was calculated using a group of developing
countries.

WITS data, World
Bank (at the 3-digit
ISIC code).31

Aid / GDPj

The ratio of aid to GDP for country j.

OECD DAC database.

Policyj

Percent of years that a country is considered open.

Wacziarg and Welch
(2003).

Black market
premiumj

Percent difference between a country’s parallel market
and official exchange rate expressed in terms of the
latter.
Several ICRGE indices averaged for the period 19861995.

Reinhart and Rogoff
(2004).

Life expectancyj

Life expectancy at birth for beginning of the relevant
decade.

WDI

Geographyj

Average of number of frost days and tropical land area.

Bosworth and Collins
(2003).

Institutional qualityj

31

Bosworth and Collins
(2003).

The Trade and Production Database provides the WITS trade data at the 3-digit ISIC
code. This database is available at: www.worldbank.org/research/trade

- 49 -

Appendix Table 1B. Aid as a Percentage of GDP
1980s
Malawi
Burundi
Senegal
Tanzania
Papua New Guinea
Zambia
Madagascar
Sri Lanka
Kenya
Swaziland
Honduras
Botswana
Bolivia
Bangladesh
Congo
Jamaica
Costa Rica
Israel
Mauritius
Fiji
Jordan
Egypt
Cote d'
Ivoire
Pakistan
Cameroon
Ghana
Tunisia
Morocco
Philippines
Guatemala
Indonesia
Thailand
Malta
Panama
Cyprus
India
Barbados
Uruguay
Algeria
Chile
Colombia
Bahamas
Singapore
Korea
Venezuela
Iran
Kuwait

17.56%
14.90%
12.41%
11.71%
11.09%
10.72%
8.67%
8.20%
8.13%
7.24%
6.48%
6.37%
6.15%
5.91%
5.87%
5.68%
4.61%
4.03%
3.59%
3.30%
3.15%
2.96%
2.77%
2.75%
2.59%
2.38%
2.25%
2.14%
1.86%
1.48%
1.17%
1.01%
0.99%
0.99%
0.92%
0.76%
0.73%
0.37%
0.33%
0.32%
0.30%
0.19%
0.16%
0.08%
0.07%
0.06%
0.03%

1990s
Tanzania
Ethiopia
Senegal
Bolivia
Kenya
Jordan
Cameroon
Sri Lanka
Egypt
Morocco
Philippines
Tunisia
Mauritius
Indonesia
Costa Rica
Panama
Algeria
India
Russia
Cyprus
Uruguay
Malaysia
South Africa
Chile
Colombia
Oman
Venezuela
Korea
Singapore
Kuwait
China (Hong Kong)

13.92%
10.83%
10.40%
7.88%
6.73%
6.32%
4.65%
3.57%
3.29%
1.55%
1.37%
1.32%
1.13%
1.02%
0.94%
0.81%
0.64%
0.56%
0.46%
0.34%
0.29%
0.28%
0.27%
0.25%
0.24%
0.18%
0.05%
0.04%
0.03%
0.02%
0.02%

- 50 Appendix Table 1C. Description of ISIC 3-digit Industries, 1980s
ISIC
code

Industrial sectors

311
313
314
321
322
323
324
331
332
341
342
351
352
353
354
355
356
361
362
369
371
372
381
382
383
384
385
390

Food products
Beverages
Tobacco
Textiles
Wearing apparel, except footwear
Leather products
Footwear, except rubber or plastic
Wood products, except furniture
Furniture, except metal
Paper and paper products
Printing and publishing
Industrial chemicals
Other chemicals
Petroleum refineries
Misc. petroleum and coal products
Rubber products
Plastic products
Pottery, china, earthenware
Glass and glass products
Other non-metallic mineral products
Iron and steel
Non-ferrous metals
Fabricated metal products
Machinery, except electrical
Machinery, electrical
Transport equipment
Professioal and scientific equipment
Other manufactured products

Average
Labor
Share

Exportability
Index

0.36
0.26
0.24
0.47
0.51
0.45
0.49
0.47
0.50
0.39
0.51
0.35
0.36
0.19
0.30
0.42
0.36
0.46
0.44
0.37
0.38
0.33
0.45
0.51
0.38
0.47
0.43
0.43

1
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
1
1

Appendix Table 1D: Is the Core Sample Representative?
Variable

Sample in
this paper

Larger sample

Aid to GDP
Mean
5.8%
7.0%
Standard deviation
4.6%
5.6%
Real GDP growth
Mean
1.0%
0.7%
Standard deviation
2.3%
2.1%
Real value added growth in
manufacturing
Mean
4.8%
3.6%
Standard deviation
3.5%
3.6%
Core sample comprises the 33 countries for which UNIDO’s disaggregate manufacturing data are available and
that have aid to GDP less than 1 percent or fall in the category of low-income countries. Larger sample includes
countries that satisfy the same criteria but for which data on aggregate manufacturing is available in the World
Bank’s World Development Indicators (it excludes 3 countries with an aid-to-GDP ratio exceeding 30 percent).

- 51 Appendix 2: An Alternative Instrument

In order to diminish any bias from politically-motivated aid, we could try and extract the
exogenous variation stemming from more “neutral” factors such as macroeconomic and
budgetary conditions in the donor countries. That is, we can estimate the regression
Ad t = α 0 + α1 FBdt + α 2 UN dt +∈dt = α 'X d t +∈d t

(3)

where FBdt is the overall fiscal balance as a share of GDP in donor country d in time period
t, and UN dt is the unemployment rate. The idea is that countries are more likely to be
forthcoming with aid when their budgetary positions are more favorable, a factor that is
likely to be exogenous to a recipient country’s long run growth. The explanatory variables
are obtained from the IMF’s World Economic Outlook (WEO) database.
We then use the predicted value, Aˆ dt = α 'X d t , to estimate the instrument
GDP Aˆ .θˆ
Art =

dt

dt

drt

d

GDPrt

The rest of the estimation is as with the instrument used in the text.

(4)

- 52 References

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James A. Robinson, and Yunyong Thaicharoen, 2003,
“Institutional Causes, Macroeconomic Symptoms: Volatility, Crises and Growth,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, No. 50, pp. 49-123.
Adam, Christopher, 2005, “Exogenous Inflows and Real Exchange Rates: Theoretical Quirk
or Empirical Reality?” Peter Isard, Leslie Lipschitz, Alexandros Mourmouras,
Boriana Yontcheva, (eds.), The Macroeconomic Management Of Foreign Aid,
(Washington: International Monetary Fund).
Adam, Christopher, and Stephen A. O’Connell, 1999, "Aid, Taxation and Development in
Sub Saharan Africa," Economics and Politics, Vol. 11, November, pp. 225-53.
Alesina, Alberto and David Dollar, 2000, “Who Gives Foreign Aid to Whom and Why?”
Journal of Economic Growth, Vol. 5, No. 1, pp. 33-63.
Alesina, Alberto, and Beatrice Weder, 2002, "Do Corrupt Governments Receive Less
Foreign Aid?" American Economic Review, Vol. 92, No. 4, pp. 1126-37.
Arellano, C., A. Bulir, T. Lane, L. Lipschitz, 2005, “The Dynamic Implications of Foreign
Aid and Its Variability,” IMF Working Paper 05/119, Washington: International
Monetary Fund.
Atingi-Ego, Michael, and Rachel Sebudde, 2000, “Uganda’s Equilibrium Real Exchange
Rate and its Implications for Non-Traditional Export Performance,” Bank of Uganda
Staff Papers, Vol. 2, No. 1, pp. 1-43.
Azam, Jean-Paul, Shantayanan Devarajan, and Stephen A. O'
Connell, 1999, "Aid
Dependence Reconsidered," World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 2144.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Shawn Cole, Esther Duflo, and Leigh Linden, 2004, “Remedying
Education: Evidence from two randomized experiments in India,” Mimeo, MIT.
Banerjee, Abhijit and Lakshmi Iyer, 2005, “History, Institutions, and Economic performance:
The Legacy of Colonial Land Tenure Systems in India,” American Economic Review,
pp. 1190-1213.
Barro, Robert J., and Jong-Wha Lee, 2004, “IMF Programs: Who is Chosen and What are the
Effects?” mimeo.
Bauer, P.T., 1971, Dissent on Development: Studies and Debates in Development
Economics, London: Weidenfeld & Nicholson.
Berg, A., M. Hussain, S. Aiyar, S. Roache, and A. Mahone, 2005, “The Macroeconomics of
Managing Increased Aid Inflows: Experiences of Low-Income Countries and Policy
Implications,”(Washington: International Monetary Fund)

- 53 Bhagwati, Jagdish, and Padma Dasai, 1970, Planning for Industrialization, London: Oxford
University Press.
Brautigam and Knack, 2004, “Foreign Aid, Institutions, and Governance in Sub-Saharan
Africa,” Economic Development and Cultural Change, pp. 255-85.
Bulir, A. and T.Lane, 2002, “Aid and Fiscal Management,” IMF Working Paper 02/112.
Burnside, Craig and David Dollar (2000) “Aid, Policies, and Growth,” American Economic
Review No. 90 Vol. 4, pp. 847-68.
Clemens, Michael A., Steven Radelet and Rikhil Bhavnani, 2004, “Counting Chickens when
They Hatch: The Short Term Effect of Aid on Growth,” Working Paper No. 44,
Center for Global Development.
Cordon and Neary, 1982, “Booming Sector and De-Industrialization in a Small Open
Economy,” Economic Journal, December, Vol. 92, No. 368, pp. 825-48.
Collier, Paul, and David Dollar, 2002,"Aid Allocation and Poverty Reduction," European
Economic Review, Vol. 46, No. 8, pp. 1475-1500.
Dalgaard, Carl-Johan, Henrik Hansen and Finn Tarp, 2004, “On the Empirics of Foreign Aid
and Growth,” Economic Journal, Vol. 114, No. 496, pp.191-216.
Dollar, D., 1992, “Outward-oriented developing economies really do grow more rapidly:
evidence from 95 LCDs, 1976-1985,” Economic Development and Cultural Change,
Vol. 40, pp. 523-44.
Easterly, William, 2003, “Can Foreign Aid Buy Growth?” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, Vol. 17, No. 3, pp. 23-48.
Easterly, William, and Ross Levine, 2003, "Tropics, Germs, and Crops: How Endowments
Influence Economic Development," Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 50, No. 1,
pp. 3-39.
Easterly, William, Ross Levine, and David Roodman, 2004, “New Data, New Doubts: A
Comment on Burnside and Dollar’s Aid, Policies, and Growth,” American Economic
Review, forthcoming.
Elbadawi, I. A., 1999, “External Aid: Help or Hindrance to Export Orientation in Africa?”
Journal of African Economics, Vol. 8, December, pp. 578-616.
Frankel, Jeffrey, 2004, “On the Yuan: The Choice between Adjustment under a Fixed
Exchange Rate and the Adjustment under Flexible Rate,” CESifo Economic Studies,
Gerhard Illing (ed.).
Frankel, Jeffery, and David Romer, 1999, “Does Trade Cause Growth?” American Economic
Review, Vol. 89, No. 3, pp. 379-99.

- 54 Friedman, Milton, 1958, “Foreign Economic Aid,” Yale Review, Vol. 47, No. 4, pp. 501-16.
Hansen, Henrik, and Finn Tarp, 2001, “Aid and Growth Regressions,” Journal of
Development Economics, Vol. 64. pp. 547-70.
Johnson, Simon, Jonathan Ostry, and Arvind Subramanian, 2006, "Prospects for Africa:
Benchmarking the Contsraints," mimeo, International Monetary Fund, Washington
D.C.
Jones, Benjamin, and Benjamin Olken, 2005, “The Anatomy of Start-Stop Growth,” NBER
Working paper, No. 11528.
Knack, S., 2001, “Aid Dependence and the Quality of Governance: Cross-Country and
Empirical Test,” Southern Economic Journal, pp. 310-329.
Kremer, Michael, Edward Miguel, and Rebecca Thornton, 2004, "Incentives to Learn,"
NBER Working Paper No. W10971.
Krugman, P.R., 1987, “The Narrow Moving Band, the Dutch Disease, and the Economic
Consequences of Mrs. Thatcher,” Journal of Development Economics.
Krueger, A.O., 1975, The Benefits and Costs of Import Substitution in India: A
Microeconomic Study (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press).
Nicita, Alessandro, and Marcelo Olarreaga, 2001, "Trade and Production, 1976–99," Policy
Research Working Paper Series 2701, (Washington: The World Bank.).
Nyoni, Timothy, 1998, “Foreign Aid and Economic Performance in Tanzania,” World
Development, Vol. 26, No. 7, pp. 1235-40.
Prati, Alessandro, and Thiessy Tressel, 2006, "Aid Volatility and Dutch Disease. Is There a
role for Macroeconomic Policies?" mimeo, (Washington: International Monetary
Fund).
Rajan, Raghuram, and Arvind Subramanian, 2005, "Aid and Growth: What Does the CrossCountry Evidence Really Show?" NBER Working Paper 11513.
Rajan, Raghuram, and Luigi Zingales, 1998, “Financial Dependence and Growth,” American
Economic Review, Vol. 88, No. 3, pp.559-86.
Reinhart, Carmen, and Kenneth Rogoff, 2004, “The Modern History of Exchange Rate
Arrangements,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol.119, No. 1, pp. 1-48.
Rodriguez, Francisco and Dani Rodrik, 1997, “Trade Policy and Economic Growth: A
Skeptic’s Guide to the Cross-National Evidence,” in Ben Bernanke and Kenneth
Rogoff (eds.) NBER Macroeconomics Manual,2000.
Roodman, David, 2004, “The Anarchy of Numbers: Aid, Development, and Cross-country
Empirics,” (Washington: Center for Global Development).

- 55 Staiger, Douglas, and James Stock (1997) "Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak
Instruments," Econometrica, No. 65 Vol. 3; pp. 557-86.
Subramanian, Arvind, and Utsav Kumar, 2006, “Counting Chickens before they Hatch: A
Comment,” mimeo, (Washington: International Monetary Fund).
Svensson, Jakob, 2003, “Why Conditional Aid Doesn’t Work and What Can Be Done About
It?" Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 70, No. 2, pp. 381-402.
United Nations Industrial Development Organization, 2003, Database on Industrial
Statistics, United Nations, Vienna.
Van Wijnbergen, Sweder, 1986, “Macroeconomic Aspects of the effectiveness of Aid: One
the Two-Gap Model, Home Goods Disequilibrium, and Real Exchange Rate
Misalignment,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 21, No. 1-2, pp 123-36.
Vos, Rob, 1998, “Aid Flows and Dutch Disease in a general Equilibrium Framework for
Pakistan,” Journal of Policy Modelling, Vol. 20, No. 1, pp. 77-109.
World Bank, 2004, “Making Services Work for Poor People,” World Development Report:
World Bank, 1998, “Knowledge for Development,” World Development Report
Yano, Makoto, and Jeffrey B. Nugent, 1999, “Aid, Nontraded Goods, and the Transfer
Paradox in Small Countries,” The American Economic Review, Vol. 89, No.3,
pp. 431-49.
Younger, Stephen, 1992, “Aid and Dutch Disease: Macroeconomic Management When
Everybody Loves You,” World Development, Vol. 20, No. 11, pp. 1587-97.

