                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              THE DECLINE OF THE INDEPENDENT
                             INVENTOR: A SCHUMPTERIAN STORY

                                          Naomi R. Lamoreaux
                                          Kenneth L. Sokoloff

                                          Working Paper 11654
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11654


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2005
We would like to express our appreciation to our research assistants Marigee Bacolod, Young-Nahn Baek,
Dalit Baranoff, Lisa Boehmer, Nancy Cole, Yael Elad, Svjetlana Gacinovic, Brian Houghton, Anna Maria
Lagiss, Huagang Li, Catherine Truong Ly, Homan Dayani, Gina Franco, Charles Kaljian, David Madero
Suarez, John Majewski, Yolanda McDonough Summerhill, Brian Rivera, Ludmila Skulkina, Dhanoos
Sutthiphisal, Matthew Wiswall, and Tamara Zavaliyenko. We are also indebted to Zorina Khan for her
collaboration with us in collecting the great inventor data sets and for her invaluable advice, as well as to
Marjorie Ciarlante and Carolyn Cooper for their help in accessing the records of the Patent Office at the
National Archives. We have also benefited from discussions with Robert Allen, Ashish Arora, Sally Clarke,
Iain Cockburn, Wes Cohen, Paul David, Stanley Engerman, Joseph Ferrie, Catherine Fisk, Avner Greif,
Louis Galambos, Timothy Guinnane, Stephen Haber, Rebecca Henderson, David Hounshell, Thomas P.
Hughes, Adam Jaffe, Margaret Jacob, Margaret Levenstein, Josh Lerner, Joel Mokyr, Ariel Pakes, Daniel
Raff, Jean-Laurent Rosenthal, Bhaven Sampat, Suzanne Scotchmer, John Kenly Smith, Jr., Scott Stern,
William Summerhill, Peter Temin, Ross Thomson, Manuel Trajtenberg, Steven Usselman, Michael
Waldman, John Wallis, Norton Wise, Gavin Wright, Mary Yeager, and participants in seminar presentations
at the Washington Area Seminar in Economic History, Harvard University, Northwestern University, Oxford
University, Stanford University, and Yale University, at meetings of the Economic History Association and
the NBER's Entrepreneurship Group, and, of course, at the Loufest Conference. We gratefully acknowledge
the financial support we have received for this research from the National Science Foundation, as well as
from All Souls College at Oxford University, the Russell Sage Foundation, the Social Science Research
Council, and the Collins Endowment and the Academic Senate at the University of California, Los Angeles.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Naomi R. Lamoreaux and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Decline of the Independent Inventor: A Schumpterian Story?
Naomi R. Lamoreaux and Kenneth L. Sokoloff
NBER Working Paper No. 11654
September 2005
JEL No. N, O

                                           ABSTRACT




Joseph Schumpeter argued in Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy that the rise of large firms’
investments in in-house R&D spelled the doom of the entrepreneurial innovator. We explore this
idea by analyzing the career patterns of successive cohorts of highly productive inventors from the
late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. We find that over time highly productive inventors
were increasingly likely to form long-term attachments with firms. In the Northeast, these
attachments seem to have taken the form of employment positions within large firms, but in the
Midwest inventors were more likely to become principals in firms bearing their names.
Entrepreneurship, therefore, was by no means dead, but the increasing capital requirements—both
financial and human—for effective invention and the need for inventors to establish a reputation
before they could attract support made it more difficult for creative people to pursue careers as
inventors. The relative numbers of highly productive inventors in the population correspondingly
decreased, as did rates of patenting per capita.


Naomi R. Lamoreaux                                   Kenneth L. Sokoloff
UCLA Department of Economics                         UCLA Department of Economics
405 Hilgard Avenue                                   405 Hilgard Avenue
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477                           Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER                                             and NBER
lamoreaux@econ.ucla.edu                              sokoloff@ucla.edu
                                                                                                              1




           The perfectly bureaucratized giant industrial unit not only ousts the small or medium-

           sized firm and “expropriates” its owners, but in the end it also ousts the entrepreneur and

           expropriates the bourgeoisie as a class which in the process stands to lose not only its

           income but also what is infinitely more important, its function. The true pacemakers of

           socialism were not the intellectuals or agitators who preached it but the Vanderbilts,

           Carnegies and Rockefellers.

                                                                     Joseph A. Schumpeter1



           For Joseph Schumpeter, the heart of the capitalist system was the entrepreneur—an

extraordinary individual who had the foresight to see profit in new products or production

processes as well as the tenacity to overcome any obstacles that stood in the way. Schumpeter

believed that the rise of large firms in the early twentieth century was making the entrepreneur

obsolete. By investing in in-house R&D laboratories staffed by teams of engineers and

scientists, large firms had routinized the process of innovation, “depersonalized and

autonomatized” technological change, so that the incremental advances were realized “as a

matter of course.” In such an environment not only did “personality and will power,” and thus

the entrepreneur, “count for less,” but the greater efficiency of large-scale enterprises was

undermining the small- and medium-size firms that historically had been the spawning ground

for heroic innovators with radically new ideas about how to do things. These developments,

Schumpeter foretold, would have profound consequences for the entire society. Because




1
    Joseph A. Schumpeter, Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy (3rd edn.; New York: Harper & Row, 1950), p. 134.
                                                                                                     2


entrepreneurs were the primary political supports for “private property and free contracting,”

their eclipse would pave the way for socialist revolution.2

           From the standpoint of the early twenty-first century, it may be difficult to take this

vision of the decline of capitalism seriously. On the eve of World War II, however, when

Schumpeter was writing Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy, it seemed much more

compelling—both on logical and empirical grounds. During the 1920s, many privately held

firms in new-technology industries had taken advantage of the boom in stock-market prices to go

public, increasing their scale and adding new layers of professional management to their

company hierarchies. This era, in which the roles of financiers (and the managers who served

their interests) appeared to have been elevated above those who created new technologies, gave

way to a deep and prolonged depression that weighed heavily on the populations of capitalist

countries. Gloom about the future was pervasive, and rival systems, such as Communism in the

Soviet Union, attracted growing numbers of adherents throughout the West.

           During the post-World War II period, the technological prowess exhibited by General

Electric, IBM, and other giant corporations spurred widespread acceptance of Schumpeter’s

belief that large firms were undermining the basis for individual entrepreneurship. Indeed,

despite mounting evidence that large firms were losing their edge, the idea that technological

discovery was most effectively pursued inside large integrated enterprises became, if anything,

more dominant in the scholarship during the 1980s, when the so-called “new economics of

information” supplied an alternative theoretical rationale. According to this theory, problems of

asymmetric information place severe limits on the exchange of technological ideas in the market.

Before firms will invest in a technology, they need to be able to assess its value—to estimate, for

example, the extent to which a new process will lower production costs, or whether a novel
2
    Schumpeter, Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy, pp. 131-63.
                                                                                                                    3


product will likely appeal to consumers. But because inventors (or other sellers of new

technology) fear that firms will steal their ideas, they typically will not be willing to provide

potential purchasers with enough information to effectuate sales. Moving the process of

technological discovery within the firm not only overcomes this source of market failure, but

also, it is argued, yields other informational advantages. For example, firms with R&D labs will

be in a better position to exploit ideas for innovation that arise from the actual experience of

producing or marketing goods. This kind of knowledge is largely firm-specific and can be

transmitted much more readily among personnel responsible for different functions within the

organization than it can across organizational boundaries.3

         Certainly, there is evidence that the dynamics of technological change shifted during the

early twentieth century in ways that seem, at least on the surface, to fit Schumpeter’s analysis of

the demise of the entrepreneur. As Figure 1 shows, patenting rates per capita increased

dramatically across the nineteenth century, peaked around the turn of the century, and then began

a long period of decline. In other words, patenting rates appear to have been inversely correlated



3
  See Kenneth J. Arrow, “Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Invention,” in The Rate and
Direction of Economic Activity (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1962), pp. 609-25; David C. Mowery, “The
Relationship between Intrafirm and Contractual forms of Industrial Research in American Manufacturing, 1900-
1940,” Explorations in Economic History, 20 (Oct. 1983), pp. 351-74; Mowery, “The Boundaries of the U.S. Firm
in R&D,” in Coordination and Information: Historical Perspectives on the Organization of Enterprise, ed. Naomi
R. Lamoreaux and Daniel M. G. Raff (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995), pp. 147-76; and David J.
Teece, “Technological Change and the Nature of the Firm,” in Technical Change and Economic Theory, ed.
Giovanni Dosi, et al. (London: Pinter, 1998), pp. 256-81.
          In recent years, this view of the inherent superiority of large-firm R&D has come under attack from
scholars who show that it both overestimates the problems associated with the market exchange of technological
ideas and underestimates the difficulty of managing technological information within the firm. This article is part of
that revisionist effort. See also Ashish Arora, Andrea Fosfuri, and Alfonso Gambardella, Markets for Technology:
The Economics of Innovation and Corporate Strategy (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2001); Joshua Gans and Scott Stern,
“The Product Market and the Market for ‘Ideas’: Commercialization Strategies for Technology Entrepreneurs,”
Research Policy, 32 (Feb. 2003), pp. 333-50; Naomi R. Lamoreaux and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, “Inventors, Firms, and
the Market for Technology in the Late Nineteenth and Early Twentieth Centuries,” in Learning by Doing in
Markets, Firms, and Countries, ed. Naomi R. Lamoreaux, Daniel M. G. Raff, and Peter Temin (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1999), pp. 19-60; and Lamoreaux and Sokoloff, “Intermediaries in the U.S. Market for
Technology, 1870-1920,” in Finance, Intermediaries, and Economic Development, ed. Stanley L. Engerman, et al.
(New York: Cambridge University Press, 2003), pp. 209-46.
                                                                                                       4


with the growth of in-house R&D, dropping in the twentieth century as more and more firms

created their own research laboratories.

         Of course, we recognize that there are objections to using patents as a measure of

entrepreneurial innovation. Schumpeter himself explicitly distinguished the concept of

innovation from that of invention. What entrepreneurs did when they innovated, according to

Schumpeter, was to take a new idea (an invention) and make it work—that is, embody the idea in

a productive enterprise and generate profits. It was the latter achievement that was important to

Schumpeter, not the discovery of the invention. We also recognize that patenting is an imperfect

measure even of invention. Some valuable inventions are never patented, and many inventions

are patented that have little or no economic significance.

         Nonetheless, we contend that data on trends in patenting are useful for testing

Schumpeter’s argument about the diminishing role of the entrepreneur in technological change

and, more generally, in capitalism. The essence of a patent is the grant of an exclusive property

right to a new technological idea. By making property out of intangible knowledge—property

that could be exploited by the owner or sold or leased to someone else—the patent system

created the foundation of property rights upon which entrepreneurial innovation flourished. As

we will show, moreover, it was this foundation, and the flourishing market for patented

technology it made possible, that created the conditions for the emergence of a class of talented,

highly entrepreneurial inventors who specialized in the production for sale of new technological

ideas.

         Before plunging into this demonstration, it is useful to provide a brief description of our

data. The starting point for our analysis is three random cross-sectional samples (totaling about

6,600 patents) that we drew from the Annual Reports of the Commissioner of Patents for the
                                                                                                                     5


years 1870-71, 1890-91, and 1910-11. For each patent in the samples we recorded a brief

description of the invention, the name and location of the patentee(s), and the names and

locations of any assignees granted rights to the invention before the date the patent was issued.

We also linked this data on patents to other information, such as characteristics of the firms to

which the patentees assigned their patent rights. Our second major data set is longitudinal and

was obtained by selecting from the three cross-sectional samples all (561) inventors whose last

names began with the letter “B.” We then collected information from Patent Gazettes and from

the Annual Reports of the Commissioner of Patents for all of the (6057) patents obtained by these

patentees for the twenty-five years before and after they appeared in one of our samples, again

linking this data to the same kinds of sources we used for the original cross-sections. For our

third data set, we collected similar information for patents granted in selected years to “great

inventors” born between 1820 and 1885. We defined great inventors as individuals whose

technological discoveries were notable enough to earn them inclusion in the Dictionary of

American Biography. In addition to specific information on a substantial subset of their patents,

we collected biographical detail on these inventors from the dictionary entries, as well as the

total number of patents each received over his or her career.4

         In the analysis that follows we first describe the details of the patent system that were

most important for supporting entrepreneurial innovation. After legislation in 1836 put the final

elements of this system in place, both patenting and trade in patent rights boomed. The result,


4
  This data set was compiled in collaboration with B. Zorina Khan. The approach to the collection of information
was basically the same as that previously followed by Khan and Sokoloff for the period before, except that we
systematically collected information on assignments at issue and opted to sample all patents awarded through 1846,
and then those in every fifth year from 1850 on rather than obtain detailed information on every patent the inventor
was granted. See B. Zorina Khan and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, “‘Schemes of Practical Utility’: Entrepreneurship and
Innovation Among ‘Great Inventors’ During Early American Industrialization, 1790-1865,” Journal of Economic
History, 53 (June 1993), pp. 289-307. We will also refer in this article to earlier work based on samples taken from
the manuscript records of patent assignments. In order to be legally binding, a contract for the sale or transfer of a
patent right had to be recorded with the Patent Office. These records are now stored in the National Archives.
                                                                                                                6


we show, was the emergence by the last third of the century of a broad group of specialized,

highly productive, and highly entrepreneurial inventors. It was the thinning of the ranks of these

independent inventors that accounts for much of the decline in patenting rates in the early

twentieth century. The rest of this article is devoted to examining the changing career patterns of

this extraordinary group of inventors in order to understand why their numbers were dwindling.



The Patent System and the Rise of Institutions Supporting a Market for Technology

        The institutional foundation for the rise of the independent inventor was the U.S. patent

system, created in accordance with the Commerce Clause of the Constitution. Although

influenced by British law, the framers of the U.S. system self-consciously made a number of

important innovations. Among them were dramatically lower fees, impersonal administrative

procedures for handling applications, and the requirement that a patentee be the “first and true”

inventor anywhere in the world. Patentees also had to be individual men or women; firms could

not receive patents directly for ideas developed in their shops. The individuals who received

patent grants then had the option of exploiting their property rights themselves, or they could sell

(assign) or lease (license) them to other individuals or to firms. These provisions not only

extended the protection of property rights to a much broader range of inventions than obtained in

Britain or elsewhere in Europe but, when coupled with effective enforcement, meant that

inventors could advantageously reveal information about their ideas to prospective buyers even

before they received a patent.5




5
  For a comparison of the U.S. and British patent systems, see B. Zorina Khan and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, “Two Paths
to Industrial Development and Technological Change,” in Technological Revolutions in Europe, 1760-1860, ed.
Maxine Berg and Kristine Bruland (Cheltenham: Elgar, 1998), pp. 292-313.
                                                                                                                 7


        Although the main purpose of the patent system was to stimulate invention by granting

creative individuals secure rights to their intellectual property, another important goal was to

promote the diffusion of technological knowledge. The law required patentees to provide the

Patent Office with detailed specifications of their inventions (including, where appropriate,

working models), and the result was a central storehouse of information that was open to all.

Anyone could journey to Washington and study the specifications of inventions already patented.

In addition, more convenient means of tapping this rich source of information soon developed.

The Patent Office itself began to publish on a regular basis lists of the patents it granted. By the

middle of the century, moreover, a number of private journals had emerged to improve upon this

official service. One of the most important was Scientific American, published by Munn and

Company, the largest patent agency of the nineteenth century. Others included the American

Artisan, published by the patent agency Brown, Coombs & Company; the American Inventor, by

the American Patent Agency; and the Patent Right Gazette, by the United States Patent Right

Association (which, despite its name, functioned as a general patent agency). Covering the full

spectrum of technologies, these journals featured articles about important new inventions,

printed complete lists of patents issued, and offered inventors advice about how to profit from

their ideas. Many pages were devoted to classified advertisements by patent agents and lawyers

soliciting clients, by inventors seeking partners with capital to invest, and by patentees hoping to

sell or lease rights to their technologies. One of the primary aims of these journals, of course,

was to drum up business for the patent agencies that published them.6

        During the early years of the century, patent rights were awarded automatically to all

inventors who registered their inventions and paid the necessary fees. This procedure effectively


6
 See Lamoreaux and Sokoloff, “Inventors, Firms, and the Market for Technology in the Late Nineteenth and Early
Twentieth Centuries” and “Intermediaries in the U.S. Market for Technology.”
                                                                                                                  8


delegated to the courts responsibility for resolving disputes about the originality, novelty, and

appropriate scope of patent rights. New legislation in 1836 resolved the obvious problems this

system created by requiring that each invention be scrutinized by technically trained examiners

to insure that it constituted an original advance in the state of the art and otherwise conformed to

the law. Uncertainty about the value of patents decreased dramatically after the passage of this

law, and trade in patent rights boomed, attaining very quickly a volume of three to six times the

number of patents issued.7

        The bulk of this early commerce in patents (80 to 90 percent of transactions during the

1840s) involved efforts by inventors to make multiple partial assignments of their rights for

different, geographically restricted areas. Because markets were primarily local or regional,

inventors with valuable intellectual property could use their ideas in their own manufacturing

facilities and, at the same time, earn additional profits by assigning partial rights to their

inventions to producers in other parts of the country. Thomas Blanchard, inventor of the

gunstocking lathe, a woodbending machine, and a variety of other devices, exploited these

possibilities to the hilt. For example, he used his lathe himself to make gunstocks for the Boston

market and for export. He also leased the rights to use the invention to gun producers operating

in other locations and to manufacturers making shoe lasts, tool handles, wheel spokes, and a

variety of other goods in different places around the country.8

        After the development of the railroad network and the emergence of national product

markets, interest in purchasing geographically segmented patent rights declined, and


7
  B. Zorina Khan, “Property Rights and Patent Litigation in Early Nineteenth-Century America,” Journal of
Economic History, 55 (March 1995), pp. 58-97; Naomi R. Lamoreaux and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, “The Market for
Technology and the Organization of Invention in U.S. History,” in Entrepreneurship, Innovation and the Growth
Mechanism of the Free-Market Economies, ed. William Baumol and Eytan Sheshinski (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, forthcoming); and Lamoreaux and Sokoloff, “Intermediaries in the U.S. Market for Technology.”
8
  Carolyn C. Cooper, Shaping Invention: Thomas Blanchard’s Machinery and Patent Management in Nineteenth-
Century America (New York: Columbia University Press, 1991).
                                                                                                                9


manufacturers instead sought to acquire full national rights to important technologies. As a

result, already by 1870 the proportion of assignments that were geographically specific had

dropped to 23 percent of the total, and the proportion would fall to 5 percent by 1890. Moreover,

in a legal environment where many, if not most, inventions were protected by patents, and where

this kind of property right was vigorously enforced, maintaining one’s competitive position often

meant beating out rivals to secure exclusive rights to new devices. As firms eagerly snapped up

new technological ideas, the proportion of patents that were assigned before they were even

issued rose from 18 percent of the total in 1870-71 to 29 percent by 1890-91.9

        As a consequence of the growth of national markets, the ways in which inventors could

extract the returns from their ideas necessarily changed. Whereas Blanchard could make use of

his invention himself and also sell off partial rights to others, patentees now typically faced a

stark choice. They could either exploit their inventions directly by establishing enterprises

capable of operating in national (or even international markets), or they could sell or license their

rights to others better situated to develop and commercialize the technology on a large scale.

Regardless, they could now benefit greatly from the assistance of specialized intermediaries who

could help them find buyers or leasers for their national patent rights, or alternatively could help

them secure the financial backing they needed to found their own enterprises (whether for the

direct commercial exploitation of their inventions or for the generation and patenting of new

technological knowledge to be sold or licensed out).

        Although the role of intermediary could be played by almost any kind of business person,

patent agents and lawyers were particularly well suited for this task. Indeed, inventors who used

the services of these professionals were able on average to sell their patents more quickly than

9
  Lamoreaux and Sokoloff, “Inventors, Firms, and the Market for Technology in the Late Nineteenth and Early
Twentieth Centuries,” p. 26. These figures are based on a sample of assignment contracts taken from the manuscript
records in the National Archives.
                                                                                                    10


anyone else (by the early 1870s, 47 percent of the assignments handled by individuals known to

be patent agents or lawyers occurred before issue, as opposed to 18 percent handled by other

intermediaries, and only 9 percent handled by the parties themselves). Not only did patent

agents and lawyers usually have considerable technical training, but in the course of their

ordinary business they serviced both sides of market for technology, helping inventors file patent

applications and assisting buyers in evaluating inventions’ technical merits. They were therefore

in a good position to obtain information about new technologies coming on the market, as well

as to know the kinds of technologies that particular buyers were interested in purchasing.

Located in urban centers, these agents typically had connections with colleagues in other cities—

sometimes formally through partnerships, sometimes informally through family ties, and

sometimes simply through repeat interactions—and thus were able to weave into a national web

the dense local networks that each of them created.10

           As is evident from Table 1, both the propensity to trade patent rights and the location of

concentrations of patent agents were positively associated across regions with rates of patenting

per capita. New England, which had exhibited the highest patenting rates in the nation since the

beginning of the nineteenth century, had both the largest proportion of patents assigned at issue

as well as the most disproportionate concentration of patent agents relative to population. The

Middle Atlantic and the East North Central regions were the next highest respectively in

patenting, assignments rates, and the clustering of agents. The South ranked lowest on all three

scales.

           This robust regional correspondence between the extent of the market for technology and

patenting rates is exactly what one would expect to observe. On the one hand, intermediaries

should, all other things being equal, concentrate in areas where rates of invention were already
10
     Lamoreaux and Sokoloff, “Intermediaries in the U.S. Market for Technology.”
                                                                                                      11


high. On the other, the presence of firms and institutions conducive to trade in technology

should stimulate greater specialization in invention—in the first place, by increasing the net

returns that inventors could expect from a given discovery (encouraging individuals with a

comparative advantage in invention to make appropriate investments in physical and human

capital) and, second, by making it easier for inventors to raise capital to support their inventive

activity. Individuals already inclined to specialize in invention might also be expected to move

to cities or regions with more developed market institutions or greater demand for new

technological knowledge. As we show in the next section, inventors did indeed respond to these

various incentives in a manner befitting Schumpeterian entrepreneurs.



Independent Inventors as Entrepreneurs

        Once one accepts the notion that inventions were a tradable good which, like other tradable

goods, could be a source of profit, then it is not difficult to see how specialized inventors resembling

Schumpeterian entrepreneurs emerged and thrived during the second half of the nineteenth century.

The entrepreneurial bent of these specialized inventors manifested itself in a variety of ways.

Perhaps the most significant was the extensive use they made of the market for technology—

extracting the returns from their patented inventions by selling off the property rights to other

individuals or firms. The resulting division of labor gave inventors the freedom to concentrate on

what they did best—invent. It also allowed them to take better advantage of differences across

firms in the ability or inclination to exploit the commercial potential of particular inventions.

        That the evolution of this market for patented inventions did in fact expand opportunities for

the technologically creative is suggested by the jump in the relative importance of specialized

inventors between the first and last third of the nineteenth century (see Table 2). The proportion
                                                                                                                     12


of patents in any given year that were awarded to individuals who received ten or more patents over

their careers increased from below 5 percent during the early 1800s to 28.9 and 35.9 percent

respectively in 1870-71 and 1890-91.11 Moreover, as indicated by their higher rates of assignment at

issue by the late nineteenth century, inventors who were more specialized or productive at this

activity were the ones most likely to trade away the rights to their patents (see Table 3).12 This

association strengthened over time, so that, by the 1910-11 subsample, inventors with 10 or more

career patents assigned 62.4 percent of their patents by the date they were issued (56.2 percent of

them to companies), whereas those with just 1 or 2 career patents assigned only 15.0 percent of their

patents.

         Because the inventors who were most successful at coming up with important new

technological ideas were also likely to be those most inclined toward, and best able to mobilize

resources for, continuing along that career path, it seems likely that these specialized, market-

oriented patentees played an even more disproportionate role in generating significant (high-value)

inventions. This view is consistent with the finding that the career patent totals for our sample of

great inventors were far higher than they were for representative (“B”) patentees and also that the

greater inventors were much more likely to assign away their inventions than other patentees. For

example, great inventors born between 1820 and 1839 received on average 35.1 patents over their

careers, those born between 1840 and 1859 received on average 68.8 patents, and those born

between 1860 and 1885 received 100.0. The respective rates of assignment for these cohorts were

29.3, 42.9, and 64.2 percent. By contrast, the average numbers of patents received by the different


11
   The fall in the proportion of patents that were awarded to inventors with 10 or more patents over their careers
between 1890-1891 and 1910-1911 may have resulted from some tendency in our data collection method to
oversample patents for the first subsample of inventors relative to the second, but it may also have resulted from
early-twentieth-century changes in the environment for invention that we discuss below.
12
   In previous work, based on the manuscript assignment records stored at the National Archives, we have shown
that the more productive inventors were also more likely to use specialized intermediaries. See Lamoreaux and
Sokoloff, “Intermediaries in the U.S. Market for Technology.”
                                                                                                             13


subsamples of our “B” inventors ranged between 7.8 and 15.6, and assignment rates were

significantly lower. The evidence thus supports the view that, by the last third of the nineteenth

century, there had emerged a class of highly productive and entrepreneurial inventors geared toward

selling off the rights to their discoveries, and that this class was a crucial source of new

technological knowledge.

        Here skeptics might object that the high assignment rates we observe for specialized

inventors did not necessarily reflect their entrepreneurial orientation toward the market for

technology but instead might simply indicate that they were employees of the firms to which they

assigned their patents. Upon closer examination, however, we can reject this possibility. During

the middle of the nineteenth century, as we have already discussed, most assignments involved

patentees selling geographically delimited rights to firms or individuals in different jurisdictions;

such geographic assignments were virtually always arms-length transactions. Moreover, in earlier

work we traced the occupations of “B” patentees wherever possible in city directories. We found

that, even as the prevalence of geographic assignments declined over time with the emergence of

national product markets, it remained quite unusual for highly productive inventors to be employees

of the firms that obtained their patent rights. To the contrary, the great majority of these patentees

either had no long-term attachment with their assignees or, as was increasingly the case by the early

twentieth century, were principals in the firms to which they assigned their patents.13

        The entrepreneurial opportunities that the ability to sell off patent rights afforded specialized

inventors were not merely potential. Productive inventors seem actively to have pursued them by

assigning their inventions to multiple individuals and firms. This pattern is evident from Table 4,

which examines the assignment behavior of the 545 patentees from our “B” sample who were


13
 Lamoreaux and Sokoloff, “Inventors, Firms, and the Market for Technology in the Late Nineteenth and Early
Twentieth Centuries.”
                                                                                                                         14


residents of the United States during at least some period of their careers. 168 of these patentees (or

30.8 percent) received ten or more patents over the fifty years we followed them (accounting for

80.6 percent of the total 5,794 patents awarded to the 545 inventors), and 51 of these 168 transferred

their patents at issue to four or more different assignees. These 51 patentees (9.4 percent of the total

number of patentees) received 2034 patents (or more than 35 percent of total patents). In

comparison, the 36 patentees with ten or more patents (6.6 percent of the sample) who dealt with

only one assignee over their careers received only 727 patents (12.5 percent of the total).14

         Even stronger evidence for such entrepreneurial behavior comes from our sample of great

inventors. Although our estimates (in Table 5) of their contractual mobility are based only on a

twenty percent sample of their patents, and are thus downward biased, we still find that 26 percent

of the most productive of these renowned inventors (that is, of the 96 inventors for whom we

collected ten or more patent records) had four or more distinct assignees over their careers,

accounting for roughly 43 percent of all the patents in the sample. The difference between

patentees with multiple assignees and those who assigned to only one individual or firm is

especially pronounced by the time of the cohort born between 1840 and 1859. More than 53

percent of the patents obtained by members of that cohort went to inventors with four or more

assignees, and only 14 percent went to those with only one assignee.15

         Entrepreneurs are generally thought to be geographically mobile—willing to relocate to take

advantage of better opportunities. Hence another way of examining the entrepreneurial qualities of


14
   Because the possibility of having more assignees increases with the number of patents, this way of describing the
patterns in the data slightly overstates the strength of the relationship we want to highlight, but the qualitative result is
robust to other approaches. It is also important to emphasize that our data includes only assignments at issue. If we were
able to track assignments that occurred subsequent to issue, our estimates of the number of different assignees would
undoubtedly increase.
15
   Note that the pattern is also strong for the cohort born between 1860 and 1885, but that the growth in the
prevalence of inventors with limited contractual mobility over their career is becoming apparent (see the fraction of
patents and patentees accounted for by inventors with only one career assignee). We discuss this change in the next
section.
                                                                                                                  15


these specialized and productive inventors is to track their movements. The great inventor sample

allows us to compare the residences of patentees at the times they received their various patents and

also with their place of birth, and it is evident from the data that these talented inventors were far

more geographically mobile than the general population. For example, the fraction of patents

awarded to U.S. born great inventors who resided outside their state of birth was nearly double

the migration estimates (36 percent and 30 percent) that Joseph Ferrie has compiled for U.S.-

born adults over the thirty-year periods from 1850 to 1880 and 1880 to 1910 respectively.16

Perhaps more directly comparable (and impressive), about 55 percent of these patents went to great

inventors who obtained their last patent in a different state from the one where they had obtained

their first. For great inventors whose patenting careers (defined as the period between their first and

last patents) lasted between 20 and 35 years, the figure was fully two thirds, and for those with

careers over 35 years, nearly three quarters. Moreover, patentees who had the most career patents

were on average the most mobile, and hence seemingly the most entrepreneurial, even after

adjusting for the duration of their careers.

         Not only were the great inventors highly mobile, but their locational decisions followed

systematic patterns (see Table 6). Patenting by great inventors remained very concentrated in the

Northeast throughout the period under study. For the cohort born between 1820 and 1839, this

pattern could be attributed to the disproportionate numbers of great inventors born in New England

and the Middle Atlantic, but later cohorts evinced a powerful tendency to relocate to these regions

and particularly to the Middle Atlantic states. For example, members of the 1840 to 1859 birth



16
   It is also striking that the foreign born were significantly over-represented, relative to the general population,
among the great inventors. Those born abroad composed 22.9 percent (19.7, 33.0, and 11.4 percent of the respective
three birth cohorts) of the great inventors born between 1820 and 1885, and received 24.9 percent (15.6, 34.7, and
17.9 percent for the respective cohorts) of the great inventors’ patents. The foreign-born great inventors were more
likely to locate in New England than their U.S.-born counterparts. Ferrie’s estimate is from Joseph P. Ferry,
“Longitudinal Data for the Analysis of Mobility in the U.S., 1850-1910,” unpublished paper, 2004.
                                                                                                          16


cohort who were born in the Middle Atlantic accounted for nearly 18 percent of total patents,

whereas those who resided in that region received 47.3 percent. By the third cohort (those born

between 1860 and 1885), nearly two-thirds of all great inventor patents went to residents of the

Middle Atlantic, even though those born in the region generated less than 10 percent of the total.

This extreme concentration of great inventor patents in the Middle Atlantic contrasts starkly with

the contemporaneous trend toward regional convergence in overall patenting rates, suggesting

that conditions in that region were especially favorable to the most talented inventors. Inventors

and the enterprises committed to technological innovation may have found it increasingly

important over time to have ready access to the legal services and financial intermediation

provided by the region’s dense cluster of patent agents, lawyers, and financial institutions.

        Elmer Sperry is an excellent example of a great inventor who assiduously pursued

entrepreneurial opportunities.17 Born into an upstate New York family of modest means, Sperry

attended public schools and then went on to college at Cortland Normal. While there, he decided

that he wanted to be an inventor and set about learning as much as possible about electricity.

Acting on the suggestion of one of the professors he sought out at nearby Cornell University, he

designed a generator capable of supplying a constant current regardless of the load on its circuits

and then began systematically to scour the local business community in search of a financial

backer. The Cortland Wagon Company, whose executives included both inventors and investors

interested in supporting new technological developments, took Sperry in, providing him with the

advice and services of a patent lawyer, as well as money to live on and a shop in which to work.

The year was 1880, and in this sheltered environment, Sperry not only perfected his dynamo, but

over the next two years developed a complete system of arc lighting to go with it. The company


17
  The following discussion is based on Thomas Parke Hughes, Elmer Sperry: Inventor and Engineer (Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins Press, 1971).
                                                                                                    17


had a branch in Chicago, and there the company’s officers, with additional backing from local

Chicago investors, organized The Sperry Electric Light, Motor, and Car Brake Company in

1883, with Sperry (who owned a big chunk of the company’s stock) serving as “electrician,

inventor, and superintendent of the mechanical department.”

       Although the company launched Sperry’s career as an inventor, it was never a financial

success. For Sperry, it proved to be a constant source of anxiety that absorbed all his attention

and left him little time and energy for creative pursuits. Indeed, this period was the low point of

his career in terms of generating new technological ideas. The nineteen patents he applied for

during his five years with the company amounted collectively to half his annual average over a

career as an inventor that stretched from 1880 to 1930. Sperry emerged from this experience

determined to devote his energies to research and never again to become so deeply involved in

the internal affairs of a company. But he was also determined to profit from his inventions. To

this end, he sold off many of his inventions to companies that were well placed to put them to

productive use. Others he commercialized himself, founding with the help of a wide assortment

of financial backers a variety of companies that bore his name, such as the Sperry Electric

Mining Machine Company, the Sperry Streetcar Electric Railway Company, and the Sperry

Gyroscope Company. Although Sperry often played an active role in these companies in their

early stages, he always downgraded his position to technical consultant as quickly as possible

and went on to something else. Like other great inventors, Sperry demonstrated a willingness

throughout his career to uproot himself and his family whenever new opportunities beckoned.

He moved from Cortland to Chicago to commercialize his arc lighting system, departed for

Cleveland when a group of wealthy investors offered financial backing for his work on electric

streetcars, and finally headed back East to Brooklyn to work on electrolytic methods for
                                                                                                   18


producing tin plate for American Can. Apparently, opportunities in the Middle Atlantic were

sufficiently rich that he was able to spend the last thirty plus years of his long, productive career

in New York.



Difficulties Facing Independent Inventors

       Large numbers of entrepreneurially oriented individuals were able to become inventors

during the nineteenth century because barriers to entry into this activity (other than talent) were

low. The examination-based patent system, coupled with favorable legal institutions, offered

strong protection for intellectual property rights at quite a modest cost. At the same time, the

traditional social institution for the transmission of technological knowledge—apprenticeship (or

more generally the practice of leaving home during adolescence to pick up skills in a trade)—

was both widely accessible and capable of adapting to the quickening pace of advance.

Technologically creative individuals without the resources to attend institutions of higher

learning thus had avenues for acquiring the skills and knowledge they needed to be effective

inventors.

       By the end of the nineteenth century, however, barriers to entry into inventive activity

seemed to be rising. The most obvious change was the apparent advantage that accrued to

inventors with formal training in science and engineering. Figure 2 documents the shift for

successive cohorts of our sample of great inventors. Up through the cohort of inventors born

between 1820 and 1845, individuals without an advanced formal education accounted for most

major inventions. Indeed, roughly 75 to 80 percent of the patents awarded to members of these

cohorts went to those with only primary or secondary schooling. There was an abrupt change,

however, in the educational backgrounds of the great inventors born after 1845. Whereas only
                                                                                                                19


10 percent of the patents awarded to those born between 1820 and 1845 went to individuals with

college or graduate training in a technical field (engineering, natural science, or medicine), the

figure jumped to around 60 percent for the cohort born between 1865 and 1885 (with still

another 20 percent awarded to those who studied other subjects in college).18

        Perhaps because access to higher education was still quite limited, or perhaps (as we will

suggest) for this reason in combination with other changes associated with the shift toward

science-based technologies, a smaller proportion of the population seems to have been able to

engage in effective invention by the early twentieth century. Table 7 presents the distribution of

patents for our three “B” subsamples, broken down by the total number of career patents

received by the patentee and by the region of the patentee’s residence. Although specialized

inventors (those with more that 10 patents over their careers) accounted for a somewhat larger

share of inventions in New England than in the other two main patenting regions (the Middle

Atlantic and the East North Central), in all three regions there was a marked increase in the share

of patents accounted for by specialized inventors. Between 1870-71 and 1910-11, the share of

patents that were granted to patentees with 10 or more career patents rose from 76.1 to 91.9

percent in New England, 65.2 to 80.7 percent in the Middle Atlantic, and 68.4 to 84.9 percent in

the East North Central. When one considers that the overall rate of patenting per capita had

essentially peaked for the country at large during the late 1880s and early 1890s, and was

declining dramatically in the two regions where inventive activity had long been concentrated (in

New England, as Table 1 shows, it dropped from 775.8 patents per million residents in 1870-71

18
  Those who received some schooling at institutions of higher learning are strikingly over-represented among great
inventors relative to the general population, where the proportions of cohorts graduating from secondary school and
college were under 10 percent and 3 percent respectively as late as 1900. See Thomas D. Snyder, 120 Years of
American Education: A Statistical Portrait (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for
Education Statistics, 1993), figures 11 and 17. See also B. Zorina Khan and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, “Institutions and
Technological Innovation During Early Economic Growth: Evidence from the Great Inventors of the United States,
1790-1930,” in Institutions and Growth, eds. Theo Eicher and Cecilia Penalosa Garcia (Cambridge: MIT Press,
forthcoming).
                                                                                                   20


to 534.3 in 1910-11 and in the Middle Atlantic from 563.4 to 488.6), the implication is that it

was becoming more difficult in these parts of the country to succeed as an inventor. And yet we

know that these were precisely the regions to which great inventors were migrating. The puzzle,

therefore, is to understand the circumstances that attracted talented inventors to the Northeast

but, at the same time, made pursuing a career as an inventor more daunting there than before.

       Another piece of the puzzle is that the degree of independence that inventors enjoyed

seems to have begun to diminish by the early twentieth century. Table 8 shows that, after rising

between the 1870-71 and 1890-91 subsamples, the contractual mobility of our “B” inventors

declined significantly between the 1890-91 and 1910-11 groups. The proportions of patentees

who assigned their patents at issue to 2-3 different assignees and 4 or more assignees increased

respectively from 7.5 to 21.1 percent and 7.5 to 12.5 percent between 1870-71 and 1890-91, but

then fell to 16.9 and 9.4 percent by 1910-11. Intriguingly, the decline in contractual mobility

that occurred during this last interval was virtually all a result of developments in the Middle

Atlantic, the region to which great inventors who born in the U.S. were disproportionately

moving. Contractual mobility changed little, or even increased slightly, in New England and the

East North Central between the 1890-91 and 1910-11 subsamples and was much greater in both

of these regions than in the Middle Atlantic.

       Schumpeter’s theory of the decline of the entrepreneur suggests a possible way to put

these puzzle pieces together. According to this view, the rise of large-scale businesses with in-

house R&D laboratories, particularly in the science-based industries associated with the Second

Industrial Revolution, gave employment (and provided the resources needed to engage

productively in the generation of new technological knowledge) to creative individuals with the

requisite educational background (or other credentials satisfactory to professional managers) at
                                                                                                      21


the same time as it made it difficult for independent inventor/entrepreneurs to survive in

competition. In order to explore this possibility, we classified the assignees in our samples by

types and then examined how these types varied over time, by region, by industry, and according

to various characteristics of the patentees. The analysis is complicated by the difficulty of

classifying the large number of assignees in our samples in a way that captures the essential

characteristics of large firms that Schumpeter had in mind. The solution we adopted was to sort

the patents into the following categories: (0) the inventor did not assign the patent at issue; (1)

the inventor made a partial assignment at issue to an individual (often a partner); (2) a full

assignment to an individual; (3) an assignment to a company with the same name as the patentee

(indicating that the inventor was likely to be a principal in the firm); (4) an assignment to a

company for which financial information was reported in the Commercial and Financial

Chronicle or in Poor’s or Moody’s Manual of Industrial Securities (indicating that the company

was important enough to tap the national capital markets) or, alternatively, that was listed in an

early-1920s National Research Council directory of companies with research laboratories; (5) an

assignment to a not-already classified company that was located in the same city as the patentee;

(6) an assignment to a not-already classified U.S. company (that is, a company located in

different city from the patentee); and (7) an assignment to a company located in another country.

We think of category (4) as being closest to the sort of bureaucratic enterprise to which

Schumpeter attributed the decline of the entrepreneur, and assume that patentees whom made

these assignments were more likely to be employees than principals of such firms. Category (3),

by contrast, consists of enterprises that were likely run by inventors, their relatives, or other close

personal associates. The firms in this category most resemble Schumpeter’s concept of an
                                                                                                    22


entrepreneurial enterprise—that is, a company set up to exploit the profit-potential of a particular

innovation.

       In Table 9, we present cross-tabulations for each of our “B” subsamples, breaking down

the distribution of patents by the total number of career patents the patentee received (our

measure of specialization at invention) and the type of assignment. Major differences are

evident in the assignment behavior of patentees with different degrees of specialization at

invention, as are changes over time. In all three subsamples, patentees who were more

specialized at invention had markedly higher assignment rates. Although all classes of inventors

assigned some of their patents to individuals, those that were more specialized or productive over

their careers were much more likely to assign their patents to companies—both as a share of their

assigned patents as well as of total patents. This association between specialized inventors and

assignments to companies strengthened over time, and is particularly evident in the high

proportion of the patents assigned to companies that came from this class of inventors. Indeed,

specialized inventors accounted for virtually all of the patents assigned to companies in

categories (3) or (4) (companies with the same name as the inventor or firms that were highly-

capitalized or had early R & D labs). By the 1910-11 subsample, inventors with 10 or more

career patents assigned at issue nearly two-thirds of all the patents they were awarded, and of

those assigned patents, over sixty percent went to firms in categories (3) or (4) and a bit over

thirty percent to other companies.

       Although these results are consistent with Schumpeter’s view of the growing importance

of large-firm R&D, other patterns in the table do not fit his account of the demise of individual

entrepreneurship. Yes, specialized inventors transferred more and more of their patents to large

integrated companies, but over time they assigned an even greater proportion of their patents to
                                                                                                    23


companies that bore their name—that is, companies in which they were more likely to be

principals than employees. Inventors with 10 or more career patents in the 1910-11 subsample

assigned 23.5 of their patents to such companies (accounting for fully 37.7 percent of their

assignments). Although these findings are consistent with the idea that, by the early twentieth

century, inventors needed to attach themselves to firms in order to remain specialized and

productive at invention, they suggest that going to work in a large firm’s R&D lab was not the

only option available.

       Examination of the data on great inventors yields essentially the same findings, though

the relative importance of assignments to large integrated versus family-name companies is

reversed. Table 10 reports the disposition at issue of the patents awarded to inventors in each of

the three birth cohorts. Members of the 1860-85 cohort would have been roughly similar in age

to the “B” patentees in the 1910-11 subsample, so it is this comparison that is most instructive.

Inventors in both the 1860-85 cohort of great inventors and the 1910-11 “B” subsample assigned

away nearly two-thirds of their patents at issue, with more than 60 percent of their assigned

patents going either to large integrated companies or to companies bearing the inventor’s family

name. The similarity of the results for these two, very different data sets provides powerful

support for the idea that productive inventors were increasingly finding it necessary to form

long-term attachments with firms.

       In order better to understand why such attachments were becoming more and more

prevalent over time, we break down the three distributions of patents awarded to “B” inventors

with 10 or more career patents by the stage of the inventor’s career and the type of assignment

(see Table 11). We classify patents granted within five years of the first patent as belonging to

the early stage of an inventor’s career, those granted 5 to 15 years after the first patent as
                                                                                                     24


intermediate stage, and those thereafter as late. The logic behind the table is that, if we can

identify when in their careers inventors began to assign their patents to large-integrated or

family-name firms (that is, to the kinds of firms with which they were more likely to have long-

term attachments), we can distinguish between two alternative explanations for the association

between productivity at invention and assignments to these kinds of companies: that inventors

were productive in generating patents because they came to be supported early in their careers by

such enterprises; or that inventors who had already distinguished themselves from the pack were

the ones able to attract such support.

       The data in Table 11 are more consistent with the second hypothesis than the first. Even

inventors who received many patents over their lives seem generally to have had much more

difficulty finding assignees for their patents when they were first starting out than during the

later phases of their career. This pattern, which was especially pronounced for the first two

subsamples and for assignments to family-name companies, suggests that inventors, in some

sense, had to prove themselves before they were able to mobilize capital to organize their own

firms. Although the speed at which these highly productive inventors made the transition to

assigning a high proportion of their patents at issue (and to family-name companies) may have

increased somewhat over time, dramatic differences in assignment behavior by stage of career

remain evident by the 1910-11 subsample. During the last stage of their careers, productive

inventors in this group were able to assign 70.3 percent of their patents at issue, with 32.6

percent (or 46.4 of their assignments) going to family-name companies. By contrast, during the

first stage of their careers, members of this group assigned just 54.4 of their patents, with only

1.3 percent (2.4 percent of assignments) going to companies that bore their names. Further

evidence that inventors first had to prove themselves in order to gain the resources they needed
                                                                                                               25


to be productive at their vocation, and that the capital required to support effective inventive

activity may have increased mightily, is provided by the dramatic change that occurred over time

in the proportions of their patents they obtained at different stages of their careers. For

specialized inventors in the 1870-71 subsample, patents were spread fairly evenly over time,

with about a third obtained in the early stage of their careers, a third in the intermediate stage,

and a third later on. By contrast, productive members of the 1910-1911 subsample obtained only

about 15 percent of their patents in the first stage of their careers and nearly 60 percent in the

last.19

          Although productive inventors apparently found it difficult to mobilize enough capital to

start their own companies during the first stage of their careers, the proportion of their early

patents that they assigned at issue did rise steadily, increasing, for example, from 38.0 percent

for the 1890-91 subsample to 54.5 percent for 1910-11. Most of this increase was accounted for

by assignments to large integrated and other (local and non-local) companies, which together

accounted for 39.0 percent of early-stage patents (71.7 percent of assignments) for the 1910-11

subsample. The substantial proportion of these assignments that went to large integrated

companies may well reflect a tendency for such enterprises to hire young, university-trained

researchers when setting up or expanding their research labs during the early twentieth century,

with the college degree perhaps serving as a signal of the employee’s qualifications in lieu of a

previous record of successful invention.20 Certainly, there is circumstantial evidence for this

notion. Not only was there was a substantial increase over time in the proportion of great

inventors who attended college in engineering or the natural sciences, but as B. Zorina Khan and


19
   These figures may somewhat understate the trend because we are likely to have undersampled patents for both the
first career stage of the first subsample and for the last stage of the last subsample.
20
   See Naomi R. Lamoreaux and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, “Market Trade in Patents and the Rise of A Class of
Specialized Inventors in the 19th-Century United States,” American Economic Review, 91 (May 2001), pp. 39-44.
                                                                                                                   26


Sokoloff have shown, great inventors who had such backgrounds attained higher rates of

patenting at younger ages than those without similar educational achievements.21 As shown in

Table 12, moreover, assignment rates increased dramatically over time for great inventors with

training in engineering and the natural sciences. Great inventors born between 1860 and 1885

who had college training in these subjects had much higher assignment rates than other members

of the cohort. They were also far more likely to assign their patents to large integrated

companies.

         These findings on career patterns lend credence to the idea that the technological

advances of the Second Industrial Revolution had made it more difficult for inventors to secure

the resources they needed to maintain their independent status. As technology became more

complex and science-based during the late nineteenth century, creative individuals with the

requisite skills and knowledge may have required more capital to pursue careers at invention

than local partners (or other traditional sources of funding) could readily provide. The marked

decrease by the early twentieth century in the number of productive inventors who managed their

careers without forming long-term attachments with firms, together with the sharp decline in

patenting rates in the regions where independent inventors had mainly been concentrated,

suggests that the need to mobilize substantial amounts of capital may indeed have operated as a

barrier to success in, or even to entry into, inventive activity by this period. Moreover, the

observation that patents were especially likely to be assigned to firms in categories (3) or (4) in

the manufacturing and energy/communications sectors, presumably the most capital-intensive on

average in the economy, is consistent with this view.22


21
  See Khan and Sokoloff, “Institutions and Technological Innovation During Early Economic Growth.”
22
  Using descriptions of the patents, we classified each of the patents in the three cross-sectional samples (1870-71,
1890-91, and 1910-11) into six sectors: agriculture and food processing; construction; energy and communications;
manufacturing; transportation; and miscellaneous. Although the differences across sectors in 1870-71 were small
                                                                                                                 27


        From this perspective, one explanation for the increase in the proportion of assignments

that went to large integrated companies may be the superior access that such firms possessed to

the nation’s main capital markets. Indeed, the concentration of large firms near New York,

which was rapidly becoming the financial center of the nation, may account both for the

migration patterns of great inventors and for the large proportion of the assignments to such

companies that occurred in the Middle Atlantic region (see Table 13). As Table 13 shows,

however, assignments by great inventors to family-name companies had a very different

geographic distribution, occurring disproportionately in the East North Central states.

Moreover, this contrasting regional pattern appears even more prominently when we breakdown

the subsamples of patents in our “B” dataset by region as well as by type of assignment at issue

(Table 14). By 1910-11, inventors in the Middle Atlantic were assigning 22.1 percent of their

patents to large integrated companies and only 2.7 percent to family-named companies, whereas

the figures for inventors in the East North Central were just the reverse—only 4.1 of patents

went to large integrated companies and 31.4 percent to companies that bore the inventor’s name.

        Although our analysis of both the “B” and great inventor samples indicates that

specialized or productive inventors found it increasingly difficult to maintain their independence

by the early twentieth century, it also suggests that the options available to inventors who were

seeking long-term attachments with firms differed systematically across regions. In particular,

inventors in the Middle Atlantic seem to have been less able, or at least less inclined, to organize

their own firms than their counterparts in the East North Central (and to a lesser extent New

England). Understanding the reasons for this geographic pattern is beyond the scope of this


and insignificant, for the latter two cross-sections patents in energy and communications and in manufacturing were
much more likely to be assigned at issue than patents in other sectors and also more likely to be assigned to
companies than to individuals. In addition, they were much more likely (energy and communications patents
especially) to be assigned to large integrated companies, and somewhat more likely to be assigned to companies
with the same name as the inventor.
                                                                                                                28


article, but differences across regions in the structure of capital markets may well have been

significant. Other research that we have done on Cleveland, an East North Central city that was

a hotbed of high-tech startups during the Second Industrial Revolution, highlights the existence

in that city of a vibrant local venture-capital sector—a sector that may have flourished (like

Silicon Valley’s in the late twentieth century) in part because of its distance from New York.23



Was Schumpeter Right?

        Although more work needs to be done, clearly there was much truth in Schumpeter’s

observation that, by the early twentieth century, the advance of technology had transformed the

organization of invention and innovation—that the higher cost of conducting R&D was making

it increasingly difficult (or less likely) for talented inventors to realize their creative potential on

their own. This change shows up in our finding that the contractual mobility of specialized

inventors was declining (that is, there was a sharp reduction in the number of different

individuals and firms to which they assigned their patents) and that inventors were increasingly

assigning their patents to firms with which they seem to have formed some kind of long-term

attachment. It also shows up in the changing career patterns of specialized inventors. By the

1910-11 subsample of “B” patentees, even the most productive inventors were obtaining on

average many fewer patents in the early stages of their careers than they were later on, after they

had formed such attachments.

        Talented inventors could procure the funds and complementary inputs they needed to

pursue their vocation by taking employment positions in the R&D labs of large integrated firms.


23
  Naomi R. Lamoreaux, Margaret Levenstein, and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, “Financing Invention during the Second
Industrial Revolution: Cleveland, Ohio, 1870-1920,” in The Financing of Invention in Historical Perspective, eds.
Lamoreaux and Sokoloff (Cambridge: MIT Press, forthcoming).
                                                                                                                 29


That many important inventors were indeed choosing this career option by the early twentieth is

readily apparent from our great inventors data set. These highly talented individuals migrated in

large numbers to the Middle Atlantic, where they increasingly assigned their patents to the large

integrated companies that were concentrated in that region. Great inventors who had studied

science or engineering in college were particularly likely to assign their patents to this type of

firm. Indeed, one advantage of this career option for inventors with scientific training was that

their university credentials enabled them to secure desirable positions early in their careers. The

great disadvantage, of course, was their loss of independence which, Schumpeter suggested, may

have affected their creativity.

        Schumpeter’s accounts stops here, but our own analysis suggests that there is much more

to the story—that talented individuals had other ways of gaining access to the resources needed

for effective invention. In particular, technologically creative individuals could become

principals in firms formed for the purpose of exploiting their inventions. This alternative seems

to have been most readily available in Midwestern cities like Cleveland where there were local

pools of venture capital, and we find productive inventors in the East North Central region

commonly assigning their patents to start-up ventures that bore their name. This pattern, along

with the recent emergence in areas like Silicon Valley of similar pockets of entrepreneurship by

the technologically creative, suggests that Schumpeter’s pessimism about the future role for

entrepreneurs in technological innovation was more than a bit extreme.24 Nonetheless, because

inventors who chose this route first had to prove themselves in order to attract capital, they faced

24
  Admittedly, by the post-World War II era, large, managerially directed firms had become increasingly dominant,
and the number of in-house R&D labs had grown dramatically. See Alfred D. Chandler, Jr., The Visible Hand: The
Managerial Revolution in American Business (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1977); and David C. Mowery
and Nathan Rosenberg, Technology and the Pursuit of Economic Growth (New York: Cambridge University Press,
1989). It is intriguing to consider, however, whether these developments may have owed less to the inherent
superiority of large-firm R&D than to the disastrous impact that the Great Depression and the new federal regulatory
efforts that followed had on the opportunities for organizing institutions geared toward the provision of venture
capital.
                                                                                                 30


substantial hurdles to success—hurdles that may help to explain the decline in patenting rates

that occurred in the twentieth century.
                                                                                                                       31

                                                           FIGURE 1


         RATE OF PATENTING PER MILLION RESIDENTS OF THE UNITED STATES, 1790-1998



  600




  500




  400




  300




  200




  100




    0
     1790 1799 1808 1817 1826 1835 1844 1853 1862 1871 1880 1889 1898 1907 1916 1925 1934 1943 1952 1961 1970 1979 1988 1997

          All Patents         Patents Awarded to U.S. Residents




Source: U.S. Patent Office, “U.S. Patent Activity, 1790-1998,”
http://www.uspto.gov/web/offices/ac/ido/oeip/taf/h_counts.htm.
                                                                                                                  32



                                                       FIGURE 2

 THE DISTRIBUTION OF GREAT INVENTOR PATENTS BY FORMAL SCHOOLING AND BIRTH COHORT
                          (PERCENT DISTRIBUTION OF PATENTS)



                      80


                      70

                      60


                      50


                      40

                      30


                      20

                      10


                       0
                            1739 -1794     1795-1819    1820-1845       1846 -186 5   1866-1885

                                          Prim ary                  Secondary
                                          College                   Technical




Notes and Sources: Great inventors were classified as having a primary education if they did not attend school
beyond age 12 (or did not attend school at all). The secondary-school category includes those who were identified
as spending one or more years in an academy or who attended school after the age of 12 but did not attend a college
or seminary. Those who spent any time at all in college were counted either in the college category, or (if they
attended a school with an engineering orientation or followed a course of study in medicine or a natural science) in
the technical category. For more discussion of the data set, see B. Zorina Khan and Kenneth L. Sokoloff,
“Institutions and Technological Innovation During Early Economic Growth: Evidence from the Great Inventors of
the United States, 1790-1930,” in Institutions and Growth, eds. Theo Eicher and Cecilia Penalosa Garcia
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, forthcoming).
                                                                                                                   33



                                                      TABLE 1

               PATENTS, ASSIGNMENTS AT ISSUE, AND PATENT ATTORNEYS, BY REGION

                                                             1870-          1890-         1910-
                                                             1871           1891          1911
                  New England
                    Patents/Population                        775.8         772.0         534.3
                   % of Patents Assigned                       26.5          40.8          50.0
                   Patent Attorneys/Population                 -----          2.7           2.0
                  Middle Atlantic
                    Patents/Population                        563.4         607.0         488.6
                   % of Patents Assigned                       20.6          29.1          36.1
                   Patent Attorneys/Population                 -----          2.2           2.0
                  East North Central
                   Patents/Population                         312.3         429.9         442.3
                   % of Patents Assigned                       14.7          27.9          32.3
                   Patent Attorneys/Population                 -----          1.1           1.1
                  West North Central
                   Patents/Population                         146.5         248.7         272.0
                   % of Patents Assigned                        9.0          21.8          17.5
                   Patent Attorneys/Population                 -----          0.3           0.7
                  South
                   Patents/Population                          85.8         103.1         114.4
                   % of Patents Assigned                        6.4          25.0          22.7
                   Patent Attorneys/Population                 -----          0.1           0.2
                  West
                    Patents/Population                        366.7         381.6         458.4
                   % of Patents Assigned                        0.0          25.4          21.4
                   Patent Attorneys/Population                 -----          0.5           1.1

                  All Patents, Including Foreign
                    Patents/Population                        325.4         360.4         334.2
                   % of Patents Assigned                       18.5          29.1          30.5
                   Patent Attorneys/Population                 -----         -----         -----

Notes and Sources: Patents/Population are annual rates of patenting per million residents. The percent of patents
assigned (which comes from our three cross-sectional samples for 1870-71, 1890-91, and 1910-11) are the
proportion of patents that were assigned before the patent’s date of issue. Patent Attorneys/Population was
computed as the ratio of the proportion of attorneys registered with the patent office who were located outside of the
District of Columbia to the proportion of the U.S. population. The data are from U.S. Patent Office, Names and
Addresses of Attorneys Practicing Before the United States Patent Office (Washington, DC: Government Printing
Office, 1883 and 1905).
                                                                                                                   34


                                                      TABLE 2

                      DISTRIBUTION OF PATENTS BY PATENTEE COMMITMENT TO
                                      PATENTING, 1790-1911


                                          Number of “Career” Patents by Patentee

                      1 Patent       2 Patents       3 Patents           4-5             6-9            10+
                                                                       Patents         Patents         Patents
                          %               %               %               %               %              %

    1790-1811           51.0            19.0            12.0             7.6              7.0             3.5

    1812-1829           57.5            17.4             7.1             7.6              5.5             4.9

    1830-1842           57.4            16.5             8.1             8.0              5.6             4.4

    1870-1871           21.1            12.5             9.9            15.8            11.8            28.9

    1890-1891           19.5            10.3            10.3            10.3            13.8            35.9

    1910-1911           33.2            14.3             8.2             9.8              9.4           25.0

Notes and Sources: The figures from 1790 to 1842 are drawn from Kenneth L. Sokoloff and B. Zorina Khan, “The
Democratization of Invention During Early Industrialization: Evidence from the United States, 1790-1846,” Journal
of Economic History, 50 (June 1990), pp. 363-78. The figures for the later years were computed from our
longitudinal “B” data set. This data set consists of patents awarded to the 561 patentees whose surnames began with
the letter “B” and who appeared in three random samples drawn from the Annual Reports of the Commissioner of
Patents for 1870-71, 1890-91, and 1910-11. We estimated the total number of career patents of each patentee by
searching the Annual Reports for the twenty-five years preceding and succeeding their appearance in a sample.
Because our sampling ratios decreased are higher for the earlier than the later cross-sections, these figures may
slightly overstate the increase in specialization that occurred between the first three and last three time periods.
However, because the method used to gather the career patenting totals for the early-nineteenth-century inventors
was likely to be a bit more comprehensive than that used for the latter periods (especially 1910-11), there is a slight
bias in the other direction as well.
                                                                                                                 35


                                                     TABLE 3

            ASSIGNMENT RATES AT ISSUE OF “B” PATENTEES BY CAREER PRODUCTIVITY


                                             Career Patent Total for Patentee

Subsamples                     1-2 Patents       3-5 Patents       6-9 Patents       10+ Patents

1870-71
   mean career patents      1.6                       4.1               7.3              28.3
   % assigned at issue     17.6                     11.4              12.3               24.7
   % assigned to companies 1.5                        1.4               4.1                8.9
       n                    68                       140               122                749

1890-91
   mean career patents      1.5                       3.9               7.7              61.0
   % assigned at issue     27.1                     28.7              39.4               54.4
   % assigned to companies 12.9                       7.0             17.0               40.5
       n                    70                       129               188              2060

1910-11
   mean career patents      1.5                       4.0               7.1             107.4
   % assigned at issue     15.0                     22.0              42.5                62.4
   % assigned to companies 3.8                        7.7             30.8                56.2
       n                    133                      155               120               1860


Notes and Sources: These estimates were computed for the 545 “B” patents who were residents of the United States
at some time during their careers. They include all of the patents these patentees received while living in the U.S.
For details on the “B” sample, see Table 2.
                                                                                                                    36


                                                      TABLE 4

              CONTRACTUAL MOBILITY AND CAREER PRODUCTIVITY OF “B” PATENTEES:
                         DISTRIBUTIONS OF PATENTS AND PATENTEES

                                           Career Patent Total for Patentee
                                    1-2 Pats    3-5 Pats        6-9 Pats    10+ Pats                    n

                                       Panel A: Distributions of Patents

No Assignees           row%         23.8              25.3               15.2              35.8       875
                       col%         76.8              52.1               30.9               6.7      15.1%

1 Assignee             row%          6.1              15.0                9.2              69.8      1042
                       col%         23.3              36.8               22.3              15.6      18.0%

2-3 Different          row%           -                 2.4               8.1              89.6      1781
    Assignees          col%           -                 9.9              33.5              34.2      15.8%

4+ Different           row%           -                 0.2               2.7              97.0      2096
   Assignees           col%           -                 1.2              13.3              43.6      36.2%

n                                    271               424                430             4669  5794
                                     4.7%              7.3%               7.4%            80.6%

                                      Panel B: Distributions of Patentees

No Assignees           row%         59.9              22.5                7.5              10.1       267
                       col%         78.8              53.6               32.3              16.1      49.9%

1 Assignee             row%         32.3              30.1               10.5              27.1       133
                       col%         21.2              35.7               22.6              21.4      24.4%

2-3 Different          row%           -               12.8               24.4              62.8        86
    Assignees          col%           -                9.8               33.9              32.1      15.8%

4+ Different           row%           -                 1.7              11.9              86.4        59
   Assignees           col%           -                 0.9              11.3              30.4      10.8%

n                                    203               112                62               168         545
                                    37.3%             20.6%              11.4%            30.8%

Notes and Sources: See Table 3. Panel A presents the distribution of all of the patents the patentees obtained over
their careers and Panel B presents the distribution for one patent per patentee, where the patent is selected randomly
from the patentee’s record. Only assignments at issue are included in the figures.
                                                                         TABLE 5

                                                 CONTRACTUAL MOBILITY OF “GREAT INVENTORS”

                                                    number of different assignees over career

Birth Cohort                  no assignees      1 assignee     2 assignees       3 assignees       4 assignees     5 or more assignees         n
                                 (row %)           (row %)         (row %)          (row %)          (row %)           (row %)

1820 to 1839
                  inventors       20.0              22.9             31.4              11.4             8.6               5.7                  35
                  patents         17.2              16.4             32.5              17.0            10.6               6.4                 548

1840 to 1859
                  inventors         8.1             24.3             32.4               2.7            18.9              13.5                 37
                  patents           6.1             14.0             25.1               1.5            18.9              34.5               1117

1860 to 1885
                 inventors          4.2             37.5               8.3             16.7             8.3              25.0                  24
                 patents            2.3             34.1               5.4             11.3             5.5              41.4                 815

All Cohorts
                 inventors        11.5              27.1             26.0               9.4            12.5              13.5                 96
                 patents           7.3              21.1             20.2               8.2            12.7              30.5               2480


Notes and Sources: The sample of “great inventors” encompasses all of the 249 individuals recognized as important inventors in the Dictionary of American
Biography who were born after 1819 and before 1886 and who were active in the U.S. For each person (248 men and 1 woman), we collected biographical
information as well as roughly a 20 percent sample of the patents he/she were ever awarded (all patents received before 1847, and then one out of every five
years from 1850 through 1930). Here we report the distributions computed over the 96 great inventors for whom we have sampled ten or more patents. Because
we have only sampled one fifth of the patents on average and are confining our analysis to assignments at issue, we are underestimating the full extent of
contractual mobility.
                                            TABLE 6

                  REGIONAL PATTERNS OF MIGRATION BY THE GREAT INVENTORS


Birth Cohort 1820-1839

                                      Region of Residence at Date of Patent

                             New         Mid-
Region of Birth                                     Midwest   Other U.S.      Foreign   Total
                            England     Atlantic

                    #         306            83        25            3             -     417
New England         row %     73.4         19.9        6.0         0.7             -
                    col %     80.7         21.9       24.8         8.6             -     46.5
                    #           35          220        29            4             -     288
Mid-Atlantic        row %     12.2         76.4       10.1         1.4             -
                    col %      9.2         58.1       28.7        11.4             -     32.1
                    #            -           11        21            9            3       41
Midwest             row %        -         26.8       51.2        27.0          7.3
                    col %        -          2.9       20.8        25.7          100       4.6
                    #            2            2          -           7             -      11
Other U.S.          row %     18.2         18.2          -        63.6             -
                    col %      0.5          0.5          -        20.0             -      1.2
                    #           36           63        26          15              -     140
Foreign             row %     25.7         45.0       18.6        10.7             -
                    col %      9.5         16.6       25.7        42.9             -     15.6
                    #          379          379       101          35              3     897
Total               row %     42.3         42.3       11.3         3.9           0.3
                                                                                              39




Birth Cohort 1840-1859
                                    Region of Residence at Date of Patent

                           New         Mid-
Region of Birth                                   Midwest   Other U.S.      Foreign   Total
                          England     Atlantic

                  #           51           94          9           4           25      183
New England       row %     27.9         51.4        4.9         2.2          13.7
                  col %     17.9         15.1        2.9         6.4          78.1     13.9
                  #           30          149        51            2             4     236
Mid-Atlantic      row %     12.7         63.1       21.6         0.9           1.7
                  col %     10.5         23.9       16.3         3.2          12.5     17.9
                  #            3          207       167            7             2     386
Midwest           row %      0.8         53.6       43.3         1.8           0.5
                  col %      1.1         33.2       53.4        11.1           6.3     29.3
                  #            1            9          8         37              -      55
Other U.S.        row %      1.8         16.4       14.6        67.3             -
                  col %      0.4          1.4        2.6        58.7             -      4.2
                  #          200          164        78          13              1     456
Foreign           row %     43.9         36.0       17.1         2.9           0.2
                  col %     70.2         26.3       24.9        20.6           3.1     34.7
                  #          285          623       313          63             32    1316
Total             row %     21.7         47.3       23.8         4.8           2.4
                                                                                                     40




Birth Cohort 1860-1885
                                           Region of Residence at Date of Patent

                                  New          Middle
Region of Birth                                           Midwest   Other U.S.     Foreign   Total
                                 England       Atlantic

                       #              58          156          1            -           -     215
New England            row %        27.0         72.6        0.5            -           -
                       col %        43.3         25.8        0.8            -           -     23.5
                       #              42          286        40        5                -     373
Middle Atlantic        row %        11.3         76.7       10.7      1.3               -
                       col %        31.3         47.4       33.1      8.8               -     40.7
                       #               2           43        78         25              -     148
Midwest                row %         1.4         29.1       52.7       16.9             -
                       col %         1.5          7.1       64.5       43.9             -     16.2
                       #               -            7          0          9             -      16
Other U.S.             row %           -         43.8        0.0       56.3             -
                       col %           -          1.2        0.0       15.8             -     1.75
                       #              32          112          2        18              -     164
Foreign                row %        19.5         68.3        1.2       11.0             -
                       col %        23.9         18.5        1.7       31.6             -     17.9
                       #             134          604       121         57              -     916
Total                  row %        14.6         65.9       13.2        6.2             -

Notes and Sources: See Table 5 and the text.
                                                                                             41


                                                TABLE 7

            CHANGES IN THE DISTRIBUTION OF PATENTS IN THE “B” SAMPLE BY REGION
                              AND NUMBER OF CAREER PATENTS



                                          Categories of Patentees by Career Patents
                                 1-2 Patents 3-5 Patents 6-9 Patents 10+ Patents
       Region                     (Row %)     (Row %)       (Row %)      (Row %)       n
       New England
         1870-71 subsample                5.0      6.5        12.4         76.1       322
         1890-91 subsample                1.8      4.7         6.0         87.6       555
         1910-11 subsample                2.6      2.9         2.6         91.9       383
       Middle Atlantic
         1870-71 subsample                6.2     16.1        12.4         65.2       434
         1890-91 subsample                2.2      4.3         5.3         88.2       947
         1910-11 subsample                5.8      9.8         3.7         80.7       601
       East North Central
         1870-71 subsample                9.2     15.6         6.9         68.4        218
         1890-91 subsample                3.8      6.9        10.9         78.4        707
         1910-11 subsample                4.6      4.4         6.2         84.9       1050
       Other U.S.
         1870-71 subsample                4.8     14.3        12.4         68.6       105
         1890-91 subsample                5.0      5.5        11.8         77.7       238
         1910-11 subsample               17.1     16.7         9.8         56.4       234

       U.S. Total
         1870-71 subsample                6.3     13.0        11.3         69.4       1079
         1890-91 subsample                2.9      5.3         7.7         84.2       2447
         1910-11 subsample                5.9      6.8         5.3         82.0       2268

Notes and Sources: See Tables 2 and 3.
                                                                                                               42


                                                    TABLE 8

             CHANGES IN THE CONTRACTUAL MOBILITY                OF “B” PATENTEES, BY REGION



                                                     Region of Patentee
                                      New            Middle    East North          Other
    Number of Assignees             England         Atlantic     Central            U.S.
        at Issue                    (Col. %)        (Col. %)    (Col. %)          (Col. %)            n
    No Assignees
        1870-71 subsample              51.2           64.8           60.5           57.1             87
        1890-91 subsample              25.7           42.4           36.7           41.7             69
        1910-11 subsample              34.8           48.4           55.0           60.4            111
    1 Assignee
        1870-71 subsample              39.0           18.5           26.3           14.3             38
        1890-91 subsample              28.6           12.1           38.3           33.3             49
        1910-11 subsample              17.4           29.0           13.8           27.1             46
    2-3 Different Assignees
        1870-71 subsample               2.4            9.3            5.3           21.4             11
        1890-91 subsample              25.7           25.8           16.7           12.5             39
        1910-11 subsample              34.8           12.9           18.8           10.4             36
    4+ Different Assignees
        1870-71 subsample               7.3            7.4            7.9            7.1             11
        1890-91 subsample              20.0           19.7            8.3           12.5             28
        1910-11 subsample              13.0            9.7           12.5            2.1             20

    # of Patentees (n)
        1870-71 subsample               41             54              38             14            147
        1890-91 subsample               35             66              60             24            185
        1910-11 subsample               23             62              80             48            213

Notes and Sources: See Tables 2 and 3. Each inventor is represented in the table by one patent that was randomly
selected from the patentee’s record.
                                                                                                    43


                                                   TABLE 9

            CHANGES IN THE DISTRIBUTION OF PATENTS IN THE “B” SAMPLE BY TYPE OF
                   ASSIGNMENT AT ISSUE AND NUMBER OF CAREER PATENTS

                                                 Categories of Patentees by Career Patents
      Type of Assignment                 1-2 Patents    3-5 Patents     6-9 Patents   10+ Patents
                                          (Col. %)       (Col. %)        (Col. %)       (Col. %)
      Not Assigned
         1870-71 subsample                  82.4             88.6         87.7          75.3
         1890-91 subsample                  72.9             70.5         60.6          45.6
         1910-11 subsample                  85.0             78.1         57.5          37.6
      Assig. Share to Individ.
         1870-71 subsample                  10.3              3.6          4.1           5.5
         1890-91 subsample                  10.0             11.6         12.8           3.9
         1910-11 subsample                   7.5              6.5          5.8           2.6
      Assig. in Full to Individ.
         1870-71 subsample                   2.9              5.0          2.5           8.8
         1890-91 subsample                   2.9              8.5          6.4           9.6
         1910-11 subsample                   1.5              3.2          1.7           3.0
      Assigned to Company
         with Same Name
         1870-71 subsample                   0.0              0.0          0.0           1.7
         1890-91 subsample                   0.0              1.6          3.7           6.1
         1910-11 subsample                   0.0              0.0          5.8          23.5
      Assigned to Large
         Integrated Company
         1870-71 subsample                   0.0              0.0          0.8           1.2
         1890-91 subsample                   1.4              0.0          0.5           9.9
         1910-11 subsample                   0.0              1.9          0.0          14.1
      Assigned to Other Local
         Company
         1870-71 subsample                   1.5              0.7          2.5           4.5
         1890-91 subsample                  10.0              3.9          5.3          15.9
         1910-11 subsample                   1.5              3.9         15.8           8.0
      Assigned to Other Non-
         Local Companies
         1870-71 subsample                   2.9              2.1          2.5           2.9
         1890-91 subsample                   4.3              3.9         10.6           9.0
         1910-11 subsample                   3.9              6.5         13.3           6.7

      Number of Patents (n)
        1870-71 subsample                    68              140           122           749
        1890-91 subsample                    80              129           188          2060
        1910-11 subsample                   133              155           120          1860
Notes and Sources: See Tables 2 and 3.
                                                                TABLE 10

                   CHANGE OVER BIRTH COHORTS IN THE TYPES OF ASSIGNMENTS AT ISSUE MADE BY GREAT INVENTORS

                                                        Assignment Type

Birth Cohort                  Not Assigned Individual    Family-Name Large Integrated Other         n
                                                           Company      Company      Company

1820 to 1839

        patents (%)               69.5        9.6             7.1           1.5       12.3          908


1840 to 1859

        patents (%)               56.5        5.6            11.3          11.8       14.8         1351


1860 to 1885

        patents (%)               35.3        3.5            14.3          27.0       19.9         921

___________________
All Cohorts

        patents (%)               54.1        6.1            11.0          13.3      15.6         3180


Notes and Sources: See Table 5.
                                   TABLE 11

     CHANGES IN THE DISTRIBUTION OF PATENTS IN THE “B” SAMPLE BY TYPE OF
           ASSIGNMENT AT ISSUE AND STAGE OF PATENTEE’S CAREER

                                                    Stage of Career
                                                       > 5 Years
                                          5 Years      and 15       > 15 Years
                                        Since First   Years Since   Since First
                                          Patent      First Patent    Patent
Type of Assignment at Issue              (Col. %)      (Col. %)      (Col. %)
Not Assigned
   1870-71 subsample                      81.9          75.3           68.9
   1890-91 subsample                      62.0          52.7           36.6
   1910-11 subsample                      45.6          50.3           29.7
Assigned Share to Individual
   1870-71 subsample                          6.2         6.7           3.6
   1890-91 subsample                          4.0         5.4           3.0
   1910-11 subsample                          6.9         4.0           0.8
Assigned in Full to Individual
   1870-71 subsample                       4.1          11.4           10.8
   1890-91 subsample                      12.1          11.1            8.0
   1910-11 subsample                       7.2           3.1            1.8
Assigned to Company with Same Name
   1870-71 subsample                          0.4        0.0            4.8
   1890-91 subsample                          2.2        4.2            8.4
   1910-11 subsample                          1.3       17.1           32.6
Assigned to Large Integrated Company
   1870-71 subsample                       0.0            0.0           0.0
   1890-91 subsample                       7.1            6.3          12.9
   1910-11 subsample                      12.1            7.3          17.8
Assigned to Other Local Company
   1870-71 subsample                       6.6           3.1            7.6
   1890-91 subsample                       8.4          15.1           18.6
   1910-11 subsample                      17.1          11.7            3.8
Assigned to Other Company
   1870-71 subsample                          0.8         3.5           4.4
   1890-91 subsample                          4.3         5.4          12.6
   1910-11 subsample                          9.8         6.5           5.9

Number of Patents     (n)
  1870-71 subsample                           243        255           251
  1890-91 subsample                           323        651          1086
  1910-11 subsample                           305        479          1076
                                                                                                               46

Notes and Sources: See Tables 2 and 3. Only patents awarded to patentees with ten or more career patents are
included in this table.
                                                                                              47


                                               TABLE 12

             CHANGES IN THE DISTRIBUTION OF GREAT-INVENTOR PATENTS BY TYPE OF
                   ASSIGNMENT AT ISSUE AND EDUCATIONAL BACKGROUND


                                                            Educational Background
                                                                                College in
                                                                  College in   Engineering,
                                                    Primary or       Non-         Natural
                                                    Secondary      Scientific   Science, or
                                                    Education       Subject      Medicine
    Type of Assignment at Issue                      (Col. %)      (Col. %)      (Col. %)
    Not Assigned
       1820-1839 Birth Cohort                         64.9           82.0          82.9
       1840-1859 Birth Cohort                         49.9           63.1          64.9
       1860-1885 Birth Cohort                         49.1           44.0          24.5
    Assigned to Individual
       1820-1839 Birth Cohort                         11.2            3.1           7.2
       1840-1859 Birth Cohort                          5.8            8.6           2.9
       1860-1885 Birth Cohort                          4.7            7.9           0.9
    Assigned to Company with Same Name
       1820-1839 Birth Cohort                          8.4            3.9           2.7
       1840-1859 Birth Cohort                         11.5            1.4          19.0
       1860-1885 Birth Cohort                          3.5           25.0          14.8
    Assigned to Large Integrated Company
       1820-1839 Birth Cohort                          1.8            0.8           0.9
       1840-1859 Birth Cohort                         15.3           11.1           4.9
       1860-1885 Birth Cohort                         11.2           12.5          41.4
    Assigned to Other Company
       1820-1839 Birth Cohort                         13.8           10.2           6.3
       1840-1859 Birth Cohort                         17.5           15.8           8.3
       1860-1885 Birth Cohort                         31.5           10.7          18.4

    Number of Patents        (n)
      1820-1839 Birth Cohort                              669        128           111
      1840-1859 Birth Cohort                              724        279           348
      1860-1885 Birth Cohort                              232        216           473

Notes and Sources: See Figure 2 and Table 5.
                                                                                     48


                                        TABLE 13

                 CHANGES IN THE DISTRIBUTION OF GREAT-INVENTOR PATENTS BY
                          TYPE OF ASSIGNMENT AT ISSUE AND REGION


                                                             Region
                                                 New         Middle     East North
                                               England      Atlantic      Central
    Type of Assignment at Issue                (Col. %)     (Col. %)     (Col. %)
    Not Assigned
       1820-1839 Birth Cohort                   58.8          76.8          81.2
       1840-1859 Birth Cohort                   47.7          60.9          52.4
       1860-1885 Birth Cohort                   35.1          33.6          32.2
    Assigned to Individual
       1820-1839 Birth Cohort                      9.0        12.9           2.0
       1840-1859 Birth Cohort                      2.4         7.6           6.1
       1860-1885 Birth Cohort                      5.2         2.8           2.5
    Assigned to Company with Same Name
       1820-1839 Birth Cohort                   11.6           4.5           2.0
       1840-1859 Birth Cohort                   19.2           5.4          17.9
       1860-1885 Birth Cohort                    6.0          13.3          25.6
    Assigned to Large Integrated Company
       1820-1839 Birth Cohort                    2.4           0.5           3.0
       1840-1859 Birth Cohort                   25.8           9.1           7.0
       1860-1885 Birth Cohort                   22.4          30.5          26.5
    Assigned to Other Company
       1820-1839 Birth Cohort                   18.2           5.3          11.9
       1840-1859 Birth Cohort                    4.9          17.0          16.6
       1860-1885 Birth Cohort                   31.3          19.9          13.2

    Number of Patents        (n)
      1820-1839 Birth Cohort                       379         379          101
      1840-1859 Birth Cohort                       287         647          313
      1860-1885 Birth Cohort                       134         604          121

Notes and Sources: See Table 5.
                                                                                       49



                                         TABLE 14

            CHANGES IN THE DISTRIBUTION OF PATENTS IN THE “B” SAMPLE BY TYPE OF
                              ASSIGNMENT AT ISSUE AND REGION


                                                              Region
                                                 New          Middle      East North
                                               England       Atlantic       Central
    Type of Assignment at Issue                (Col. %)      (Col. %)      (Col. %)
    Not Assigned
       1870-71 subsample                         76.1          75.6          83.0
       1890-91 subsample                         24.7          58.1          51.3
       1910-11 subsample                         35.0          38.1          44.6
    Assigned Share to Individual
       1870-71 subsample                            3.7         5.5           8.3
       1890-91 subsample                            3.8         5.3           4.8
       1910-11 subsample                            3.7         2.0           3.1
    Assigned in Full to Individual
       1870-71 subsample                         10.6           8.3           2.3
       1890-91 subsample                          7.8           4.5          18.3
       1910-11 subsample                          5.2           3.2           2.1
    Assigned to Company with Same Name
       1870-71 subsample                          0.6           2.3           0.5
       1890-91 subsample                          3.4           5.0           6.8
       1910-11 subsample                         23.0           2.7          31.4
    Assigned to Large Integrated Company
       1870-71 subsample                          0.0           0.0           0.0
       1890-91 subsample                         15.5           9.4           3.8
       1910-11 subsample                         23.0          22.1           4.1
    Assigned to Other Local Company
       1870-71 subsample                          7.5           3.9           1.0
       1890-91 subsample                         30.8           9.5          10.6
       1910-11 subsample                          3.7           8.2           8.4
    Assigned to Other Company
       1870-71 subsample                          1.6           4.4           0.0
       1890-91 subsample                         14.1           8.2           4.4
       1910-11 subsample                          6.5          23.8           6.4

    Number of Patents   (n)
      1870-71 subsample                             322         434          218
      1890-91 subsample                             555         947          707
      1910-11 subsample                             383         601         1050

Notes and Sources: See Tables 2 and 3.
