NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MEDIA BIAS AND REPUTATION
Matthew Gentzkow
Jesse M. Shapiro
Working Paper 11664
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11664
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2005

We are grateful to Alberto Alesina, Attila Ambrus, Nigel Ashford, Chris Avery, Heski Bar-Isaac, Gary
Becker, Tyler Cowen, Jonathan Feinstein, Jeremy Fox, Drew Fudenberg, Ed Glaeser, Jerry Green, James
Heckman, Tom Hubbard, Steve Levitt, Larry Katz, Kevin M. Murphy, Roger Myerson, Canice Prendergast,
Matthew Rabin, Andrei Shleifer, Lars Stole, Richard Thaler, Richard Zeckhauser and seminar participants
at Harvard University, the University of Chicago, the Institute for Humane Studies, and the University of
British Columbia for helpful comments. We thank Christopher Avery, Judith Chevalier, Matthew Hale,
Martin Kaplan, Bryan Boulier and H. O. Stekler for generously providing access to their data. Karen
Bernhardt, Fuhito Kojima, Jennifer Paniza and Tina Yang provided excellent research assistance. Gentzkow
acknowledges financial assistance from the Social Science Research Council and the Centel
Foundation/Robert P. Reuss Faculty Research Fund. Shapiro acknowledges financial assistance from the
Institute for Humane Studies, the Center for Basic Research in the Social Sciences, the Chiles Foundation
and the National Science Foundation. E-mail: gentzkow@ChicagoGSB.edu, jmshapir@uchicago.edu. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Matthew Gentzkow and Jesse M. Shapiro. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Media Bias and Reputation
Matthew Gentzkow and Jesse Shapiro
NBER Working Paper No. 11664
September 2005
JEL No. L82, L10, D83
ABSTRACT
A Bayesian consumer who is uncertain about the quality of an information source will infer that the
source is of higher quality when its reports conform to the consumer's prior expectations. We use this
fact to build a model of media bias in which firms slant their reports toward the prior beliefs of their
customers in order to build a reputation for quality. Bias emerges in our model even though it can
make all market participants worse off. The model predicts that bias will be less severe when
consumers receive independent evidence on the true state of the world, and that competition between
independently owned news outlets can reduce bias. We present a variety of empirical evidence
consistent with these predictions.

Matthew Gentzkow
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
gentzkow@chicagogsb.edu
Jesse M. Shapiro
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jmshapir@uchicago.edu

1

Introduction

On December 2, 2003, American troops fought a battle in the Iraqi city of Samarra. Fox News
began its story on the event with the following paragraph:
In one of the deadliest reported firefights in Iraq since the fall of Saddam Hussein’s regime, US
forces killed at least 54 Iraqis and captured eight others while fending oﬀ simultaneous convoy
ambushes Sunday in the northern city of Samarra (Fox News 2003).

The New York Times article on the same event began:
American commanders vowed Monday that the killing of as many as 54 insurgents in this central
Iraqi town would serve as a lesson to those fighting the United States, but Iraqis disputed the
death toll and said anger against America would only rise (New York Times 2003).

And the English-language website of the satellite network Al Jazeera began:
The US military has vowed to continue aggressive tactics after saying it killed 54 Iraqis following
an ambush, but commanders admitted they had no proof to back up their claims. The only
corpses at Samarra’s hospital were those of civilians, including two elderly Iranian visitors and
a child (AlJazeera.net 2003).

All of the accounts are based on the same set of underlying facts. Yet by selective omission, choice
of words, and varying credibility ascribed to the primary source, each conveys a radically diﬀerent
impression of what actually happened. The choice to slant information in this way is what we will
mean in this paper by media bias.
Such bias has been widely documented, both internationally and within the United States
(Groseclose and Milyo, forthcoming).1 Concern about bias has played a prominent role in many
policy debates, ranging from public diplomacy in the Middle East (Satloﬀ, 2003; Peterson et al,
2003) to ownership regulation by the FCC (Cooper, Kimmelman and Leanza, 2001). Moreover,
survey evidence revealing rising polarization and falling trust in the news media has prompted
concerns about the market’s ability to deliver credible information to the public (Kohut, 2004).
In this paper, we develop a new model of media bias. We start from a simple assumption: A
media firm wants to build a reputation as a provider of accurate information. If the quality of the
1

The diﬀerences between the slant of Arab and American news sources in covering the Middle East are documented
at length by Ajami (2001). A sampling of recent works documenting bias in US national media includes books
by Franken (2003), Coulter (2003), Goldberg (2003), and Alterman (2003). Underhill and Pepper (2003) discuss
accusations of prejudicial reporting at the BBC.

2

information a given firm provides is diﬃcult to observe directly, consumer beliefs about quality will
be based largely on observations of past reports. Firms will then have an incentive to shape these
reports in whatever way will be most likely to improve their reputations and thus increase their
future profits by expanding the demand for their product.
Our first set of results shows that firms will tend to distort information to make it conform
with consumers’ prior beliefs. To see why, consider that a noisy or inaccurate signal is more likely
to produce reports that contradict the truth. An agent who has a strong prior belief about the
true state of the world will therefore expect inaccurate information sources to contradict that belief
more often than accurate ones. Suppose, for example, that a newspaper reports that scientists have
successfully produced cold fusion. If a consumer believes this to be highly unlikely a priori, she
will rationally infer that the paper probably has poor information or exercised poor judgment in
interpreting the available evidence. A media firm concerned about its reputation for accuracy will
therefore be reluctant to report evidence at odds with consumers’ priors, even if they believe the
evidence to be true. The more priors favor a given position, the less likely the firm becomes to
print a story contradicting that position.
Our second main result is that when consumers have access to a source that can provide ex-post
verification of the true state of the world, firms’ incentives to distort information are weakened.
If a firm misreports its signal so as to move closer to consumers’ priors, it runs the risk that the
truth will come out and its report will be falsified, damaging its reputation. As the likelihood of
ex-post feedback about the state of the world improves, the amount of bias occurring in equilibrium
decreases. Our model therefore predicts less bias in contexts where predictions are concrete and
outcomes are immediately observable–forecasting weather, sports outcomes, or stock returns, for
example. It predicts more bias in coverage of a foreign war, discussion of the impact of alternative
tax policies, or summary of scientific evidence about global warming, contexts where outcomes are
diﬃcult to observe and are often not realized until long after the report is made.
The analysis of feedback foreshadows our third result: Competition in the news market can lead
to lower bias. A firm competing with another news outlet runs the risk that, if it distorts its signal,
the competitor’s report will expose the inaccuracy and thus reduce consumers’ assessments of the
distorting firm’s quality. We also show that if all firms in a market are jointly owned, bias can

3

remain unchanged even as the number of firms gets large.
At the end of the paper, we present empirical evidence on the determinants of bias. We review
a range of existing evidence suggesting that feedback can limit bias, and that in high-feedback
settings, such as weather reporting, bias tends to be relatively minor. We also highlight the fact
that local sports columnists do not excessively favor their local teams in forecasting game outcomes,
which is consistent with an important role for rapid feedback in limiting the incentive to slant.
Finally, we discuss anecdotal evidence suggesting that media firms in more competitive markets
have stronger incentives to reveal important information, and show quantitatively that television
news reports leading up to the 2000 election were more equitable in their treatment of Bush and
Gore in more competitive markets.
Formally, our work is most closely related to the literature on “herding on the priors,” which
considers the way agents’ incentives to act on or reveal information depend on the prior beliefs of
those who will ultimately determine their rewards. In this vein, Brandenburger and Polak (1996)
show that a firm manager concerned about his firm’s current stock price may choose the action
favored by shareholders’ priors even when he has private information showing this is ineﬃcient. The
manager’s desire to maximize current stock prices plays a role similar to the reputational incentives
in our framework: it gives the decision-maker an incentive to slant its action toward the prior beliefs
of another agent. Prendergast (1993) shows that similar concerns will lead a worker to skew her
reports to match the data that her manager has received, again leading valuable information to
be lost in equilibrium.2 In contrast to much of this literature, however, the reputational concerns
we model provide an additional incentive for honesty, which in turn guarantees the presence of an
informative equilibrium. In this sense, our model is also related to work on reputational eﬀects in
sender-receiver games (see, e.g., Morris, 2001; Eﬃnger and Polborn, 2001; Avery and Meyer, 2003;
Olszewski, 2004; and Ottaviani and Sørensen, 2005a and 2005b). We deviate from these papers
in highlighting the importance of the receiver’s prior beliefs for the equilibrium reporting strategy,
and in showing the eﬀects of ex-post revelation on equilibrium reporting.3
2

See also Heidues and Lagerlöf, 2000 for an application to political competition.
See Ely and Välimäki (2003) and Ely, Fudenberg and Levine (2002) for other models in which reputational
concerns lead to distortions in equilibrium.
3

4

Topically, our work is related to the growing body of economic research on media bias. Existing
economic models of bias all take as given that some agents in the economy–consumers (Mullainathan and Shleifer, forthcoming), reporters (Baron, 2003), or governments (Besley and Prat,
2004)–prefer for news suppliers to distort the information they provide.4 In contrast, our model
shows that bias can arise even when news consumers care only about learning the truth, news sellers care only about maximizing profits, and eliminating bias could make all agents in the economy
better oﬀ. While we do not deny that some agents may prefer for the news media to distort their
reports, our findings suggest that caution is warranted in interpreting media slant as evidence for
such tastes. Additionally, our framework generates novel, testable predictions that distinguish it
from these existing theories. Most notably, our prediction that increased competition lowers the
incentive to bias reports toward consumer priors contrasts sharply with that of Mullainathan and
Shleifer (forthcoming), who argue that increased competition will tighten the connection between
priors and reports.
In the next section we discuss the role of reputational incentives in media markets. In section
3 we present the model for a simple monopoly case, and show that equilibrium bias is correlated
with consumer priors and decreasing in the amount of ex post feedback. In section 4, we extend
the model to allow for multiple firms, and develop the intuition that competition can reduce bias
by increasing the likelihood that erroneous reports are exposed. In section 5, we extend the model
to allow consumers with heterogeneous prior beliefs to coexist in the same market. We show that
it is possible to have segmented equilibria where each firm provides information to only one type
of consumer and slants its reports accordingly, and that the key comparative statics remain valid
in this setting. Section 6 presents empirical evidence supporting our key findings, and section 7
concludes.

2

Credibility, Quality, and Bias in the Media

In this section, we present evidence supporting two key building blocks of our model: Media firms
try to build a reputation for truthful reporting, and consumers’ assessments of the quality of news
4
An earlier version of Mullainathan and Shleifer’s (2002) paper does not assume that consumers have a taste for
confirmatory information but generates similar behavior through a mechanism in which consumers think categorically.

5

sources depend on prior beliefs. We also present evidence confirming the intuition suggested in the
first paragraph of the introduction that firms’ reporting strategies are highly related to the prior
beliefs of their consumers.

2.1

The Importance of Reputation in Media Markets

At the heart of our model will be media firms’ desire to maintain a reputation for accuracy in
reporting. The high costs firms are willing to incur to gather information provide strong evidence
of such an incentive,5 as does the response of media firms whose reports are revealed to have
been inaccurate. For example, on September 8, 2004, CBS News anchor Dan Rather reported the
emergence of new evidence indicating that President Bush’s family had pulled strings in order to
get him into the Texas Air National Guard and avoid his having to serve in Vietnam. When later
information indicated that the documents on which the report was based may have been fabricated,
both Rather and CBS President Andrew Heyward issued apologies emphasizing the importance of
a reputation for truth-telling in journalism. Heyward wrote that “nothing is more important to
[CBS] than our credibility and keeping faith with the millions of people who count on us for fair,
accurate, reliable, and independent reporting. We will continue to work tirelessly to be worthy of
that trust” (Heyward, 2004). Rather’s statement echoed Heyward’s, explaining that “nothing is
more important to [CBS] than people’s trust in our ability and our commitment to report fairly
and truthfully” (Rather, 2004).
Similarly, the exposure of Jayson Blair’s fraudulent reporting at the New York Times prompted
the resignation of top-ranking editors Howell Raines and Gerald M. Boyd. Former Tupperware chief
executive Warren L. Batts remarked, “They, of course, had to resign... Any company has to sell the
credibility of its product, but a media company has nothing else to sell” (Kirkpatrick and Fabrikant,
2003).6
5

To take one example, Andrew Lack, President of NBC News, estimated at the beginning of the war in Afghanistan
that covering it would cost each network approximately 1 million dollars per week–10 percent of their total weekly
expenditures (Auletta 2001). One would not expect to see this level of expense if consumers were not significantly
concerned with the factual content of news.
6
An investigation by the Times discovered that Blair had “fabricated comments,” “concocted scenes,” and “selected details from photographs to create the impression he had been somewhere or seen someone, when he had not”
(Barry et al, 2003). New York Times publisher Arthur Sulzberger Jr. called Blair’s deceptions “an abrogation of the
trust between the newspaper and its readers” (Barry et al, 2003).

6

2.2

The Influence of Priors on Quality Assessments

Our model will draw upon a general property of Bayesian updating about source quality; namely,
that a source is judged to be of higher quality when its reports are more consistent with the agent’s
prior beliefs.7 A large body of psychological research documents a strong connection between
subjects’ prior views and their assessments of information sources. In perhaps the best known
paper on this subject, Lord, Ross, and Lepper (1979) show that experimental subjects evaluating
studies of the deterrence eﬀect of the death penalty rate studies supporting their prior beliefs as
both more “convincing” and “better done.”8 This basic finding is replicated and expanded by Lord,
Lepper, and Preston (1984), Miller et al. (1993), and Munro and Ditto (1997). Along the same
lines, Koehler (1993) shows that scientists rate experiments as higher quality when the experimental
results conform to the scientists’ belief about a controversial issue.
Evidence on consumer assessments of media quality in the real world show a similar pattern.
To take one example, figure 1 shows that in a recent survey nearly 30 percent of respondents who
described themselves as “conservative” indicated that they thought they could believe all or most of
what the Fox Cable News Network says. In contrast, less than 15 percent of self-described liberals
said that they could believe all or most of what the network reports. Ratings of National Public
Radio, show the opposite pattern: more than 35 percent of liberals believe all or most of what NPR
says, as opposed to less than 20 percent of conservatives.9 Taken together these pieces of evidence
strongly suggest that prior beliefs influence consumers’ judgements of quality in the way a Bayesian
model would predict.
7

Our supplemental appendix, available online, provides a proof of this property under fairly general conditions.
See also Prendergast (1993) and Brandenburger and Polak (1996).
8
This paper is often cited as evidence that consumers have confirmatory bias–i.e. a taste for information that
confirms their prior beliefs. We simply note that the evidence on evaluating the quality of information sources is
equally consistent with a Bayesian model.
9
Other evidence comes from the 2002 Gallup Poll of the Islamic World (The Gallup Organization, 2002). Respondents in nine Islamic countries were asked to report whether each of the following five descriptions applies to CNN:
has comprehensive news coverage; has good analyses; is always on the site of events; has daring, unedited news; has
unique access to information. In our supplemental appendix, we show that an index of these quality assessments is
strongly correlated with respondents’ reported favorability toward the US. To deal with the possibility of reversecausality, we also construct a proxy for favorability based on respondents’ reported religiosity and show that this also
has a strong correlation with quality assessments.

7

2.3

The Influence of Consumer Priors on Media Reports

A large body of anecdotal evidence suggests a connection between consumers’ prior beliefs and
media firms’ slant. Consider, for example, Ames’ (1938) description of the problem faced by
southern newspaper editors in their coverage of lynching: “As individuals, they are unanimously
opposed to mob violence but, as editors who are caught in the general atmosphere of a given trade
territory, they do not reflect their own ideas but those of the people upon whose goodwill their
papers depend for revenue.” The result of this pressure was that southern editorials in the period
almost universally condoned lynchings.
A more recent example is the reported diﬀerence in coverage of the war in Iraq between U.S.
networks and Arabic-language news channels such as Al Jazeera. As Lieutenant Josh Rushing, an
American press oﬃcer, explains in the documentary Control Room, “It benefits Al Jazeera to play
to Arab nationalism because that’s their audience, just like Fox plays to American patriotism for
the exact same reason” (Turan, 2004).
Even within a given firm slant can vary depending on the audience. For example, CNN’s domestic cable channel broadcasts quite diﬀerent content from CNN International, which is broadcast
worldwide. Chris Cramer, president of CNN International, writes that their audience “expects us
to have a non-U.S. viewpoint.” The diﬀerence is also illustrated by coverage in the aftermath of
September 11: the domestic channel prominently displayed an American flag during its broadcasts
while the international broadcasts quickly dropped the flag (Kempner, 2001).
Turning to more systematic evidence, newspaper endorsements of presidential candidates display
a pattern of conformity to local political opinion. As figure 2 shows, in the 2000 U.S. presidential election, Bush’s share of the two-party vote was considerably lower in richer states (Glaeser,
Ponzetto and Shapiro, 2004). Bush received almost 60 percent of the two-party vote among states
in the lowest income quartile, as against just over 40 percent in the states in the highest quartile. As
the figure illustrates, newspaper endorsements displayed a similar pattern, with almost 90 percent
endorsing Bush in the bottom quartile and less than 55 percent in the top quartile. Although this
graph is by no means conclusive, it certainly suggests a significant connection between consumer
beliefs and media slant.
Existing work in political science also suggests a correlation between the editorial position of
8

newspapers and the views of their readers. For example, Dalton, Beck and Huckfeldt (1998) show
survey evidence from the 1992 presidential election suggesting that the editorial stance of local
newspapers is correlated with local perceptions of candidates. Erikson (1976) documents a similar
relationship using aggregate data on voting patterns in the 1960s. In Gunther’s (1992) analysis of
national survey data, he finds that only two percent of respondents had political views categorized
as “very distant” from those of their primary newspaper.

3

Media Bias in a Monopoly

In this section we present a simple model in which a single media firm reports to homogeneous
consumers. There is a binary state of the world S ∈ {L, R} and a large population of consumers
who must each choose a binary action A ∈ {L, R} which gives payoﬀ 1 if A = S and payoﬀ 0
otherwise.10 We assume that consumers and the firm place prior probability θ and θF , respectively,
on the true state being R.11
At the beginning of the game, the firm receives a signal s ∈ {l, r} about the true state, whose
distribution depends on the firm’s quality. With probability λ, the firm is “high quality” and has
a signal that perfectly reveals the true state. With probability (1 − λ), the firm is “normal,” and
has an imperfect but informative signal distributed according to

Pr (l | L) = Pr (r | R) = π,
¢
¡
where π ∈ 12 , 1 . We assume that the firm knows its own quality with certainty. We also assume
¢
£
that θ ∈ 12 , π and θF ∈ (1 − π, π). These restrictions ensure that the firm’s best guess as to the

true state will depend on its signal and also that its signal will be valuable to consumers.12 The
10

We follow much of the previous literature in modeling the information provided by media firms as an informative
signal about some unknown state of the world, and assuming that consumers value this information because they
face some decision whose payoﬀs are connected with the true state. This could represent actual decisions that depend
on the news, either with large instrumental consequences (whether to join a terrorist group opposing the United
States) or with minor consequences (what position to support in an argument with friends). It could also represent
consumers who value information intrinsically as in Grant, Kajii and Polak (1998).
11
Although we will allow for the possibility that θ = θF , the choice to specify firm and consumer beliefs separately
rather than assuming a common prior does aﬀect the results slightly because it means the comparative statics we
present on θ will hold the firm prior constant. As we point out below, however, the comparative statics would only
be strengthened if we moved firm and consumer priors together.
12
In the case where π < θF , the firm’s best guess is that the true state is R regardless of its signal. We would want
to define “bias” in this case to be the probability that the firm’s report deviates from its best guess of the true state

9

assumption that θ ≥

1
2

is without loss of generality and serves to limit the set of cases we need to

consider.

n o
After seeing its signal, the firm publishes a report ŝ ∈ ˆl, r̂ . Normal firms are free to report

either ˆl or r̂, and we write a normal firm’s strategy conditional on its signal by σ s (ŝ) = Pr (ŝ | s).
Without loss of generality, we will restrict attention to strategies with σ r (r̂) ≥ σ l (r̂) (cases where
this does not hold are equivalent to a relabeling of ˆl and r̂). We assume that high quality firms
always report their signal (and thus the true state) honestly.13
These assumptions treat bias as pure distortion of the facts. In reality, of course, news sources
may slant information by reporting some facts and omitting others, by changing the order in which
facts are presented, by presenting sources as more or less credible, or by using language with
positive or negative connotations. Note, however, that in all of these cases, diﬀerent slants convey
information to consumers about what the firm believes is the true state of the world. For example,
Al Jazeera’s opening paragraph about the Samarra incident uses evidence selectively to imply
that the American attack harmed civilians. What is important for modelling is the information
conveyed in such a report, not the form the communication takes. In this sense, our model could
be a useful approximation to many technologies for bias, provided that these diﬀerent strategies
involve conveying diﬀerent impressions about the facts underlying the news story.14
Consumers choose whether or not to purchase the firm’s product and thus learn the value
of ŝ. Rather than specify the pricing and profit structure in detail, we make two reduced-form
assumptions: (i) all consumers purchase the product in equilibrium; (ii) a change in the distribution
of ŝ (conditional on the true state) that increases consumers’ willingness to pay for the firm’s report
does not reduce consumer welfare and strictly increases firm profits. These assumptions would hold,
for example, in a model where the firm sets a monopoly price and extracts all of the consumer
surplus.15
(the proper definition with respect to welfare). Bias would therefore involve the firm reporting ˆ
l “too often” rather
than r̂ too often as in the case we will analyze. However, the key comparative statics, that firm reports are correlated
with consumer priors and that bias decreases with feedback, would remain unchanged.
13
Allowing both types to have discretion would complicate the exposition and lead the model to have multiple
equilibria in general. As we discuss in more detail in the supplemental appendix, however, the equilibrium we analyze
in which high types report truthfully is in fact the unique equilibrium of the more general model under an intuitive
stability criterion.
14
In the supplemental appendix, we extend the model to allow for a continuous underlying signal, which approximates the case where firms receive several signals each period and choose which to print and which to omit.
15
Alternatively, we could relax assumption (i) and allow the number of consumers who buy the firm’s product to

10

After making the purchase decision and possibly learning ŝ, each consumer chooses an action
A. Note that if consumers received utility from this action immediately, they would also know the
true state. Since we wish to model feedback about the truth explicitly, we assume consumers do not
receive utility until the end of the game, but all consumers immediately learn the true state with
probability μ ∈ [0, 1]. Letting X ∈ {L, R, 0} denote the feedback received, with X = 0 indicating
the case of no feedback, we will abuse notation slightly and denote by λ (ŝ, X) a consumer’s posterior
probability that the firm is high quality given a report of ŝ and feedback of X.
P
Finally, we assume that the firm receives a continuation payoﬀ i f (λi ), where f is a continuous
and strictly increasing function of its argument and λi is the posterior belief of consumer i. This

could easily be derived by assuming a second period with exactly the same structure as the game
just described. Second period profits would then be increasing in λi because each consumers’
expected gain from learning ŝ will be higher the greater the probability the firm is high quality.
It can also be generated by a repeated structure in which overlapping generations of consumers
interact with a long-lived firm (Gentzkow and Shapiro, 2005).
The timing of the game is summarized in figure 3. Note that the structure of the game implies
that the firm’s choice of a report ŝ only aﬀects its objective function via the continuation payoﬀs
f (λi ). Therefore, any ŝ played in equilibrium must maximize the expectation of the continuation
payoﬀ over possible realizations of the consumer feedback.

3.1

Inferring quality from content

As a first step to analyzing the outcome of this game, we consider how a consumer’s posterior belief
about firm quality depends on the firm’s strategy, the accuracy of its signal, π, and the consumer’s
prior, θ. We focus for now on the case when consumers do not receive feedback.
Consider the posterior after a report of r̂ and no feedback, λ (r̂, 0). Setting aside the degenerate
case where the firm always reports ˆl, this is a strictly increasing function of the likelihood ratio:
θ
Pr (r̂ | high)
=
.
Pr (r̂ | normal)
θ [σ r (r̂) π + σ l (r̂) (1 − π)] + (1 − θ) [σ r (r̂) (1 − π) + σ l (r̂) π]
depend on the expected value of the information in the firm’s report. A firm that set a zero price but extracted
revenues from advertising would then be better oﬀ the more useful its reports were expected to be.

11

The key observation that drives many of the results below is that the more consumers’ prior
beliefs favor the state R, the more highly they will rate the quality of a firm that reports r̂. To
see this, note that the derivative of the likelihood ratio with respect to θ has the same sign as
σ r (r̂) (1 − π) + σ l (r̂) π, which is strictly positive under our maintained assumption that π < 1.
Intuitively, as θ increases, the probability that a high type reports r̂ increases faster than the
probability that a normal type reports r̂, since the latter’s report is more weakly related to the true
state. This makes r̂ a better indicator of quality.
We can also see immediately that the likelihood ratio is strictly decreasing in both σ r (r̂) and
σ l (r̂) (since increasing these makes r̂ a better indicator that the firm is normal). It is also weakly
decreasing in π (strictly if θ >

1
2

and σ r (r̂) > σ l (r̂)) since increasing π makes normal firms more

likely to receive a signal of r and thus more likely to report r̂, but does not aﬀect the distribution
of the high type’s reports.
Applying the same logic to beliefs after a report of ˆl, we arrive at lemma 1.
Lemma 1 Suppose that normal firms report both r̂ and ˆl with positive probability and that θ > 12 .
³ ´
Then λ (r̂, 0) is strictly increasing in θ and strictly decreasing in σ r (r̂) and σ l (r̂). Similarly, λ ˆl, 0
is strictly decreasing in θ, and strictly increasing in σ r (r̂) and σ l (r̂). Finally, λ (r̂, 0) is decreasing
³ ´
in π and λ ˆl, 0 is increasing in π, strictly whenever σ r (r̂) > σ l (r̂).

3.2

Two special cases

To fix ideas, we treat first the special cases of no feedback (μ = 0) and perfect feedback (μ = 1). In
the no feedback case, the consumer’s posterior on the firm’s quality will be λ (ŝ, 0), which depends
³ ´
only on the firm’s report. In equilibrium we must have λ (r̂, 0) = λ ˆl, 0 . To see this, note that
³ ´
if λ (r̂, 0) > λ ˆl, 0 , normal firms would prefer to always report r̂ which in turn would imply
³ ´
λ ˆl, 0 = 1, a contradiction.

In order for the posterior to be independent of the firm’s report, it must be the case that, from

the consumer’s perspective, the equilibrium distributions of the high and normal types’ signals are
the same. This requires that the normal firm report r̂ with probability θ and ˆl with probability
(1 − θ). Note that this immediately rules out the normal firm truthfully reporting its signal, since
a truthful normal firm reports r̂ with probability (1 − θ) (1 − π) + θπ < θ.
12

There are many possible strategies for the normal firm which would cause its signal to have the
necessary distribution, and thus many possible equilibria.16 Since the firm must distort its signal
in a way that increases the overall probability of reporting r̂, all of these will involve some garbling
of the signal l (that is σ l (r̂) > 0). For now, we will focus on the most informative equilibrium–the
one in which the firm does not simultaneously garble r signals.17 We show below that with even a
small probability of feedback, μ, the model has a unique equilibrium, and that the one considered
here is the limit of these unique equilibria as μ → 0.
In equilibrium, then, the firm biases its signal in the direction of consumers’ prior.18 Using
lemma 1, we can see immediately that the intensity of this bias, σ ∗l (r̂), will be increasing in the
³ ´
strength of the prior θ. Increasing θ increases λ (r̂, 0) and decreases λ ˆl, 0 , thus making it more
attractive to report r̂; σ l (r̂) must then increase to restore equilibrium. The same logic shows that

increasing π reduces the intensity of bias. Intuitively, since R is the most likely state, a normal
firm with a more accurate signal is more likely to report r̂, and so requires less distortion to match
the high type’s signal. Finally, note that since the prior on quality λ cancels out in the equilibrium
³ ´
condition λ (r̂, 0) = λ ˆl, 0 , bias will be independent of λ. Therefore, as is common in reputationbased models, even an arbitrarily small chance that the firm is high-type is suﬃcient to pin down

its reporting incentives (Kreps and Wilson, 1982; Milgrom and Roberts, 1982).
Consider, next, the special case in which the consumer receives feedback with certainty (μ = 1).
Because any disagreement between feedback and report implies that the firm must be the normal
type, the firm will always prefer to match the feedback if possible. Intuitively, this will mean the
firm should report whichever state it believes is most likely after seeing its signal, s. Since we have
assumed that the signal is suﬃciently strong to outweigh the firm’s prior (i.e. that π > θ F > 1 − π),
this will lead to truthful reporting.
16

For example, there is a pure babbling equilibrium in which normal firms randomly choose r̂ with probability θ
and l̂ with probability 1 − θ (independently of s.)
17
It is straightforward to show that this is the equilibrium that maximizes the probability that the consumer chooses
the correct action, from the perspective of the consumer’s prior θ.
18
In this simple case, we can solve for the bias explicitly. Equilibrium requires that:
Pr (r̂ | normal) = σr (r̂) [θπ + (1 − θ) (1 − π)] + σl (r̂) [θ (1 − π) + (1 − θ) π] = θ
Setting σr (r̂) = 1, we have:
(2θ − 1) (1 − π)
.
θ (1 − π) + (1 − θ) π
It is straightforward to check that this is increasing in θ and decreasing in π.
σ l (r̂) =

13

This argument would be exactly correct if the gain in continuation payoﬀ from correctly matching the R state were equal to the gain from correctly matching the L state. This is not a priori obvious, since the consumer’s judgments will depend on her conjecture about the normal firm’s strategy.
³ ´
Suppose, however, that the gain from correctly reporting R were greater–if λ (r̂, R) > λ ˆl, L .

This would mean the firm might have an incentive to deviate and report r̂ after seeing a signal of

l but would always report truthfully after seeing r. But this would imply that normal firms are
³ ´
more likely to correctly match R states than L states and so we would have λ ˆl, L > λ (r̂, R), a

contradiction. From this logic it follows that the only equilibrium is honest reporting. Note that
this is also the most informative strategy, in the sense that it most eﬃciently conveys the firm’s
information to the consumer.

3.3

Equilibrium reporting

We turn next to a formal treatment of the more general case of μ ∈ (0, 1). The firm’s expected
payoﬀ is essentially a weighted average of the two special cases described above. With probability
(1 − μ), the consumer receives no additional information about the true state, and forms a posterior
based on her prior beliefs and her conjectures about the firm’s strategy. With probability μ, a
feedback report arrives, and the consumer can base her judgment of the firm’s quality on the true
state. Because the equilibrium conditional on feedback involves truthful reporting, we would expect
equilibrium bias in the general case to be decreasing in μ.
Formally, we can write the expected gain to reporting r̂ rather than ˆl after seeing signal s as

∆ (s) = (1 − μ) ∆nf + μ∆f (s) ,
where

∆nf

³ ³ ´´
= f (λ (r̂, 0)) − f λ ˆl, 0

i
¡
¢ h ³ ³ ´´
∆f (s) = θF (s) [f (λ (r̂, R)) − f (0)] − 1 − θF (s) f λ ˆl, L − f (0) .
(We abuse notation slightly and let θF (s) represent the firm’s posterior on the true state after
seeing s.) Note that the two terms in square brackets are the gain to correctly matching the R
14

and L states respectively. These follow from the fact that a firm that fails to match the feedback
³
´
report cannot be a high type, and so λ ˆl, R = λ (r̂, L) = 0. Note that since θF (r) > θF (l) and

so ∆f (r) > ∆f (l), the gain to reporting r̂ (ˆl) is strictly larger (smaller) after seeing r than after
seeing l.
To gain some intuition for the comparative statics, suppose we begin from the case of perfect
feedback (μ = 1) in which normal firms report their signals truthfully. Because a truthful normal
firm reports r̂ less often than a high quality firm, we know that ∆nf > 0–if there were no feedback
the firm would want to deviate and report r̂ after seeing l. Truthful reporting also implies that
³ ´
∆f (l) < 0, since λ (r̂, R) = λ ˆl, L and θF (l) < 12 –conditional on feedback, the firm strictly

prefers to report l signals truthfully.

Consider, now, what happens as we decrease μ. For a firm that saw a signal l, this shifts
weight from the negative term ∆f (l) to the positive term ∆nf , decreasing the net gain to reporting
truthfully. As long as firm strategies don’t change, neither ∆f (l) nor ∆nf changes with μ, so we
will eventually reach a value of μ strictly greater than 0 where ∆ (l) = 0. If μ falls beyond this
point, the firm will strictly prefer to report r̂ even after seeing l. It cannot be an equilibrium for the
firm to always report r̂ because in this case reporting ˆl would lead consumers to believe the firm was
high quality for sure.19 The firm must therefore begin garbling l signals with a small probability–
this increases the probability that a normal firm reports r̂, causing the net reputational payoﬀ to
reporting r̂ to fall. There will thus be a range of high μ where the firm reports truthfully, and a
range of lower μ where the firm plays a mixed strategy defined by the condition ∆ (l) = 0. In this
range, the firm biases its signal toward consumer priors and the probability of bias is decreasing in
μ.
It is easy to see that when the firm is playing a mixed strategy, the bias will also be increasing
in θ. Increasing θ increases ∆nf by lemma 1 and does not change ∆f (s).20 Since neither λ (r̂, R)
³ ´
nor λ ˆl, L changes, this provides a strict incentive to report r̂ and in order to restore equilibrium
the firm must garble l signals into r̂ more often.

19
Making this argument precise requires us to handle the zero probability event that the firm deviates and reports
ˆ
l but then the consumer receives feedback that the true state was R. We discuss the formalities in the proof of
proposition 1.
20
Note that if we assumed that the firm and consumers had identical priors, then θF (s) and hence ∆f (s) would
be increasing in θ, thus strengthening the comparative static on θ.

15

Given the general form we have assumed for the continuation payoﬀ, there is no clear comparative static with respect to π.21 However, in the limit as π approaches 1, a normal firm’s
signal becomes nearly as accurate as that of the high type, so that the normal firm’s reputational
incentives no longer favor distortion and honest reporting becomes the unique equilibrium strategy.
The complete characterization of equilibrium is given in proposition 1, which is proved in the
appendix. Note that the equilibrium reporting strategy is now unique–with even arbitrarily little
feedback, the firm will choose the most informative strategy to try to match the conditional distribution of the high type’s reports. Note too that since the firm only garbles l signals, the limit of
these equilibria as μ → 0 is the one discussed for the case of no feedback above.
Proposition 1 The unique perfect Bayesian equilibrium reporting strategy is for a normal firm
to report r signals truthfully and to misrepresent l signals with probability σ ∗l (r̂) ∈ [0, 1). This
¡
¢
probability is weakly increasing in θ, strictly whenever σ ∗l (r̂) > 0. For any θ ∈ 12 , 1 , there exists

μ∗ ∈ (0, 1) such that this probability is zero for μ ≥ μ∗ and is positive and strictly decreasing in μ
for μ < μ∗ . The limit of σ ∗l (r̂) as π → 1 is zero.
To make clearer how the equilibrium works, figure 4 shows the equilibrium bias as a function
of θ for two diﬀerent values of μ. When μ is very close to zero, there is bias for almost all θ and it
is strictly increasing in θ. As μ increases the bias falls, and there is a range of low θ for which the
equilibrium is truth-telling.

3.4

Welfare

Because we have modeled bias as a garbling of the firm’s signal, it should be immediately clear
that consumers’ willingness to pay for an unbiased signal would be strictly higher than for a biased
signal. Recall that we have assumed a change in the distribution of ŝ that increases consumers’
willingness to pay for the firm’s report does not reduce consumer welfare, and strictly increases
firms’ profits in the first period. This means eliminating bias cannot make consumers worse oﬀ
(from the perspective of the consumer’s prior), and that it strictly increases firm profits in the first
21

Increasing
  π makes it more likely that a normal firm’s report matches the feedback, and so decreases both λ (r̂, R)
and λ l̂, L . Depending on the shape of the function f (), this could either increase or decrease ∆f (l), and so the
net eﬀect on the incentive to report r̂ is ambiguous.

16

period.22
The other element of welfare to consider is the eﬀect of eliminating bias on the firm’s expected
continuation payoﬀ, where the expectation is taken with respect to the firm’s prior θF . This is
more subtle because reducing bias would improve the accuracy of consumers’ inferences about
quality. This would tend to increase the continuation payoﬀs of high quality firms and decrease the
continuation payoﬀs of normal firms. Importantly, however, the magnitude of this learning eﬀect
will be small if the change in consumer beliefs about quality is small. This will be true in particular
if λ (the prior probability that the firm is high quality) is close to zero. To see this, observe that
since the normal firm reports both r̂ and ˆl with positive probability in equilibrium, there is no
event that reveals the firm to be high quality for sure. Therefore, as λ → 0, the posteriors λ (ŝ, X)
become arbitrarily close to zero for all ŝ and X. This means that the change in continuation payoﬀs
when bias is eliminated will approach zero.
We can thus state the following result.
Proposition 2 Suppose that the equilibrium bias σ ∗l (r̂) is bounded away from zero in a neighborhood of λ = 0. Then for small λ consumers would be weakly better oﬀ and the firm strictly better
oﬀ if the firm were required to report its signal truthfully.
It is easy to find parameters for which the equilibrium bias is indeed bounded away from zero
around λ = 0. Recall that in the model with no feedback we showed that bias in the most informative
equilibrium was independent of λ and also that this was the limit of the full model’s equilibria as
μ → 0. It is also easy to see that the bias will be continuous in λ. For any θ >

1
2

we can therefore

find μ small enough that the limit of bias as λ → 0 is strictly positive.

4

Competition and Endogenous Feedback

Thus far we have taken the probability of feedback, μ, to be exogenous. This was meant to capture
a variety of ways that consumers might obtain additional information ex post–direct experience,
22

Note as an aside that we have not assigned consumers a continuation payoﬀ that depends on their beliefs about
the firm’s quality. In a model where future interactions were defined explicitly, we might expect consumers to be
better oﬀ the more they learned about firm quality. But eliminating bias must also at least weakly increase this
payoﬀ, since an unbiased signal provides strictly more information about the firm’s type, and so we would still find
a strict increase in overall willingness to pay.

17

contact with friends, and so forth. In this section, we explore a specific case in more detail: feedback
that is provided by competing media firms. We discuss the kinds of incentives that would lead
competing firms to provide accurate feedback in equilibrium and show that increasing competition
will tend to decrease reporting bias.
We assume that there are J firms in the market. One of these firms has a “scoop” on the true
state of the world–this means that the firm receives a possibly noisy signal of the true state s and
reports it exactly as the monopoly firm did in the last section. That is, if the scoop firm is high
quality (with probability λ) it receives a perfectly accurate signal and reports it honestly; if it is
normal, it receives a noisy signal equal to the true state with probability π and is free to report
P
either r̂ or ˆl.23 At the end of the game, the firm receives a continuation payoﬀ equal to i f (λi ).
We extend the model by adding a “feedback stage” in which the remaining J − 1 firms observe

the scoop firm’s report and also learn the true state with certainty. Each of these firms j then
n o
publishes a report which we denote s̃j ∈ ˜l, r̃ . We continue to assume that there is an exogenous
probability μ̃ > 0 that the true state is revealed after all reports have been made.

In specifying consumer behavior, we want to capture the idea that increasing the number of
competing firms makes it more likely that consumers will read a feedback report ex post. We
continue to assume for simplicity that all consumers read the scoop firm’s report and that they
must choose their action A immediately after reading it. We then assume that each consumer
can choose one of the J − 1 feedback reports or the outside option of reading none of them, which
provides some exogenous constant level of utility. The utility of reading each of the feedback reports
includes an i.i.d. random component with full support, so that the probability that each consumer
reads at least one feedback report, denoted φ (J), is strictly increasing in J and approaches one as
J → ∞.
Observe that if all J − 1 firms report the true state accurately in the feedback stage, the assumptions we have made mean the scoop firm’s problem will be exactly equivalent to the monopoly
problem analyzed above–it chooses its report to maximize its reputation knowing consumers will
23

Implicitly, we are assuming that the firm with the scoop always makes a report, but in principle we could
endogenize this choice. Of course, a firm that knows it is the normal type might prefer not to make a report, so as
to avoid making an error and revealing its type. This temptation would be especially strong if consumers do not
know which firm has the scoop. On the other hand, if high types always make a report when they have the scoop,
then there will be reputational incentives to make a report even if consumers do not know which firm has the scoop.
Understanding how these trade-oﬀs play out in equilibrium is an interesting issue beyond the scope of this paper.

18

either have no feedback about the truth or learn the true state with certainty. The only diﬀerence
is that the probability of feedback will now be a strictly increasing function of J. Proposition 1
thus implies that given truthful reporting, bias is weakly decreasing in J, and strictly decreasing
in J whenever the equilibrium calls for positive bias.
This observation treats competing firms as a mechanical device whose reports are exogenously
fixed to perfectly reveal the true state. But reputational incentives such as those that drive our
earlier results can also lead competing firms to uncover the true state and to report it truthfully.
To see this, assume that each of the J firms may be high quality with probability λ, and that each
P
firm j receives a continuation payoﬀ i f (λij ), where λij is consumer i’s posterior on j’s quality

and f () is strictly increasing. Assume that in the feedback stage, high quality firms always report
the true state honestly, but that normal firms can choose their reports freely. Each normal firm j

will choose its feedback report s̃j to maximize the ex post perception of its quality knowing that
there is a probability μ that consumers receive exogenous feedback. Note that the game between
a feedback firm and its readers is identical to our monopoly model above, with the restriction that
the normal type knows the true state for sure rather than having a noisy signal (π = 1).
It then follows almost immediately from proposition 1 that the unique equilibrium is for all
feedback firms to report the true state honestly. We showed that the limit of the unique equilibria
as π → 1 is honest reporting. The only complication at π = 1 is that if consumers expect a
firm to report honestly the event that its report disagrees with the exogenous feedback becomes a
zero probability event. Assuming that their belief in this case is that the firm is normal for sure
easily supports the equilibrium. Any other candidate equilibrium would have positive equilibrium
probabilities at all nodes and would be ruled out by the the same argument that established
uniqueness for π close to 1.
Proposition 3 Let μ̄ = μ̃+(1 − μ̃) φ (J) denote the total probability that a given consumer receives
feedback about the true state. Then in equilibrium all feedback firms report truthfully, and the
scoop firm plays the equilibrium strategy of the monopoly game with feedback probability μ = μ̄.
Equilibrium bias is therefore weakly decreasing in the number of firms J (strictly whenever there is
positive bias in equilibrium) and zero for J suﬃciently large.

19

This proposition is straightforward because the feedback firms are only motivated by their own
reputations. Their only incentive is thus to ensure that their reports match any feedback consumers
receive ex post. To highlight the importance of this independence, we now consider the opposite
extreme where the J firms are jointly owned, a case of particular interest in the policy debate. We
assume that the firms are either all high quality (with probability λ) or all normal, so reputation is
formed at the level of the owner. High quality firms always report the true state truthfully in both
P
the scoop and feedback stages. We assume that the owner receives a continuation payoﬀ i f (λi )

where λi is consumer i’s posterior on the firms’ joint quality and f () is strictly increasing.

We first show that the unique equilibrium in the feedback stage is for normal firms to confirm
the report of the scoop firm regardless of the true state. To see that this is an equilibrium, suppose
consumers expect this strategy and consider a (normal) firm that is reporting in the feedback stage.
Because both high quality and normal firms always confirm, consumers’ beliefs about quality will
remain strictly greater than zero if the firm follows its strategy of repeating the scoop firm’s report
and there is no exogenous feedback. This occurs with positive probability since μ < 1. If the
firm deviates and contradicts the report we assign consumers the belief that the firm is normal for
sure regardless of the exogenous feedback. The firm will then strictly prefer to confirm since if it
contradicts it receives the lowest possible reputation for sure. To see that the equilibrium is unique
consider an alternative in which a feedback firm contradicts the scoop firm’s report with positive
probability. Consumers must assign a posterior of zero when they see a contradiction. A firm whose
strategy called for it to contradict would therefore strictly prefer to deviate since consumers must
assign it a posterior strictly greater than zero if it confirms and there is no feedback, an event that
occurs with positive probability.
Next, observe that given this equilibrium in the feedback stage, increasing the number of firms
has no eﬀect on the scoop firm’s decision. Both normal firms and high-quality firms always report
the same thing in the scoop and feedback stages, so consumers never change their quality assessments based on the feedback-stage report. The decision of all J firms to jointly report either r̂
or ˆl is thus exactly equivalent to the monopoly problem analyzed earlier. We therefore have the
following result:
Proposition 4 Suppose all firms are jointly owned. Then in equilibrium firms in the feedback
20

stage always confirm the scoop firm’s report, and the scoop firm plays the equilibrium strategy of
the monopoly game with feedback probability μ = μ̃. Equilibrium bias is therefore independent of
the number of firms J.
The assumption that all firms have the same quality is important for this result. If we relax
this assumption, the eﬀect of joint ownership will depend on the relative weight of the two firms’
reputations in the owner’s continuation payoﬀ.
In the analysis above, we have shown that with independent ownership, truthful feedback reporting can be supported by firms’ desires to maintain their own reputations for quality. It is possible,
however, that feedback firms might also have an incentive to harm the reputation of the scoop firm,
say because the two firms’ products are viewed as substitutes in the continuation game. Intuitively,
such rivalrous incentives can have two competing eﬀects on the quality of ex-post feedback. On
the one hand, consider a case such as we have modelled above where feedback firms can misreport.
If the feedback firms were solely concerned with damaging the reputation of the scoop firm, this
would give them a motivation to lie and make it more diﬃcult to sustain an equilibrium where their
reports are fully revealing. On the other hand, suppose feedback reports are verifiable but costly to
issue. Then a feedback firm interested in damaging the scoop firm’s reputation wouldn’t bother to
pay the cost to confirm a correct scoop report, but might be willing to undertake eﬀort to expose
an incorrect one. Therefore the stronger is the incentive to harm the scoop firm’s reputation, the
less likely an incorrect report is to go unchallenged. These kinds of competitive incentives might
exacerbate bias in a world of unverifiable feedback, but could help discipline it in a world where
feedback is verifiable but costly to report.

5

Heterogeneous Priors and Market Segmentation

In the model thus far, all consumers have identical beliefs about the state of the world, and consequently any two consumers who see the same report and feedback will make identical inferences
about newspaper quality. This seems a reasonable starting point for thinking about diﬀerences in
slant across markets–for example, why Al Jazeera and CNN diﬀer, or why local newspapers may
diﬀer in their political orientation. But in many key settings of interest, firms with diﬀerent biases

21

compete in the same market. In this section, we extend the model to consider a case in which two
firms report to consumers with diﬀerent priors,24 and illustrate why media firms might segment
the market according to prior beliefs.25
We will assume there are two equally large groups of consumers, denoted L and R, with prior
beliefs about the true state 1 − θ and θ, respectively, where θ > 12 . For simplicity we suppose that
the firm’s prior is θF = 12 , the average prior belief of the consumers. Each consumer can only view
one firm’s report, and we assume they choose to view the report that will provide the greatest
expected utility–that is, that maximizes the probability of choosing the correct action A. In the
event that two newspapers provide the same expected utility, a consumer will randomize, choosing
each with equal probability. As before, all consumers receive feedback about the true state with
probability μ.
We make the same assumptions about the two firms that we made about the monopolist above.
Each firm is high quality with probability λ in which case it sees the true state and reports truthfully.
Otherwise, a firm is normal, it sees a signal equal to the true state with probability π, and it can
choose its report freely. Both types and signals are drawn independently across firms. Each firm
P
receives a continuation payoﬀ i f (λi ), defined over consumers’ quality assessments λi , where f ()
is strictly increasing.26

Consider first how a consumer’s decision of which paper to read depends on her beliefs about
each firm’s equilibrium reporting strategy. Because we have modeled bias as pure distortion, we
should expect it to reduce the value of a signal to all consumers. Importantly, however, the perceived
cost of bias will depend on a consumer’s type. A firm that biases its signals to the right–that is,
that sometimes distorts l signals but always reports r signals truthfully–will be relatively more
24
See Morris (1995) for a discussion of the role of heterogeneous priors in economic theory, and Morris (1994) for
an application with heterogeneous priors.
25
Mullainathan and Shleifer (forthcoming) point out a diﬀerent intuition for market segmentation, namely that
price competition leads firms to avoid oﬀering similar products.
26
We note three points about the assumption on continuation payoﬀs. First, nothing would change if we let the
function f () diﬀer by firms so long as it was strictly increasing for both. Second, because we have assumed that
consumers can only see one firm’s report, the results would also not change if we let one firm’s continuation payoﬀ
depend on a consumer’s belief about both its own and its competitor’s quality (the firm only cares about the consumers
who see its report, and these consumers’ beliefs about its competitor will be constant). Finally, assuming f () is strictly
increasing does rule out some natural specifications of the continuation game. For example, suppose there were a
second period in which consumers chose whichever firm they believed to be higher quality (and firms received a fixed
advertising revenue per consumer). Then f (λi ) would be a step function with f 0 = 0 almost everywhere. What we
would require in this case is some stochastic component in consumer utility–a cost of time, utility from reading the
sports section, etc.–that would “smooth out” consumer demand.

22

attractive to R-type consumers than to L-type consumers, because L-type consumers expect l
signals to arrive more often. We can see this formally by noting that a consumer who follows the
signal of a normal firm that biases l signals with probability σ ∗ will choose the correct action with
probability π + (1 − π) σ ∗ if the true state is R and probability π (1 − σ ∗ ) if the true state is L.
Using her prior belief that the state is R with probability θ, an R-type consumer would calculate
that if she follows the firm’s signal she will choose the correct action with probability π −σ ∗ (π − θ).
An L-type consumer, on the other hand, would expect to choose the correct action with probability
π −σ ∗ [π − (1 − θ)] which is strictly smaller. The same logic shows that a firm that biases its signals
to the left will be relatively more attractive to L-type consumers.27 If the two firms have equal
bias in opposite directions–if one distorts l signals with probability σ ∗ > 0 and the other distorts
r signals with the same probability–the R-type consumers will strictly prefer the right-biased firm
and the L-type consumers will strictly prefer the left-biased firm.
We can then see immediately that there can be equilibria in which the consumer market is
completely segmented by type. Suppose for the moment that all type-R consumers buy from firm
1 and all type-L consumers buy from firm 2. Then the equilibrium strategy of firm 1 will be that
of a monopolist in a market where all consumers have prior θ–that is, to distort l signals with
some probability and report r signals truthfully–and the equilibrium strategy of firm 2 will have
the same bias but in the opposite direction. If the monopoly strategy calls for distortion with any
positive probability, type-R consumers will indeed choose firm 1 and type-L consumers will choose
firm 2.
This is not the only equilibrium of the game, however. Consider what happens when a firm has
equal numbers of consumers of each type. Suppose consumers expect the firm to report honestly
and that they see no ex post feedback. If the firm reports r̂, the R-types will increase their estimate
of its quality (say to λhigh ) and the L-types will decrease their estimate of its quality (say to λlow ).
Its continuation payoﬀ per consumer will be [f (λhigh ) + f (λlow )] /2. But because the problem is
symmetric, this will also be its payoﬀ if it reports ˆl–the only diﬀerence is it will then be the L-types
who have posterior λhigh . The firm must therefore be indiﬀerent about its report conditional on no
feedback. Since it strictly prefers to report truthfully conditional on feedback, truthful reporting
27

The relationship between prior beliefs and the information value of binary signals is explored in detail by Suen
(2004).

23

will be an equilibrium for any firm with equal numbers of each type. We can go further and show
that any firm with equal numbers of consumers of each type must report honestly in equilibrium.
To see this, suppose that a firm sometimes reports r̂ after seeing l. Relative to the case of honest
reporting, this strictly reduces all consumers’ posteriors after an r̂ report and strictly increases their
posteriors after an ˆl report. Thus, the incentive to report ˆl after l would be even stronger than
when consumers expect honest reporting, and the firm would prefer to deviate from its presumed
strategy. The same argument shows the firm cannot report ˆl after r.
There are then two types of equilibria with honest reporting. First, suppose all consumers of
both types will buy from firm 1. Then firm 2 will be indiﬀerent about its report (since it has no
consumers) and firm 1, as we just observed, will report honestly. If firm 2 plays any strategy with
positive probability of distortion, all consumers will indeed prefer to buy from firm 1. Second,
suppose consumers of both types divide evenly between the two firms. Then both firms will report
honestly, consumers will be indiﬀerent between them, and consumers will indeed divide evenly.
The proof of the following proposition establishes that these three types of equilibria are generically unique. The genericity argument is required because there is one other equilibrium configuration that is possible in principle: one consumer type strictly prefers one firm while the other
consumer type is indiﬀerent between the two. We show that if such an equilibrium does exist for
some payoﬀ functions f (), it will not exist for small perturbations of the payoﬀ functions.
Proposition 5 For generic continuation payoﬀs, the game with heterogeneous priors has three
types of equilibria:
1. A segmented equilibrium, in which one firm is read only by R-group consumers and biases
its reports toward r̂ and the other is read only by L-group consumers and biases its reports
toward ˆl. This type of equilibrium exists for any parameter values such that σ ∗l (r̂) > 0.
2. An eﬀective monopoly, in which one firm reports honestly and the other lies with positive
probability, and all consumers read the report of the honest firm. This type of equilibrium
exists for all parameter values.
3. An honest equilibrium, in which both firms report honestly and consumers divide evenly
between them. This type of equilibrium exists for all parameter values.
24

Observe that in the segmented equilibrium, the firms’ strategies are endowed with the comparative
statics described in proposition 1, since each firm is playing the monopoly strategy for its respective
consumer base. This means that as beliefs become more extreme (θ increases), the firms’ reporting
strategies tend to diverge, and that as feedback strengthens (μ increases) they tend to move back
toward honest reporting. Indeed, for high enough μ, the monopoly strategies call for honesty,
so that in these cases all (generic) equilibria involve consumers receiving as much information as
possible.

6

Evidence on the Determinants of Bias

In the model above, we argued that two factors should play a key role in determining the direction
and strength of bias: ex post feedback and competition. In this section, we review existing evidence
and present new evidence on both predictions.

6.1

Feedback

As proposition 1 shows, our model predicts that ex-post feedback about the true state of the world
will tend to reduce media bias. An extreme example of an issue where feedback is immediate
and unambiguous is weather reporting. Although the notion of bias in weather reporting seems
strange, consumers certainly have strong prior beliefs about the next day’s weather–a forecaster
who predicts snow in New Mexico in July would be viewed with suspicion. But since feedback is
immediate, this should not deter her from making such a prediction if she truly believes it to be
the most likely scenario.
In fact, studies of weather forecasters’ predictions reveal excellent reliability. Probability forecasts match up well with observed relative frequencies; i.e., a forecast of a 20 percent chance of
precipitation tends to be followed by precipitation roughly 20 percent of the time. Additionally,
reported confidence intervals for temperatures show nearly exact coverage (Murphy and Winkler,
1977 and 1984). Given the fact that the weather is known with certainty soon after forecasters
make their predictions, it is not surprising that we find little evidence of bias in predicting the
weather.

25

Of course, weather diﬀers from politics not only because of the strength of feedback but because
people take actions with concrete and immediate consequences in response to forecasted conditions.
Some authors (such as Glaeser, 2004) have argued that psychological biases will have less influence on decisions with larger stakes. The presence of such a force could allow theories based on
confirmatory bias to accommodate the observation that weather reporting is relatively unbiased.
We therefore turn next to a forecasting environment with rapid feedback in which emotions run
high and concrete stakes tend to be low: sports picking by local newspaper columnists. We draw
on data collected by Boulier and Stekler (2003) on New York Times sports editors’ predictions
from 1994-2000. For each game, the dataset contains the opening betting line (as published in USA
Today) and the editors’ picks. If bias is driven primarily by consumers’ desire to hear felicitous
reports, a natural hypothesis is that the Times would favor the New York teams–the Jets and the
Giants–to win (relative to the betting market’s expectation). In contrast, because outcomes are
observed soon after reports are made, our model predicts little such bias in this context.
To investigate this issue we calculate a measure δ̂ i of the experts’ slant towards team i by
estimating a regression model of the form

winj = α + δ i [(homej = i) − (awayj = i)] + γ (linej ) + εj
where winj denotes whether the editor picked the home team to win game j, homej indexes the
home team in game j, awayj indexes the visiting team in game j, and linej is a vector of dummy
variables representing deciles of the betting line.
Figure 5 presents graphically our estimates of δ i for each team, measured relative to the Seattle
Seahawks (the experts’ least favored team over this time period). As the figure shows, the Giants
are picked more often than average and the Jets less often, but there is no evidence of overall
favoritism toward the New York teams. This fact is surprising if we start from taste-based theories
of bias, but is consistent with the implications of proposition 1 above.28
Evidence from financial reporting also suggests a role for feedback in limiting media bias. Lim
28

A similar test can be conducted using data collected by Avery and Chevalier (1999) on picks of six experts
published in the Boston Globe between 1983 and 1994. Results are in our supplemental appendix, and details of the
exercise are provided in notes to the figure. While the writers are more favorable to home team (the Patriots) than
average, the Patriots are not the experts’ most favored team, and are treated comparably to many other teams in the
league. Overall, this data shows limited evidence for a taste for confirmation as a driving factor in sports reporting.

26

(2001) presents evidence indicating that analysts’ forecasts of corporate earnings are more optimistically biased for smaller firms and for firms with more volatile historical earnings and stock
returns (see also Das, Levine and Sivaramakrishnan, 1998). Although Lim interprets these findings
as evidence that analysts make optimistic forecasts so as to win favor with firms and obtain access
to non-public information, we propose our model as an alternative explanation. When earnings
are less volatile, inaccurate reporting is more easily detected, and so analysts concerned with their
reputation for high-quality reports will be less likely to bias their forecasts.
Relatedly, several authors have argued that biases in earnings forecasts become less severe as the
length of time between the publication of the forecast and the earnings announcement decreases (see
Kang, O’Brien and Sivaramakrishnan, 1994 and Raedy, Shane and Yang, 2003). Again, a model
with reputational concerns oﬀers a possible interpretation of this fact: When the announcement
comes quickly on the heels of the forecast, bias is more likely to be detected and to influence
consumer decisions about which forecast to purchase in the future.

6.2

Competition

Because competition increases the likelihood that erroneous reports will be exposed ex-post, our
model predicts that added competition will tend to reduce bias. The reaction to Dan Rather’s
report on President Bush’s service in the National Guard, discussed in more detail in section
2.1, provides one example of the role that competing media outlets can play in exposing flaws in
journalism. Anecdotes about the impact of Al Jazeera’s relatively independent reporting on media
in the Arabic-speaking world provide another. As Otis (2003) reports, “Many experts contend that
Egyptian newspapers have improved dramatically in recent years. During the Six-Day War against
Israel in 1967, the heavily censored press largely ignored battlefield defeats. Today, Al-Jazeera
and other television stations beam raw images of military conflicts into people’s homes, preventing
newspapers from straying too far from the truth.” To take a third example, when an American
civilian was beheaded by militants in Iraq, reporting of the story was more common in countries
with competitive media environments. In Syria, where all local press and television are stateowned (Djankov, McLiesh, Nenova and Shleifer, 2003), newspapers completely ignored this event.
By contrast, in Lebanon, which has a relatively competitive press, most newspapers did report on

27

the beheading (Associated Press, 2004). This fact seems to support the view that suppression and
distortion of information are less attractive when competition makes the truth likely to come out.29
For a more quantitative investigation of the eﬀects of competition on media bias, we have
obtained data from the 2000 Local News Archive (Kaplan and Hale, 2001). The dataset encodes
the characteristics of local election news coverage broadcast between 5:00pm and 11:35pm during
the 30 days prior to the general election on November 7, 2000. It covers 74 stations in 58 of the
top 60 media markets in the US. Most importantly for our purposes, it contains a coding of the
number of seconds of speaking time given to George W. Bush and Al Gore. By calculating the total
number of seconds given to each candidate by each station i, we can then construct the following
measure of biased treatment:
biasi =

µ

bushi
1
−
bushi + gorei 2

¶2

where bushi and gorei denote the number of seconds given to each candidate by station i. This
measure takes on a value of 0 when Bush and Gore received equal time in local news coverage of
the election, and a value of .25 when only one candidate is given coverage. The average of biasi
across the stations in a market will serve as our measure of bias.
Given this measure, we can investigate whether the degree of bias is lower in markets with a
greater number of local news broadcasts, as predicted by the model. As table 1 shows, this is indeed
the case. Column (1) of the table indicates that one additional television station is associated with
a statistically significant reduction in bias of about .006, which is equivalent to about one-third of a
standard deviation. As column (2) shows, this eﬀect is robust to the inclusion of controls for Census
region, so it is not merely driven by geographic diﬀerences in the thickness of markets. Column (3)
highlights that including population, an important determinant of the number of local broadcasts
(the correlation between log(population) and the number of news broadcasts is about .5), does
not substantially reduce the size of the competition eﬀect or eliminate its statistical significance.
Finally, column (4) shows that the eﬀect is robust to an additional control for income per capita,
29

Another example of the role of competition is the coverage of the allegations of torture in the Abu Ghraib prison
in Iraq. The CBS program 60 Minutes was the first to obtain photos from the prison, but it delayed broadcasting
them for two weeks. The incentive to suppress the photos in this case was not consumer beliefs but direct pressure
from the government–Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staﬀ Richard Myers had personally asked Dan Rather not to
broadcast the photos. But what led them to finally be aired was competition: once CBS learned that Seymour Hersh
was working on the same story for the New Yorker, they decided to put the report on the air (Folkenflik, 2004).

28

which could also drive diﬀerences across locations in the competitiveness of the news market.30
Several existing studies of bias in reporting also show eﬀects of competition consistent with
our model’s predictions. Dyck and Zingales (2003) argue that newspapers put less “spin” on their
reports of company earnings when many alternative sources of information are available. Lim (2001)
presents evidence from analysts’ earnings forecasts suggesting that bias is lower the more analysts
are providing reports on a given company.31 Gentzkow, Glaeser and Goldin (2004) document that
the emergence of independent (i.e. non-party-aﬃliated) newspapers in the United States was faster
in larger cities, suggesting a role for competition in encouraging the growth of more informative
news outlets.

7

Conclusions

The model in this paper presents a new way to understand media bias. Bias in our model does not
arise from consumer preferences for confirmatory information, reporters’ incentives to promote their
own views, or politicians’ ability to capture the media. Instead, it arises as a natural consequence
of firms’ desire to build a reputation for accuracy, and in spite of the fact that eliminating bias
could make all agents in the economy better oﬀ.
An advantage of our model is that it generates sharp predictions about where bias will arise and
when it will be most severe. We wish to highlight two policy implications of these results. The first
concerns the regulation of media ownership. In the current debate over FCC ownership regulation
in the U.S., the main argument in favor of limits on consolidation has been the importance of
“independent voices” in news markets. Proposition 4 oﬀers one way to understand the potential
costs of consolidation: independently owned outlets can provide a check on each others’ coverage
and thereby limit equilibrium bias, an eﬀect that may be absent if the outlets are jointly owned.
As a second implication, the eﬀect of competition described by proposition 3 has important
implications for the conduct of public diplomacy. The U.S. government is currently engaged in a
debate about the most eﬀective way to counter what it sees as anti-American bias in the Arab media,
especially Al Jazeera. Eﬀorts along these lines have included condemnation of Al Jazeera by top
30
The estimated eﬀect of competition is also robust to controlling for the average total amount of candidate speaking
time aired by stations in each market.
31
See also Firth and Gift (1999).

29

U.S. oﬃcials (Rumsfeld, 2001), appeals to the Emir of Qatar (who sponsors the network) to change
the tone of Al Jazeera’s coverage (Campagna, 2001), and the closing of Al Jazeera’s Baghdad oﬃce
by the U.S.-backed Alawi government in Iraq. Our model suggests a diﬀerent approach: supporting
the growing competitiveness of the Middle Eastern media market and in particular increasing the
availability of alternative news sources in local languages. Aside from the direct eﬀect on the beliefs
of those who watch these sources (Gentzkow and Shapiro, 2004), introducing more news outlets
could have the eﬀect of disciplining existing stations and reducing the overall amount of bias in the
region.

References
[1] Fouad Ajami. What the Muslim world is watching. New York Times Magazine, page 48,
November 18 2001.
[2] Eric Alterman. What Liberal Media? The Truth About Bias and the News. Basic Books,
February 2003.
[3] Jessie Daniel Ames. Editorial treatment of lynchings. The Public Opinion Quarterly, 2(1):77—
84, January 1938.
[4] Ken Auletta. Battle stations: How long will the networks stick with the news? New Yorker,
December 10 2001.
[5] Christopher Avery and Judith Chevalier. Identifying investor sentiment from price paths: The
case of football betting. Journal of Business, 72(4):493—521, 1999.
[6] Christopher Avery and Margaret Meyer. Designing hiring and promotion procedures when
evaluators are biased. Oxford University Mimeograph, May 2003.
[7] David P. Baron. Persistent media bias. Stanford Graduate School of Business Research Paper,
1845, February 2004.
[8] Dan Barry, David Barstow, Jonathan D. Glater, Adam Liptak, and Jacques Steinberg. Correcting the record: Times reporter who resigned leaves long trail of deception. New York
Times, page 1, May 11 2003.
[9] Timothy Besley and Andrea Prat. Handcuﬀs for the grabbing hand? media capture and
government accountability. London School of Economics Mimeograph, April 2004.
[10] Bryan L. Boulier and H. O. Stekler. Predicting the outcomes of National Football League
games. International Journal of Forecasting, 19:257—270, 2003.
[11] Adam Brandenburger and Ben Polak. When managers cover their posteriors: Making the
decisions the market wants to see. RAND Journal of Economics, 27(3):523—541, Autumn
1996.
30

[12] Joel Campagna. Between two worlds: Qatar’s Al-Jazeera satellite channel faces conflicting
expectations. CPJ Press Freedom Reports, October 2001. http://www.cpj.org.
[13] Mark Cooper, Gene Kimmelman, and Cheryl Leanza. Comments of Consumers Union, Consumer Federation of America, Civil Rights Forum, Center for Digital Democracy, Leadership
Conference on Civil Rights and Media Access Project. December 2001.
[14] Ann Coulter. Slander : Liberal Lies About the American Right. Three Rivers Press, September
2003.
[15] Russell J. Dalton, Paul A. Beck, and Robert Huckfeldt. Partisan cues and the media: Information flows in the 1992 presidential election. The American Political Science Review,
92(1):111—126, March 1998.
[16] Somnath Das, Carolyn B. Levine, and K. Sivaramakrishnan. Earnings predictability and bias
in analysts’ earnings forecasts. Accounting Review, 73(2):277—294, April 1998.
[17] Simeon Djankov, Caralee McLiesh, Tatiana Nenova, and Andrei Shleifer. Who owns the media?
Journal of Law and Economics, 46(2), October 2003.
[18] Alexander Dyck and Luigi Zingales. The media and asset prices. Harvard Business School
mimeograph, August 2003.
[19] Matthias R. Eﬃnger and Mattias K. Polborn. Herding and anti-herding: A model of reputational diﬀerentiation. European Economic Review, 45:385—403, 2001.
[20] Jeﬀrey C. Ely, Drew Fudenberg, and David K. Levine. When is reputation bad? October
2002. Harvard University mimeo.
[21] Jeﬀrey C. Ely and Juuso Välimäki.
118(3):785—814, August 2003.

Bad reputation.

Quarterly Journal of Economics,

[22] Robert S. Erikson. The influence of newspaper endorsements in presidential elections: The
case of 1964. American Journal of Political Science, 20(2):207—233, May 1976.
[23] Michael Firth and Michael Gift. An international comparison of analysts’ earnings forecast
accuracy. International Advances in Economic Research, 5(1):56—64, February 1999.
[24] David Folkenflik. Iraq prison story tough to hold oﬀ on, CBS says. Baltimore Sun, page 1D,
May 5 2004.
[25] Al Franken. Lies and the Lying Liars Who Tell Them: A Fair and Balanced Look at the Right.
E P Dutton, August 2003.
[26] Matthew Gentzkow and Jesse M. Shapiro. Media bias and reputation. University of Chicago
Mimeograph, January 2005.
[27] Matthew A. Gentzkow, Edward L. Glaeser, and Claudia D. Goldin. The rise of the fourth estate: How newspapers became informative and why it mattered. July 2004. Harvard University
mimeograph.
[28] Matthew A. Gentzkow and Jesse M. Shapiro. Media, education, and anti-Americanism in the
Muslim world. Journal of Economic Perspectives, Summer 2004. Forthcoming.
31

[29] Edward L. Glaeser. Psychology and the market. American Economic Review, 94(2):408—413,
May 2004.
[30] Edward L. Glaeser, Giacomo A. M. Ponzetto, and Jesse M. Shapiro. Strategic extremism:
Why republicans and democrats divide on religious values. Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Forthcoming.
[31] Bernard Goldberg. Bias : A CBS Insider Exposes How the Media Distort the News. Perennial,
January 2003.
[32] Simon Grant, Atsushi Kajii, and Ben Polak. Intrinsic preference for information. Journal of
Economic Theory, 83:233—259, 1998.
[33] Tim Groseclose and Jeﬀ Milyo. A measure of media bias. Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Forthcoming.
[34] Albert C. Gunther. Biased press or biased public? Attitudes toward media coverage of social
groups. The Public Opinion Quarterly, 56(2):147—167, Summer 1992.
[35] Paul Heidhues and Johan Lagerlöf. Hiding information in electoral competition. Games and
Economic Behavior, 42:48—74, 2000.
[36] Andrew Heyward. CBS statement on bush memos. CBSNews.com, September 20 2004.
[37] Sok-Hyon Kang, John O’Brien, and K. Sivaramakrishnan. Analysts’ interim earnings forecasts:
Evidence on the forecasting process. Journal of Accounting Research, 32(1):103—112, Spring
1994.
[38] Martin Kaplan and Matthew Hale. Local TV coverage of the 2000 general election. Norman
Lear Center, USC Annenberg School of Communication, February 2001.
[39] Matt Kempner. CNN on top of the world; CNN International crafts coverage with a global
emphasis that appeals to viewers overseas. Atlanta Journal-Constitution, page 1G, October 7
2001.
[40] David D. Kirkpatrick and Geraldine Fabrikant. Changes at the Times: Reactions; advertisers
and Wall St. see an end to turmoil. New York Times, page B9, June 6 2003.
[41] Jonathan Koehler. The influence of prior beliefs on scientific judgments of evidence quality.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision, 56(1):28—55, 1993.
[42] Andrew Kohut. Media myopia: More news is not necessarily good news. New York Times,
July 11 2004.
[43] David Kreps and Robert Wilson. Reputation and imperfect information. Journal of Economic
Theory, 27:253—279, 1982.
[44] Terence Lim. Rationality and analysts’ forecast bias. Journal of Finance, 56(1):369—385,
February 2001.
[45] Charles G. Lord, Mark R. Lepper, and Elizabeth Preston. Considering the opposite: A corrective strategy for social judgment. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 47(6):1231—
1243, 1984.
32

[46] Charles G. Lord, Lee Ross, and Mark R. Lepper. Biased assimilation and attitude polarization:
The eﬀects of prior theories on subsequently considered evidence. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 37(11):2098—2109, 1979.
[47] Paul Milgrom and John Roberts. Predation, reputation and entry deterrence. Journal of
Economic Theory, 27:280—312, 1982.
[48] Arthur G. Miller, John W. McHoskey, Cynthia M. Bane, and Timothy G. Dowd. The attitude polarization phenomenon: Role of response measure, attitude extremity, and behavioral consequences of reported attitude change. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
64(4):561—574, 1993.
[49] Stephen Morris. Trade with heterogeneous prior beliefs and asymmetric information. Econometrica, 62(6):1327—1347, November 1994.
[50] Stephen Morris. The common prior assumption in economic theory. Economics and Philosophy,
11:227—253, 1995.
[51] Stephen Morris. Political correctness. Journal of Political Economy, 109(2):231—265, 2001.
[52] Sendhil Mullainathan and Andrei Shleifer. The market for news. American Economic Review.
Forthcoming.
[53] Sendhil Mullainathan and Andrei Shleifer. Media bias. Harvard Institute of Economic Research
Discussion Paper, (1981), October 2002.
[54] Geoﬀrey D. Munro and Peter H. Ditto. Biased assimilation, attitude polarization, and aﬀect
in reactions to stereotyped-relevant scientific information. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 23(6):636—653, 1997.
[55] Allan H. Murphy and Robert L. Winkler. Reliability of subjective probability forecasts of
precipitation. Applied Statistics, 26(1):41—47, 1977.
[56] Allan H. Murphy and Robert L. Winkler. Probability forecasting in meteorology. Journal of
the American Statistical Association, 79(387):489—500, September 1984.
[57] Wojciech Olszewski. Informal communication. Journal of Economic Theory, pages 180—200,
2004.
[58] The Gallup Organization. The 2002 Gallup Poll of the Islamic World: Executive Report. The
Gallup Poll Tuesday Briefing. Princeton, NJ, February 2002.
[59] John Otis. Arab media accused of bias; experts say most reports are accurate, but with anti-US
slant. Houston Chronicle, page A25, April 5 2003.
[60] Marco Ottaviani and Peter Norman Sørensen. Professional advice. Journal of Economic
Theory, 2005.
[61] Marco Ottaviani and Peter Norman Sørensen. Reputational cheap talk. RAND Journal of
Economics, 2005.
[62] Peter G. Peterson, Kathy Bloomgarden, Henry Grunwald, David E. Morey, and Shibley Telhami. Finding America’s Voice: A Strategy for Reinvigorating U.S. Public Diplomacy. Council
on Foreign Relations, New York, 2003.
33

[63] Canice Prendergast. A theory of "yes men". American Economic Review, 83(4):757—770,
September 1993.
[64] Associated Press. Arab media muted in coverage of beheading; many papers play down story,
others ignore it. May 12 2004.
[65] Jana Smith Raedy, Philip Shane, and Yanhua Yang. Horizon-dependent underreaction in
financial analysts’ earnings forecasts. University of Colorado Mimeograph, September 2003.
[66] Dan Rather. Dan Rather statement on memos. CBSNews.com, September 20 2004.
[67] Donald H. Rumsfeld. Secretary rumsfeld remarks at stakeout outside ABC TV. Department
of Defense News Transcript, October 28 2001.
[68] Robert Satloﬀ. Rethinking public diplomacy in the Middle East. Weekly Standard, 8(46),
August 2003.
[69] Wing Suen. The self-perpetuation of biased beliefs. Economic Journal, 114:377—396, April
2004.
[70] Kenneth Turan. Through the looking glass with Al Jazeera: Jehane Noujaim’s documentary
’Control Room’ challenges what some might expect of the news channel. Los Angeles Times,
page E6, June 18 2004.
[71] William Underhill and Tara Pepper. The media: Losing trust in Auntie Beeb. Newsweek,
September 29 2003.

34

Figure 1 Political views and assessments of news media believability

% who believe all or most of what outlet says

45
40
35
30
25

Fox News
NPR

20
15
10
5
0
very
conservative

conservative

moderate

liberal

very liberal

Respondent political views

Notes: Data from the Pew Research Center for the People and the Press’s 2002 News Media Believability
Survey. Exact wording for survey question on respondent political views:
In general, would you describe your political views as very conservative, conservative, moderate, liberal, or very liberal?
Exact wording for survey question on media believability:
Now, I’m going to read a list. Please rate how much you think you can BELIEVE each
organization I name on a scale of 4 to 1. On this four point scale, “4” means you can believe
all or most of what the organization says. “1” means you believe almost nothing of what they
say. How would you rate the believability of {The Fox News CABLE Channel / National Public
Radio} on this scale of 4 to 1?

35

Figure 2 Newspaper endorsements and ideology across U.S. states in the 2000 election

100
90

Percent for George W. Bush

80
70
60
Vote
Endorsements

50
40
30
20
10
0
1

2

3

4

State income quartile

Notes: Data on voting behavior taken from Federal Election Commission (http://www.fec.gov/elections.html).
Percent for Bush reflects percent of two-party vote. Data on state per capita income from USA Counties 1998
CD-ROM. Data on newspaper endorsements from Bush (www.georgewbush.com) and Gore (www.algore.com)
oﬃcial campaign sites; data posted at http://www.wheretodoresearch.com/Political.htm#Endorsements.
Percent for Bush reflects percent among papers endorsing either Bush or Gore.

36

Figure 3 The timing of the monopoly game

Nature chooses firm type and state of the world
Firm receives signal correlated with true state
Firm makes a report
Consumers update beliefs about true state based on report
Consumers choose an action based on beliefs about true state
With some probability, consumers learn true state
Consumers update beliefs about firm quality based on firm’s
report and feedback (if available)
Firm receives continuation payoff depending on consumers’
assessments of its quality

37

Degree of bias

Figure 4 A numerical example

0
.5

no feedback (μ=0)
feedback (μ>0)

π

Prior belief (θ)

Notes: Vertical axis shows equilibrium probability of reporting r̂ given that the newspaper with the scoop
receives a signal of l. Horizontal axis shows prior probability θ . Dashed line shows equilibria for the limit
case of no feedback (μ = 0). Solid line shows equilibria for the case of a positive probability of feedback
(μ = .5). Drawn for the case of f (x) = x, π = .7, and λ = .3.

38

Figure 5 Sports picking by New York Times sports editor, 1994-2000

0.35

Excess probability of picking team

0.3

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

vikings

steelers

seahawks

saints

redskins

rams

ravens

raiders

patriots

panthers

oilers

packers

jets

lions

jags

giants

eagles

falcons

dolphins

cowboys

colts

chiefs

chargers

bucs

cards

browns

bills

broncos

bears

bengals

49ers

0

Notes: Data from Boulier and Stekler (2003). Dataset contains information on the picks of the New York
Times sports editor for NFL games in the 1994-2000 seasons, as well as the outcome of the game and the
betting line. The bar for team i represents the estimated coeﬃcient δ̂ i in a regression of the form

winj = α + δ i [(homej = i) − (awayj = i)] + γ (linej ) + εj
where winj denotes whether the editor picked the home team to win game j , homej indexes the home team
in game j , awayj indexes the visiting team in game j , and linej is a vector of dummy variables representing
deciles of the betting line.

39

Table 1 Competition and bias in local news coverage of the 2000 election
(1)

Number of local news
broadcasts, 2002
Census region controls?

³

(2)
bushi
bushi +gorei

(3)
´2
− 12

(4)

-0.0057
(0.0025)

-0.0064
(0.0025)

-0.0062
(0.0030)

-0.0062
(0.0031)

NO

YES

YES

YES

-0.0006
(0.0043)

-0.0004
(0.0053)

log(population), 2000
log(income per capita), 1999
N
R2

-0.0013
(0.0188)
58
0.0834

58
0.1747

58
0.1751

58
0.1752

Notes: Bias is measured as the average across all stations in a market of

biasi =

µ

bushi
1
−
bushi + gorei 2

¶2

where xi denotes the number of seconds given to candidate x by station i, with data taken from the Local
News Archive (Kaplan and Hale, 2001). Number of local news broadcasts reflects the number of stations
showing local news coverage at some time during the day as of July 2002, compiled from www.tvguide.com.
Data on population, income per capita, and Census region are taken from the U.S. Census, 2000.

40

A

Appendix: Proofs

PROOF OF PROPOSITION 1
We show first that it cannot be an³ equilibrium
for the firm to distort r signals with positive
´
ˆ
probability (i.e. for the firm to play σ r l > 0). Recall from the text that the gain from reporting ˆl
after r is strictly smaller than the gain from reporting ˆl after l. If the firm sometimes reports ˆl after
r it must therefore always report ˆl after l. A normal³ firm
´ would then be more likely to correctly
ˆ
match L states than R states, implying λ (r̂, R) > λ l, L and thus, since θF (r) > 12 , ∆f (r) > 0.
³´
³ ´
Since λ (r̂, 0) > λ ˆl, 0 when the firm reports honestly, and increasing σ r ˆl increases λ (r̂, 0) and
³ ´
decreases λ ˆl, 0 , we also know ∆nf > 0. The firm would therefore strictly prefer to deviate and
report r̂ after r. Any equilibrium must therefore have at most garbling of l signals into r̂.
Observe next that it cannot be an equilibrium for the firm to always garble l signals into r̂.
Suppose that consumers expected normal firms to always report r̂ and consider a firm that sees a
signal of l. If the firm deviates and reports ˆl, a ³consumer
that sees no feedback or that receives
´
ˆ
feedback that the state is L will have posterior λ l, L = 1, since only high quality firms report ˆl.
In these cases, the firm would prefer to deviate. The event a consumer sees ˆl and receives feedback
that the state is R has zero probability in the proposed equilibrium, and so beliefs at this node can
be arbitrary. Suppose, in the worst
³
´case for the firm, that they assume that if this node is reached
ˆ
the firm is normal for sure (λ l, R = 0). Payoﬀs from following the strategy are then:
£
¡
¢
¤
(1 − μ) f (λ (r̂, 0)) + μ θF (l) f (λ (r̂, R)) + 1 − θF (l) f (0) .

Payoﬀs from deviating are:

£
¡
¢
¤
(1 − μ) f (1) + μ θF (l) f (0) + 1 − θF (l) f (1) .

Because λ (r̂, 0) and λ (r̂, R) are both strictly less than one and θF (l) < 12 (since 1 − π < θF < π),
the firm strictly prefers to deviate.
Any equilibrium must therefore have a probability of distortion σ ∗l (r̂) ∈ [0, 1). We now show
that the equilibrium σ ∗l (r̂) exists and is unique. Note first that the payoﬀ to reporting r̂ after
l, ∆ (l), is strictly decreasing in the garbling probability σ l (r̂). This follows from the fact that
increasing σ l (r̂) decreases the posterior on quality after an r̂ report and increases the posterior
after an ˆl report (for any feedback), and that this is strict for no feedback or feedback that matches
the firm’s report. Now consider two cases. First, suppose that when consumers expect truth-telling,
∆ (l) ≤ 0. Then truthful reporting is an equilibrium and it is unique because at any candidate
σ l (r̂) > 0 we would have ∆ (l) strictly negative and so the firm would prefer to deviate and always
report ˆl after l. Second, suppose that when consumers expect truth-telling, ∆ (l) > 0. Then the
facts that (i) ∆ (l) is strictly decreasing in σ l (r̂), and (ii) ∆ (l) < 0 at σ l (r̂) = 1, imply that there
is a unique σ ∗l (r̂) ∈ (0, 1) such that ∆ (l) = 0 when consumers expect σ ∗l (r̂). This mixed strategy
is then the unique equilibrium.
To derive the comparative statics with respect to θ, observe that for any μ ∈ (0, 1), truthful
reporting of r signals, and σ l (r̂) ∈ [0, 1), lemma 1 implies that ∆ (l) is strictly increasing in θ.
Therefore the probability σ ∗l (r̂) must be increasing¡ in θ¢ in the mixed strategy range.
For the comparative statics on μ, suppose θ ∈ 12 , 1 , that consumers expect truthful reporting
of r signals, and that we are at an equilibrium value of σ l (r̂)–that is, either σ l (r̂) = 0 or σ l (r̂) > 0
and ∆ (l) = 0. Then ∆ (l) is strictly decreasing in μ. To see this, note first that the payoﬀ to
41

reporting r̂ after l conditional on feedback (∆f (l)) must be strictly negative, since the firm believes
L to be the most likely state and the reward to correctly matching the L state is greater than the
nf
reward for correctly matching the R state. Second, the payoﬀ conditional
³ ´on no feedback (∆ )
must be strictly positive. This follows from the fact that λ (r̂, 0) > λ ˆl, 0 if consumers expect
truth-telling, and the fact that ∆ (l) = 0 if consumers expect a positive probability of distortion.
The signs of ∆f (l) and ∆nf also imply that if consumers expect truth-telling, ∆ (l) is strictly
negative for μ = 1 and becomes strictly positive as μ → 0. There is therefore a unique μ∗ ∈ (0, 1)
such that the equilibrium is truth-telling for μ ≥ μ∗ and a mixed strategy for μ < μ∗ , and the
probability of distortion in the mixed strategy range is strictly decreasing in μ.
For the limit result on π, note that if consumers expect the firm to report honestly, it is
straightforward to show that limπ→1 ∆nf = 0 and limπ→1 ∆f (l) < 0, which by continuity implies
that limπ→1 σ ∗l (r̂) = 0.¥
PROOF OF PROPOSITION 5
We first show that each firm must distort at most one signal with positive probability. As in
the monopoly case, the expected payoﬀ to reporting r̂ is strictly greater after a signal r than after
a signal l. (The only way that seeing r rather than l aﬀects the firm’s expected continuation payoﬀ
is that it shifts the firm’s posterior on the true state toward R, increasing the expected return to
reporting r̂ conditional on consumers receiving feedback.) Therefore a firm that sometimes reports
r̂ after l must always report r̂ after r. Similarly, the return to reporting ˆl is strictly greater after a
signal l and so a firm that sometimes reports ˆl after r must always report ˆl after l.
Now, observe that there can logically be four types of equilibria:
1. Type-R consumers strictly prefer one firm and type-L consumers strictly prefer the other firm
2. Both consumer types strictly prefer the same firm
3. Both consumer types are indiﬀerent between the firms
4. One consumer type strictly prefers one firm and the other is indiﬀerent between the firms
The discussion in the text established (i) that segmented equilibria exist whenever σ ∗l (r̂) > 0
and are the only possible equilibria of the first type; (ii) that eﬀective monopoly equilibria exist
and that these are the only equilibria of the second type; and (iii) that honest reporting equilibria
exist and that these are the only equilibria of the third type. To complete the proof we show that
equilibria of the fourth type will not exist generically.
Suppose without loss of generality that the L-type consumers have a strict preference for firm
1 and the R-type consumers are indiﬀerent between the firms. Then firm 1’s customers are 2/3 L
types and 1/3 R types while firm 2’s customers are all R types. Therefore, firm 2 must be playing
the monopoly strategy for R types, which will involve distorting l signals with some probability,
possibly 0. Denote this probability σ ∗ . If σ ∗ = 0, both types would either be indiﬀerent (if firm
1 reports honestly) or strictly prefer firm 2 (if firm 1 reports with bias), which contradicts our
assumption. Therefore we can restrict attention to cases where σ ∗ > 0.
Note first that firm 1 cannot be playing the same strategy as firm 2, because then L types would
also be indiﬀerent between the two firms. Firm 1 also cannot distort l signals with a diﬀerent nonzero probability because then both types would either strictly prefer firm 1 (if the probability was
lower) or strictly prefer firm 2 (if the probability was higher). Firm 1 must therefore distort r
signals with some positive probability σ 0 . From the expression for consumer value derived in the

42

text, we can see that to make the R types indiﬀerent, σ 0 will be defined uniquely by the equation
π − σ 0 [π − (1 − θ)] = π − σ ∗ (π − θ) .

(1)

Note that this immediately implies σ 0 > 0. In order for the strategy σ 0 to be an equilibrium, firm 1
must be indiﬀerent about its report when consumers expect it to play σ 0 and it observes a signal r.
Letting ∆f (r) denote the relative payoﬀ to reporting r̂ after r conditional on feedback, and letting
λR (ŝ, 0) and λL (ŝ, 0) represent the posteriors of consumers of types R and L respectively, we must
have:
³ ³ ´´i 1 h ¡
³ ³ ´´i
¢
¢
2h ¡ R
+
= ∆f (r) .
f λ (r̂, 0) − f λR ˆl, 0
f λL (r̂, 0) − f λL ˆl, 0
(2)
3
3
Equations 1 and 2 are a system with a single unknown, σ 0 , so there will not be a solution for generic
f ().¥

43

Supplemental Appendix to
“Media Bias and Reputation”
Jesse M. Shapiro∗
University of Chicago and NBER

Matthew Gentzkow
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago

September 14, 2005

A

Extensions and Generalizations

A.1

Consumer inferences about quality

In this extension, we show that the basic link between consumer priors and inferences about quality
holds in a larger class of information structures than the simple model considered in the paper.
That is, it is a robust property of Bayesian belief formation.
Suppose the true state of the world is S ∈ {L, R}. Information sources, which may be high
or low quality, make a report ŝ ∈ D, where D is some set of possible reports. The density of a
high-quality report conditional on the state S is π̄ (ŝ; S) and the density of a low-quality report is
π (ŝ; S). Here π̄() and π() may be either PMFs or PDFs so long as any mass points of π̄() are also
mass points of π().
We say that a value ŝ supports R if π̄ (ŝ; R) > π̄ (ŝ; L)–i.e. if seeing report ŝ from a high-quality
source provides information that R is the true state. We assume that the high-quality source is
uniformly more informative than the low-quality source in the sense that:
π̄ (ŝ; R)
π̄ (ŝ; L)
π̄ (ŝ; L)
π̄ (ŝ; R)

>
>

π (ŝ; R)
if ŝ supports R;
π (ŝ; L)
π (ŝ; L)
if ŝ supports L.
π (ŝ; R)

(1)

Suppose that a consumer has prior probability θ that the true state is R, and prior probability λ
that the source is high quality. The following proposition characterizes how the report ŝ influences
the consumer’s posterior estimate of quality λ(ŝ).
Appendix Proposition 1 λ(ŝ) is strictly increasing in θ if ŝ supports R and strictly decreasing
in θ if ŝ supports L.
Proof. The posterior on quality will be an increasing function of the likelihood ratio:
L=
∗

π̄ (ŝ; L) (1 − θ) + π̄ (ŝ; R) θ
π (ŝ; L) (1 − θ) + π (ŝ; R) θ

E-mail: gentzkow@ChicagoGSB.edu, jmshapir@uchicago.edu.

1

The derivative dL/dθ has the same sign as:
[π (ŝ; L) (1 − θ) + π (ŝ; R) θ] [π̄ (ŝ; R) − π̄(ŝ; L)]

− [π̄ (ŝ; L) (1 − θ) + π̄ (ŝ; R) θ] [π (ŝ; R) − π (ŝ; L)]

= π (ŝ; L) π̄ (ŝ; R) − π (ŝ; R) π̄(ŝ; L)
The result then follows from (1) above.

A.2

More general signal space

The model presented in the body of the paper assumes that firms receive a binary signal of the
state of the world and then make a binary report to consumers. Bias arose in this context as pure
distortion–firms sometimes reporting r̂ when their signal was l. In this section, we extend the
model to the case where firms’ underlying information is a continuous rather than binary signal.
We continue to assume that they make a binary report and consider the case of a monopoly firm
with homogeneous consumer beliefs. Assuming a continuous signal captures the idea that media
firms’ must take a large amount of underlying information and summarize or filter it into a much
simpler report for consumers. Note in particular that it can be seen as an approximation to the
case where firms receive a large number of underlying binary signals that are either r or l and must
choose one of these signals to report to consumers.
With a more general signal space, firms seeking to emulate the behavior of the high type will
still have a temptation to lean towards the prior beliefs of their customers. As before, the presence
of ex-post feedback will tend to discipline this incentive and therefore to reduce the amount of
equilibrium bias.
Suppose a normal firm receives a signal s ∈ (−b, b) with b ∈ (0, ∞] whose distribution function
G (·) depends on the state of the world. (Here we use b = ∞ to denote the case in which (−b, b) = R.)
After observing this signal, the firm has the option of reporting either r̂ or ˆl. (We continue to assume
that the high type always reports the true state.) We assume that G (·) has full support on (−b, b),
and that higher values of s indicate a greater likelihood that the true state is R. More precisely,
we assume that
g (s | R)
(R1)
g (s | L)
is strictly increasing in s, where g (·) is the (continuous and diﬀerentiable) probability density
function associated with G (·). We will consider the case where where the firm’s prior θF is equal
to 12 .
We also impose the following restrictions:
g (s | R)
= 0
s→−b g (s | L)
g (s | R)
= ∞
lim
s→b g (s | L)
g (0 | R) = g (0 | L)
lim

1 − G (0|R) = G (0|L) > θ

(R2)
(R3)
(R4)
(R5)

Restrictions (R2) and (R3) imply that as the value of s approaches the boundaries, it is strong
enough to overwhelm any non-doctrinaire prior. Restriction (R4) normalizes the signal space so
that a signal of 0 provides no information about the true state. The first part of (R5) is a symmetry
condition that requires that the probability of a positive signal if the true state is R is equal to the
2

probability of a negative signal if the true state is L. The second part of (R5) puts a lower bound
on the informativeness of the firm’s signal by guaranteeing that consumers in either group would
rather take action R when s > 0 and L when s < 0 than the action that is optimal given their
priors. (This is analogous to our assumption that π > θ in the two-signal model.)
Given these conditions, we have the following characterization of equilibrium behavior, where
we assume for simplicity that the firm reports r̂ when it is indiﬀerent:
Appendix Proposition 2 There exists a cutoﬀ k∗ ∈ (−b, 0] such that in any equilibrium the firm
reports r̂ if and only if s ≥ k∗ . The cutoﬀ k∗ is weakly increasing in μ and weakly decreasing in θ,
strictly whenever k∗ < 0.
Proof. The first step is to show that any equilibrium strategy must take the cutoﬀ form. Let
C ⊂ (−b, b) be the set of signals such that the firm reports r̂. It is suﬃcient to show that if s0 ∈ C,
the firm will strictly prefer to report r̂ after seeing any s00 > s0 . Note that conditional on consumers
receiving exogenous feedback, increasing the signal s increases the firm’s posterior on the true state
θF (s) and so strictly increases the expected gain to reporting r̂ rather than ˆl. Conditional on no
feedback, increasing s does not change the expected gain to reporting r̂. Thus, a firm that weakly
preferred reporting r̂ after s0 must strictly prefer reporting r̂ after s00 .
We now show that the cutoﬀ k∗ exists and is unique. Suppose consumers expect the firm to
play a strategy with cutoﬀ k 0 . Write the firm’s expected gain to reporting r̂ rather than ˆl given a
signal s and consumer expectations k0 as:
¡
¢
¡ ¢
¡
¢
∆ s, k0 = (1 − μ) ∆nf k 0 + μ∆f s, k 0 .

The argument in the previous paragraph shows that ∆() is strictly increasing in s for a given
k0 . Therefore a necessary and suﬃcient condition for a cutoﬀ k ∗ to be an equilibrium is that
∆ (k∗ , k∗ ) = 0. ∆() is also strictly increasing in k0 for a given s, since increasing the cutoﬀ makes
normal firms more likely to report ˆl and less likely to report r̂ (thus decreasing the posteriors on
quality after the former report and increasing them after the latter). The facts that ∆() is strictly
increasing in both arguments and that by (R2) and (R3) we have
lim ∆ (x, x) < 0

x→−b

lim ∆ (x, x) > 0

x→b

mean that such a k∗ exists and is unique.
To see that k∗ ≤ 0, suppose first that consumers expect a cutoﬀ k0 = 0 and that the firm sees
a signal s = 0. Then (R4) implies that consumers’ posteriors on quality will be the same as in
the binary model with π = G (0|L). The fact that θF (0) = 12 then implies that the firm will be
indiﬀerent about its report conditional on feedback. The gain to reporting r̂ conditional on no
feedback, ∆nf (0), will be zero if θ = 12 and strictly positive if θ > 12 . Therefore ∆ (0, 0) ≥ 0, which
implies that k∗ ≤ 0, with k∗ < 0 whenever θ > 12 .
To see the comparative static on θ, recall that the only terms in the firm’s expected payoﬀs that
change with θ are consumers’ posteriors on quality conditional on no feedback. Lemma 1 implies
that increasing θ increases the posterior after r̂ and decreases the posterior after ˆl, strictly if k∗ < 0.
∆ (s, k0 ) is therefore increasing in θ for any s and k0 , which means the equilibrium k∗ is decreasing
in θ (strictly if k∗ < 0).
To see the comparative statics on μ, note that at θ = 12 , ∆nf (0) = ∆f (0, 0) = 0. Thus the
equilibrium at this point is independent of μ. For the case where k∗ < 0, it is possible to show that
3

(R1) and (R5) imply ∆nf (k∗ ) > 0 and ∆f (k ∗ , k ∗ ) < 0. Since ∆ (k∗ , k∗ ) = 0, increasing μ makes
∆() strictly negative and so k∗ must increase to restore equilibrium.

A.3

Allowing for a dishonest high type

In the model presented in the body of the paper, we assume that a high-type firm both knows
the true state of the world and always reports its signal honestly in the reporting stage. In this
subsection, we relax the latter assumption and permit the high type to choose its reporting-stage
action so as to maximize future profits, which we now assume are given by the same continuation
payoﬀ function f () that determines the payoﬀ of normal firms. While there are multiple equilibria
in this case, we show that the strategy profile studied in the body of the paper is unique with
respect to an intuitive stability criterion.
It is easy to verify that there exists an equilibrium in which high-type firms report honestly and
normal-type firms play the strategy defined in proposition 1. That is, the equilibrium studied in the
body of the paper survives when we permit high-type firms to choose their actions optimally. To see
why, note that by definition normal types will be willing to play the strategy defined in proposition
1 given that high types are reporting honestly, since that is the assumption that is maintained
throughout proposition 1. To see that in this case the high type will be willing to report honestly,
observe that the only diﬀerence in the reporting incentives of the high and normal types come
through the firm’s posterior on the true state. The presence of feedback therefore guarantees that
the high type always has strictly more incentive than the normal type to report honestly. Since
normal firms always weakly prefer to report r̂ given a signal of r, high types must strictly prefer to
report r̂ in this case since then they are assured of matching the feedback. Additionally, since the
normal firm either strictly prefers to report ˆl given a signal of l or is indiﬀerent to its report in that
case, the high type will strictly prefer to report ˆl. Therefore it is an equilibrium for the high type
to report honestly and for the normal type to play the strategy characterized in proposition 1.
Other equilibria are also possible, however. Given the continuation payoﬀs we assume, the
normal type always wishes to emulate the high type’s reporting strategy. If the high type is not
being perfectly honest, in general the strategy defined in proposition 1 will not be an equilibrium,
because the normal type’s equilibrium play will involve additional bias in the direction of matching
the high type’s behavior.
Such equilibria are unstable in an intuitive sense, however. In any equilibrium in which the high
type’s strategy involves randomization given some signal, a small perturbation to the high type’s
behavior would lead the proposed equilibrium to “unravel.” To see why, consider that if the high
type sometimes reports r̂ when its signal is l, then high-type firms must be indiﬀerent between
reporting r̂ and reporting ˆl given consumers’ beliefs about the strategies of the two types. But
then a small increase in the probability of the high type reporting r̂ will increase the incentives for
the high type to do so. This in turn will lead high-type firms to move towards reporting r̂ more
frequently, and so on until the process reaches a boundary.
By contrast, the equilibrium characterized by proposition 1 is stable in the sense that high-type
firms strictly prefer to play their equilibrium strategies, and when normal firms become more likely
to report r̂, this reduces the incentive for them to say r̂, so that behavior has a tendency to return
to the equilibrium point.
To define stability formally, let q ∈ {0, 1} index whether a firm is high-type (with q = 1
denoting a high-type firm), and let σ s (ŝ; q) ∈ [0, 1] be the probability that type q reports ŝ given
a signal of s. Analogously, let ∆ (s; q) be type q’s net return to reporting r̂ given a signal of s.
We will say that an equilibrium is stable if for all q and s, either |∆ (s; q)| > 0 or ∆ (s; q) = 0 and
∂∆ (s; q) /∂σ s (r̂; q) < 0. That is, an equilibrium is stable if for each signal s and type q, either the
4

type strictly prefers its equilibrium report, or it is indiﬀerent between reports and an increase in
its probability of its reporting r̂ strictly decreases its return to doing so. This definition captures
the idea that when a type’s behavior is perturbed, it ought to have an incentive to move back to
the equilibrium point.
Finally, the model also permits equilibria in which both normal and high quality firms always
make the same report regardless of their signal. For example, if consumers expect both normal
and high types to always report r̂, their beliefs about quality will be unchanged when they see
r̂ regardless of the exogenous feedback. Seeing ˆl, on the other hand, is a zero probability event
so we could assign consumers the belief that if this node is reached the firm is normal for sure.
This means all types would strictly prefer to report r̂ so this would be a stable equilibrium. This
is not a particularly interesting equilibrium, however, because the firm’s report would have no
value to consumers. We will refer to equilibria in which both types of firms always make the same
report as degenerate and focus on the set of non-degenerate equilibria. We also implicitly ignore
the equilibrium in which the high type plays a pure “lying” strategy–i.e. always reports ˆl when
the state is R and vice-versa–since this is equivalent to the equilibrium in proposition 1 up to a
relabeling of the reports.
We now have the following result:
Appendix Proposition 3 There exists a unique non-degenerate stable equilibrium in which the
high type reports honestly, and the normal type plays the equilibrium strategy defined in proposition
1.
Proof. We have already shown that these strategies constitute an equilibrium. To see that
it is stable observe that all types except possibly the normal type who has seen a signal l strictly
prefer to make the report called for in the equilibrium. We showed in proposition 1 that in this
equilibrium ∂∆ (l; 0) /∂σ l (r̂; 0) < 0 whenever σ l (r̂; 0) > 0, so that the equilibrium is stable.
Proposition 1 established that this equilibrium is unique in the class of equilibria in which the
high type reports honestly. Therefore to complete the proof we need only show that there exists
no stable equilibrium in which the high type misreports with positive probability. If the high type
never randomizes, it must be the case that either: (i) the high type misreports in both states with
probability one, which is equivalent to a relabeling of the equilibrium in proposition 1; or (ii) the
high type misreports one state with probability one and reports the other state honestly, which
would be a degenerate equilibrium. Suppose, then, that for some signal s0 the high type randomizes.
Then we must have ∆ (s0 ; 1) = 0. But an increase in the probability of high-type firms reporting r̂
will lead to an increase in the incentive to report r̂, i.e. that ∂∆ (s; 1) /∂σ s (r̂; 1) > 0, so any such
equilibrium fails to meet the definition of stability.

B

Evidence from the Gallup Poll of the Islamic World

In this appendix, we study the relationship between prior opinions and assessments of news media quality using survey evidence from the Muslim world on consumer evaluations of the satellite
news network CNN International. This exercise has two limitations relative to the experimental
approaches discussed in section 2. First, we cannot control exactly what information survey respondents receive. If two individuals give diﬀerent evaluations of the quality of CNN, this could occur
because the individuals reacted diﬀerently to the same content, or because they saw slightly diﬀerent content (say, two diﬀerent CNN news programs). Second, because the data are cross-sectional,
we do not have a direct measure of the opinions respondents possessed before exposure to CNN.

5

We will therefore need to seek proxies for pre-existing attitudes and ask whether these proxies are
correlated with perceptions of CNN’s quality.
The data come from the 2002 Gallup Poll of the Islamic World (The Gallup Organization,
2002). The sample consists of 10,004 respondents from nine predominantly Muslim countries.1
Respondents in all countries (except Iran) were asked to report whether each of the following five
descriptions applies to CNN: has comprehensive news coverage; has good analyses; is always on the
site of events; has daring, unedited news; has unique access to information. We have constructed
an overall measure of perceived quality equal to the share of these characteristics the respondent
feels CNN possesses. This measure has a correlation of over .7 with each individual component,
and therefore seems like a good proxy for the respondent’s overall attitude toward the quality of
CNN’s news coverage.
As we discuss in Gentzkow and Shapiro (2004), relative to the media environment in the sample
countries, CNN is quite pro-United States in its coverage. In the context of the above model, then,
we would expect respondents whose prior opinions are less pro-United States to rate CNN as being
of lower quality. To execute this test, we will first need a measure of prior opinions—opinions formed
before exposure to CNN content. We will use the respondent’s ranking of the importance of religion
in her life relative to four other concepts (own family/parents, extended family/local community,
country, and own self). The rank varies from one to five, and we have re-scaled (by subtracting one
and dividing by four) so that the measure varies from zero to one, with one implying that religion
is the most important among the list of five. It seems likely that the importance of religion in the
respondent’s life is predetermined with respect to television news viewership.
We predict that respondents who rank religion as being of greater importance are likely to have
more negative prior attitudes toward the United States. Columns (1) and (2) of Table 1 check this
prediction by regressing a measure of the respondent’s general attitude toward the United States
on the importance of religion variable. The measure of the respondent’s general attitude comes
from a question of the form “In general, what opinion do you have of the following nations?...The
United States.” Responses range from one (“very unfavorable”) to five (“very favorable”). We have
re-scaled this measure to vary from zero to one, with one being the most favorable toward the
United States.
As column (1) shows, respondents who indicate that religion plays an important role in their
lives tend to report less favorable attitudes toward the United States. Column (2) shows that
this relationship is robust to the inclusion of a wide set of demographic controls, indicating that
it is not likely to be driven by demographic variation in the population. Similar results can be
obtained using alternative measures of attitudes toward the United States, such as beliefs about
the justifiability of the September 11 attacks (results not shown).
Now that we have established the relationship between the importance of religion and attitudes
toward the United States, we can ask whether respondents who are likely to have a negative prior
opinion toward the United States—that is, respondents for whom religion is more important—rate
CNN as being of lower quality. Column (3) shows that this prediction of the above model is indeed
correct. An increase in the importance of religion of one standard deviation is associated with a
decrease in the perceived overall quality of CNN of about five percent of a standard deviation. As
column (4) shows, this finding is robust to the inclusion of a large set of demographic controls.
1

Sample sizes by country are as follows: Pakistan (2,043), Iran (1,501), Indonesia (1,050), Turkey (1,019),
Lebanon (1,050), Morocco (1,000), Kuwait (790), Jordan (797), and Saudi Arabia (754). Other than a slight
oversampling of urban households, the samples are designed to be representative of the adult (18 and over)
population in each country. Further details on sample selection and survey methodology are available at
http://www.gallup.com/poll/summits/islam.asp.

6

Appendix Table: Prior opinions and assessments of media quality

Importance of religion
(Mean = .76, SD = .30)

(1)
(2)
General attitude toward US

(3)
(4)
Overall CNN quality rating

(Mean = .33, SD = .33)

(Mean = .10, SD = .24)

-0.1711
(0.0132)

-0.1520
(0.0132)

-0.0418
(0.0101)

-0.0291
(0.0100)

Country fixed eﬀects?

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Demographic controls?

No

Yes

No

Yes

8566
0.1432

8566
0.1597

7451
0.1575

7451
0.1745

N
R2

Notes: Respondents with missing data on dependent variable or importance of religion have been omitted
from the regressions reported. Results are weighted as recommended by the data providers. Demographic
controls include dummies for education, gender, age, urban/rural status, marital status. Missing data
dummies are included for all demographic controls.

7

C

Sports picking by Boston Globe columnists, 1983-1994

0.14

Excess share picking team

0.12

0.1

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

Wash

Tampa

Seattle

SanFran

SanDiego

Rams

Raiders

Phil

Phoenix

Pgh

NOrl

Minn

NEng

KCity

Miami

Jets

Indiana

Giants

Houston

GBay

Detroit

Dallas

Denver

Cleve

Cincin

Chicago

Buffalo

Atlanta

0

Notes: Data from Avery and Chevalier (1999). Dataset contains information on the picks of Boston Globe
sports columnists for NFL games in the 1984-1994 seasons, as well as the outcome of the game and the
opening betting line. The bar for team i represents the estimated coeﬃcient δ̂ i in a regression of the form

winj = α + δ i [(homej = i) − (awayj = i)] + γ (linej ) + εj
where winj denotes the share of local columnists picking the home team to win game j , homej indexes the
home team in game j , awayj indexes the visiting team in game j , and linej is a vector of dummy variables
representing deciles of the opening betting line.

8

