NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TEACHERS AND THE GENDER GAPS
IN STUDENT ACHIEVEMENT
Thomas S. Dee
Working Paper 11660
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11660
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2005

500 College Avenue, Department of Economics, Swarthmore College, Swarthmore, PA 19081 and NBER
(email: dee@swarthmore.edu). This research was supported by the Spencer Foundation and by a grant from
the American Educational Research Association which receives funds for its "AERA Grants Program" from
the National Science Foundation and the National Center for Education Statistics of the Institute of
Education Sciences (U.S. Department of Education) under NSF Grant #REC-0310268. Opinions reflect
those of the author and do not necessarily reflect those of the granting agencies. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2005 by Thomas S. Dee. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Teachers and the Gender Gaps in Student Achievement
Thomas S. Dee
NBER Working Paper No. 11660
September 2005
JEL No. I2
ABSTRACT

In the United States, girls outperform boys in measures of reading achievement while generally
underperforming in science and mathematics. One major class of explanations for these gaps
involves the gender-based interactions between students and teachers (e.g., role-model and
Pygmalion effects). However, the evidence on whether these interactions actually matter is limited
and contradictory. In this study, I present new empirical evidence on whether assignment to a samegender teacher influences student achievement, teacher perceptions of student performance, and
student engagement. This study's identification strategy exploits a unique "matched pairs" feature
of a major longitudinal survey. Within-student comparisons based on these data indicate that
assignment to a same-gender teacher significantly improves the achievement of both girls and boys
as well as teacher perceptions of student performance and student engagement with the teacher's
subject. For example, assignment to a female science teacher increases the likelihood that a girl
views science as useful for her future. However, because the middle-school teachers in most
academic subjects are female, these results also suggest that the gender dynamics between teachers
and students at this level amplify boys' large underperformance in reading while attenuating the more
modest underperformance of girls in math and science.
Thomas S. Dee
Department of Economics
Swarthmore College
Swarthmore, PA 19081
and NBER
dee@swarthmore.edu

1
1. INTRODUCTION
Society’s fundamental interest in fairness and equal opportunity continues to motivate
highly contentious debates over the root causes of gender differences in educational outcomes.
Much of this heated discussion, both in popular and academic settings, has focused on assessing
the relative contributions of biological and environmental determinants (i.e., “nature versus
nurture”).1 However, there are also pointed disagreements among studies that stress the role of
environmental influences. In particular, the so-called “gender wars” have recently offered
sharply contrasting images of how interactions with teachers may shape the relative cognitive
development and intellectual engagement of boys and girls (AAUW 1992, Sommers 2000,
Sadker 2002).2
This recent discussion has centered on controversial claims that teachers consistently
privilege boys over girls (e.g., with more positive feedback and helpful questions).3 However, the
literature in this area has also focused whether these classroom dynamics differ when a student
and teacher share the same gender. Assignment to a same-gender teacher could be educationally
relevant for a number of reasons. For example, it could influence student engagement or
behavior through role-model effects and stereotype threat. Furthermore, same-gender teachers
may also communicate different (and self-fulfilling) expectations to the boys and girls in their
classrooms (i.e., Pygmalion effects). Prior studies have examined the empirical relevance of
these dynamics by assessing the reduced-form impact of assignment to a same-gender teacher on
educational outcomes (e.g., Bettinger and Long 2005, Canes and Rosen 1995, Ehrenberg,
1

For example, the recent remarks on this topic by Larry Summers have drawn considerable public attention to this
topic (Dillon 2005). Similarly, a more recent comment by First Lady Laura Bush that female teachers “are great in
language arts and not so great in math” (Abcarian 2005) also drew attention.
2
However, concerns over whether school practices favor one gender over another are far from new. For example,
nearly a century ago, Ayres (1909) expressed concern over the relative reading achievement of boys in the
elementary grades.
3
See AAUW (1992) and Sadker and Sadker (1994) for evidence in support of these claims and Saltzman (1994),
Kleinfeld (1998), Lewin (1998), and Sommers (2000) for critical appraisals.

2
Goldhaber and Brewer 1995, Rothstein 1995, Neumark and Gardecki 1998, Nixon and Robinson
1999, and Robst, Keil and Russo 1998). However, the results of these studies have been mixed.
This study presents new evidence on whether assignment to a same-gender teacher
influences educational outcomes. And it uses these evaluation results to discuss how the gender
interactions between students and teachers may shape the early evolution of gender gaps across
academic subjects. The evidence presented here makes three distinct contributions to the extant
literature. First, this study focuses on a nationally representative sample of middle-school
students (i.e., 8th graders) instead of students at secondary or postsecondary levels. This
distinction may be particularly relevant because early adolescence corresponds more closely with
the age at which the gender gaps in educational achievement become particularly pronounced
(e.g., Table 1).
Second, in addition to test scores, the educational outcomes examined in this study
include teacher perceptions of a student’s performance and student perceptions of the subject
taught by a particular teacher. These subjective outcomes are useful simply because they are
educationally important outcomes that provide a complement to the results based on achievement
scores. However, measures of student engagement with specific academic subjects may also be
particularly important as precursors of the subsequent gender gaps in curricula and occupations.
For example, college females are underrepresented in fields like computer science and
engineering to an extent that may have more to do with their confidence and interest in math and
science than with the relatively modest gender gaps in their prior math and science achievement
(e.g., Cavanagh 2005).
Third and perhaps most important, this study adopts an identification strategy that
exploits a unique “matched pairs” feature of the National Education Longitudinal Study of 1988

3
(NELS:88). In its base year, NELS:88 surveyed a nationally representative cross section of
nearly 25,000 8th graders. However, NELS:88 also surveyed two of each student’s academicsubject teachers. These surveys elicited information on each teacher’s background and on how
each teacher viewed the performance of the sampled student. Furthermore, NELS:88 also fielded
student tests in the subjects taught by these teachers and gathered self-reported information from
students on their attitudes towards the teacher’s academic subject. This unique “cluster sample”
(e.g., Wooldridge 2002, page 328) implies that the effects of a same-gender teacher can be
identified in models that control for the influence of unobserved student traits, which may have
biased the conventional cross-sectional evaluations. This analysis is similar to that used for data
on monozygotic twin pairs (e.g., Ashenfelter and Krueger 1994, Ashenfelter and Rouse 1998,
and Rouse 1999). But, in this context, the paired observations are of the same student observed
contemporaneously in two different academic subjects.
The next section briefly characterizes the gender gaps in educational outcomes and
discusses the literature on the sources of these differences. Sections 3 and 4 introduce the data
and specifications used to assess the reduced-form effects of gender interactions. Sections 5 and
6 discuss the basic test score results and a variety of specification checks that assess the internal
validity of these inferences.4 Section 7 presents the results for the outcome measures based on
teacher and student perceptions. The final section concludes with a discussion of the effect sizes
documented here and with a brief assessment how the gender dynamics between students and
teachers may influence the gender gaps in outcomes in light of the gender distribution of teachers
across subjects.

4

Though these matched-pairs comparisons control for subject fixed effects and student fixed effects that are
constant across subjects, there are several possible threats to the internal validity of these inferences (e.g., nonrandom sorting by students with subject-specific propensities for achievement and unobserved teacher traits).

4
2. GENDER GAPS AND TEACHERS
Recent data from the recent Early Childhood Longitudinal Study indicate that, on
entering kindergarten, boys and girls perform similarly on tests of general knowledge, reading
and mathematics (Freeman 2004). However, by the spring of the 3rd grade, boys have slightly
higher mathematics scores and lower reading scores. These subject-specific gender gaps appear
to expand as students advance through the elementary and secondary grades. Table 1 presents
average scores by gender, subject and student age on the 1999 National Assessment of
Educational Progress (NAEP). Among 9 year-olds, boys have higher mathematics and science
scores but a lower average score in reading. The relative underperformance of boys in reading is
particularly large (0.16 of a standard deviation). And, among 9 year olds, it is the only difference
that is statistically significant.
However, the NAEP data indicate that, over the next four years, each of these subjectspecific achievement gaps increases. Specifically, as we move from 9 to 13 year-olds, the
standardized gender gaps roughly double in science and reading and become statistically
distinguishable from zero (Table 1). The standardized gender gap in math scores also increases
(by roughly two-thirds) and becomes weakly significant. As we move from 13 to 17 year olds,
the gender gap in science achievement continues to expand. But, interestingly, there is very little
growth in the math and reading gender gaps among teenagers.5
The sizes of the gender gaps in test scores as students complete their secondary schooling
are not trivial. For example, the underperformance of 17 year old boys in reading (i.e., 0.3
standard deviations) is nearly half the size of the corresponding black-white differential, a topic
5

One notable caveat is that changes in average NAEP scores by gender between the ages of 13 and 17 may be
biased by the fact that boys are more likely than girls to drop out of high school. However, this does not appear to be
too empirically relevant in these circumstances. Specifically, this sort of differential attrition would imply that the
more modest growth in the math and science gender gap is overstated while the growth in the reading gender gap is
understated.

5
which has also commanded considerable attention. Another way to benchmark the relatively
poor reading proficiency of boys is to note that it is roughly equivalent to 1.5 years of schooling
(Riordan 1999). The underperformance of 17 year old girls in science and math (i.e., 0.2 and 0.1
standard deviations, respectively) is more modest but still qualitatively large (e.g., 20 and 10
percent of the respective black-white gaps).
The gender differences in these average test scores, of course, identify only some of the
ways that the educational outcomes of boys and girls differ. For example, Hedges and Nowell
(1995) find that the variance in male test scores is consistently larger than that of females,
implying that, for several types of outcomes, boys are overrepresented among both high and low
performers. Boys are also substantially more likely than girls to repeat a grade (Freeman 2004).
And boys are now increasingly less likely than girls both to attend college and to persist in
attaining a degree (e.g., Jacob 2002).6 However, female college students continue to be
underrepresented in certain technical fields like engineering or computer science (Freeman
2004).
The sources of the gender differences in educational outcomes have been the subject of
considerable study and debate. One particularly contentious issue involves the possible role
played by biological differences between males and females. Tests of general intelligence
suggest that there are no overall differences between males and females. However, there do
appear to be large gender differences with respect to average scores on specific cognitive tasks.
For example, males outperform females at visual-spatial tasks, which are thought to complement
mathematical problem-solving, whiles females excel at certain verbal tasks. A task-force report
sponsored by the American Psychological Association in response to the publication of “The

6

The fact that boys lag behind girls with respect to a variety of important educational outcomes has been called the
“silent gender gap” (Riordan 1999).

6
Bell Curve” suggested that biological factors do contribute to these gender differences (Neisser
et al. 1996). In particular, there are differences in male and female brain structures and in
exposure to sex hormones that appear to influence the gender-specific skill advantages.7
However, Neisser et al. (1996) note that these biological differences interact with environmental
factors that appear soon after birth. Furthermore, discussions of this evidence frequently
emphasize that there is “substantial overlap in the distribution of male and female scores” (e.g.,
Coley 2001).
The gender dynamics in classrooms are also frequently portrayed as an important
“environmental” source of the gender differences in educational outcomes (e.g., AAUW 1992,
Sommers 2000). There are a number of structural explanations for why assignment to a samegender teacher, in particular, might influence the educational experiences of boys and girls. And
understanding the distinctions among these theoretical explanations is an important antecedent to
designing well-targeted policy interventions.
One broad hypothesis is that male and female teachers have unique biases with respect to
how they engage boys and girls in the classroom. For example, there is controversial evidence
based on classroom observations that teachers are more likely to offer praise and remediation in
response to comments by boys but mere acknowledgement in response to comments by girls
(e.g., AAUW 1992, Sadker and Sadker 1994, Saltzman 1994, Kleinfeld 1998, Lewin 1998, and
Sommers 2000). Similarly, cognitive process theories (e.g., Jones and Dindia 2004) suggest that
teachers may subtly communicate that they have different academic expectations of boys and
girls. And these biased expectations become self-fulfilling when students respond to them (i.e., a
Pygmalion effect).

7

For more recent discussions of this evidence, see Kimura (1999), Halpern (2000), Lippa (2002), and Cahill (2005).

7
The available evidence on the extent to which male and female teachers share any
particular bias in how they interact with girls or boys is more limited and contradictory. For
example, in a recent literature review, Jones and Dindia (2004) cite several small-scale studies in
support of this claim and conclude that a teacher’s gender is “the most obvious factor that seems
to shape sex equity in the classroom.” However, these studies focused exclusively on postsecondary settings. In an earlier review of research spanning different grade levels, Brophy
(1985, page 137) concludes that “teachers do not systematically discriminate against students of
the opposite sex.”
A second class of explanations for the educational relevance of a teacher’s gender
involves how students respond to a teacher’s gender and not how that teacher actually behaves.
For example, the potential existence of a “role model” effect implies that a student will have
improved intellectual engagement, conduct, and academic performance when assigned to a
same-gender teacher. A recent variation on this argument is the phenomenon known as
“stereotype threat.” This refers to a situation where student performance suffers when they fear
being viewed through the lens of a negative stereotype threat. A recent experimental study by
Spencer, Steele, and Quinn (1999) suggests that stereotype threat does apply to female
performance in math. Specifically, they found that female subjects underperformed on a math
test when told that the test produces gender differences but did not when told the opposite.
This study does not attempt to distinguish among these structural explanations but instead
provides reduced-form evidence on the educational consequences of assignment to a samegender teacher. Interestingly, most prior evidence on this question has focused on postsecondary
and graduate settings (e.g., Canes and Rosen, 1995, Rothstein 1995, Neumark and Gardecki
1998, Robst, Keil and Russo 1998, and Bettinger and Long, 2005). The conclusions from these

8
studies are quite mixed as are the ones from the fewer studies that have examined the effect of a
teacher’s gender in high-school settings.
For example, Nixon and Robinson (1999), using data from the National Longitudinal
Survey of Youth (NLSY), found that females attending high schools with a higher proportion of
female faculty had higher levels of educational attainment. They also found no association
between the presence of female faculty and the educational attainment of male students. In
contrast, using cross-sectional data on 10th graders participating in the National Education
Longitudinal Study of 1988 (NELS:88), Ehrenberg, Goldhaber and Brewer (1995) found that a
teacher’s gender was not associated with the achievement gains of girls (or boys). However, they
did find that white female students were more favorably evaluated by white female teachers in
math and science. A recent study by Lavy (2004), based on blind and non-blind test-score data
from Israeli schools, found evidence that public high school teachers discriminated against male
students and that these effects varied by the teacher’s gender and subject.
As noted earlier, this study contributes to this literature in three ways. First, this study
focuses on younger students (i.e., 8th graders) who are closer to the age when the gender gaps in
achievement grow rapidly. Second, unlike most studies, this research focuses on several different
student outcomes (i.e., test scores, teacher perceptions of student performance, and student
perception of a particular academic subject), which are described in the next section. Third, this
study also adopts a simple panel-based identification strategy that eliminates some (but not all)
of the potential biases that could compromise the conventional cross-sectional evidence.
Specifically, a possible problem with cross-sectional evaluations in this context is that they may
be biased by the non-random assignment of students to teachers. For example, the prior evidence
that females have better outcomes when with female teachers could occur if females with an

9
unobserved propensity for achievement are more likely to be matched with female teachers.
Similarly, if boys with a lower propensity for achievement are more likely to be assigned to male
teachers, the estimated benefits of a male teacher would be biased downwards. This study
addresses such concerns by evaluating the effects of a teacher’s gender on student outcomes in
specifications that effectively condition on student fixed effects. This approach is feasible
because of a unique, “matched-pairs” feature of a major longitudinal study, which is described in
the next section.

3. NATIONAL EDUCATION LONGITUDINAL STUDY OF 1988 (NELS:88)
The National Education Longitudinal Study of 1988 (NELS:88) is a nationally
representative, longitudinal study that began in 1988 with a sample of 24,599 8th grade students
from 1,052 public and private schools (Ingels et al. 1990). NELS:88 relied on a two-stage
sampling design. In the first stage, schools, which were the primary sampling unit, were selected
with probabilities proportional to their 8th grade enrollment. Approximately 26 students were
then randomly chosen within each participating school.
NELS:88 also fielded questionnaires to the teachers responsible for teaching each of the
selected students in two of four academic subjects: mathematics, science, reading, and social
studies. The two surveyed teachers were chosen by randomly assigning each sampled school to
one of four subject-area groupings: mathematics/reading, mathematics/social studies,
science/reading, and science/social studies. The teacher survey solicited information about the
teacher’s background and about how the teacher viewed the behavior and performance of the
sampled student. The student component of NELS:88 also collected test scores in the subject
taught by that teacher as well as the student’s perception of the subject taught by that teacher.

10
This arrangement implies that we observe a variety of student-level educational outcomes
(i.e., test scores, teacher perceptions, and student perceptions). But, more important, it implies
that each student-level outcome is observed twice. That is, an outcome is observed for each
student in each of the two sampled subjects along with data on the teacher of the student in the
given subject. Two completed teacher surveys are available for 21,324 of the 8th grade students
because of some non-response and because some students did not have a class in one or both of
their assigned academic subjects. The final data set consists of 42,648 observations since the unit
of observation is each teacher-student pairing (Table 2).
The students participating in NELS:88 completed multiple-choice achievement tests in
the subjects taught by these teachers.8 For purposes of this analysis, the formula scores on these
tests have been standardized by subject so that the changes in these scores (STEST) can be
understood as effect sizes. The other outcome variables used in this study reflect the teacher’s
perceptions of the sampled student and the student’s perception of the subject taught by that
teacher (Table 2).
More specifically, this analysis focuses on three pejorative teacher assessments: whether
the student was seen as frequently disruptive (DISRUPT), consistently inattentive (INATTEN),
or rarely completed homework (NOHWK). The response options to these questions were simply
yes or no so these three variables are binary. One potential complication with these variables is
that it is not entirely clear that these outcomes should be understood as negative ones. For
example, a student may become disruptive or inattentive simply because they have mastered the
classroom material relative to their peers. However, the data do not support that hypothesis.
8

For details on the cognitive tests, see U.S. Department of Education (1991). Test scores are, for several reasons,
unavailable for roughly 4 percent of the 24,599 students who completed questionnaires. For example, some students
were absent on the survey day and were only administered the questionnaire during a make-up session. Several
participating schools also refused the test component of the study and test sections were not scored if a student
answered fewer than 5 questions.

11
More specifically, using these NELS:88 data, I found that, conditional on student and subject
fixed effects, students performed significantly lower on subject tests when the teacher for that
subject viewed them negatively. The students viewed negatively by teachers were also
substantially less likely than other students in their school to take any Advanced Placement
courses over the subsequent two years and more likely to have dropped out of high school.
The remaining outcome variables used in this study are three variables reflecting the
students’ perception of the subject taught by the responding teacher. More specifically, students
were asked whether they are afraid to ask questions in that subject, whether they look forward to
their class in that subject and whether they see that subject as useful for their future. The students
were given four options in response to these questions (strongly agree, agree, disagree, strongly
disagree), which are coded as integers from 1 to 4. However, for ease of interpretation, the order
of the responses to the “afraid” question was reversed. This implies that, for each of the three
questions, higher values of the ordinal response imply a negative view of the subject.
Furthermore, within each subject, the responses to each of these three questions were
standardized to create the variables used in this analysis (i.e., AFASK, NOTLF, NOTUSE).
Interestingly, regressions that condition on student and subject fixed effects indicate students
with higher values of NOTLF, NOTUSE and AFASK have significantly lower test scores.
Table 3 presents the average values of these seven outcome measures by gender and
subject. Like the NAEP data presented in Table 1, the test scores from NELS:88 indicate that
girls had, on average, lower scores in math and science but higher scores in reading. Girls also
had lower test scores in history. Interestingly, the magnitudes of these gender gaps in math and
science are similar to those of the NAEP 13 year olds. However, the gender gap in reading scores
is smaller in NELS:88 than in the NAEP. The conditional means in Table 3 also indicate that

12
boys are substantially more likely than girls to be viewed pejoratively by their teacher (i.e.,
DISRUPT, INATT, NOHWK). This pattern occurs consistently regardless of the subject.
However, the pattern of self-reported student engagement with particular subjects is similar to
that of test scores. More specifically, girls are more likely than boys to report higher values of
NOTLF, NOTUSE and AFASK in math, science and history. However, boys report higher
values of these variables with respect to English.
The remaining variables used in this study are controls for teacher and classroom
observables. These include dummy variables for the gender and race-ethnicity of the teacher as
well as a dummy variable that identifies whether the student shares the teacher’s race-ethnicity
(Table 2).9 Another dummy variable indicates whether the teacher is state-certified in the subject
they are teaching.10 Teacher experience is measured by 10 categorical dummies (Table 2). This
relatively unrestrictive approach to measuring teacher experience may important given the
evidence of non-linear returns to teacher experience (e.g., Hanushek et al. 2005). The final
controls capture two observable traits of the teacher’s class, the number of students in the class
and the percentage of students in the class who are limited English proficient (LEP).

4. SPECIFICATIONS
The specifications evaluated here are straightforward variations of those used to evaluate
the labor-market returns to schooling using data on monozygotic twin pairs (e.g., Ashenfelter and
Kruger 1994, Ashenfelter and Rouse 1998, Rouse 1999). More specifically, the initial
specification, estimated separately for girls and boys, allows the educational outcome of student i

9

Prior research suggests that a same-race may influence student outcomes through phenomenon like role-model
effects, stereotype threat and teacher biases (e.g., Dee 2004, 2005, Hanushek et al. 2005).
10
There is evidence that this field-specific qualification is associated with teacher quality (e.g., Goldhaber and
Brewer 2000, Dee and Cohodes 2005).

13
with teacher t of subject 1 (i.e., y1it) to be a function of observed student traits, Xi and whether
the teacher of this class is female (i.e., FT1t):
y1it = αXi + β(FT1t) + λZ1t + µi + ε1it

(1)

The terms, µi and ε1it, are, respectively, a student fixed effect and a mean-zero error term. The
term, Z1t, consists of the other observed determinants of y1it, which vary at the level of the
classroom and teacher. These variables include fixed effects for the subject of the class and other
observed attributes of the teacher and the classroom (Table 1).
Equation (1) refers to the student when observed in either math or science. I assume that
a similar specification applies when the student is observed in the second subject (i.e., social
studies or reading):
(2)

y2it = αXi + β(FT2t) + λZ2t + µi + ε2it
One of the concerns underscored with respect to the prior literature is that a student’s

likelihood of being assigned to a female teacher may be correlated with the unobserved student
effects (i.e., µi) that influence educational outcomes. The existence of this sort of non-random
assignment implies that β cannot be reliably identified by evaluating equations (1) or (2) in
isolation. However, the matched-pairs nature of the NELS:88 data may make it possible to
identify β in such circumstances. Specifically, differencing equations (1) and (2) leads to the
following:
(3)

(y1it – y2it) = β(FT1t - FT2t) + λ(Z1t - Z2t) + (ε1t - ε2t)
In addition to “first difference” (FD) estimates based on equation (3), some of the results

presented here are based on stacked versions of equations (1) and (2) that condition on school
fixed effects instead of student fixed effects. These more conventional OLS estimates provide
some continuity with the earlier literature by examining whether unobserved student traits could

14
impart a bias to the estimated effect of a teacher’s gender. It should also be noted that all of the
inferences presented in this study are based on standard errors that accommodate
heteroscedasticity clustered at the school level. This approach is arguably appropriate in light of
NELS:88’s clustered sampling design. Furthermore, comparisons of this approach with others
(e.g., conventional standard errors as well as those that allow clustering at the student or teacher
level) indicate that it implies the most conservative inferences (i.e., the largest standard errors).
The specification in equation (3) assumes that the effect of a female teacher does not
depend on the subject being taught. However, this assumption may be unreasonable. For
example, the magnitude of a role-model effect (or stereotype threat) could quite conceivably
depend on how a teacher’s gender accords with stereotypes about the particular subject matter
being taught. Some of the results presented here examine this sort of heterogeneity by allowing
the effect of a teacher’s gender to interact with the fixed effects for the subject. Specifically,
equation (1) is assumed to take the following form:
y1it = αXi + βM(FTM1t) + βS(FTS1t) + λZ1t + µi + ε1it

(4)

where FTM1t and FTS1t refer to dummy variables for whether the teacher in math and science,
respectively, is female. Similarly, equation (2) can be restated as:
(5)

y2it = αXi + βE(FTE2t) + βH(FTH2t)+ λZ2t + µi + ε2it

where FTE2t and FTH2t refer to dummy variables for a female teacher in English and social
studies, respectively. First differencing these equations to remove the student fixed effect yields
the following:
(6) (y1it – y2it) = βM(FTM1t) + βS(FTS2t) + βE(-FTE3t) + βH(-FTH4t) + λ(Z1t - Z2t) + (ε1it - ε2it)
The FD estimates based on equations (3) and (6) may improve upon the prior literature
by controlling for unobserved student effects in an unambiguous manner. However, it is

15
critically important to note that there are a number of ways that the internal validity of the FD
estimates could also be compromised. For example, the FD estimates condition on unobserved
student traits that are constant across subjects. However, the gender of a student’s assigned
teacher could be related to their subject-specific propensity for achievement. Furthermore, the
estimated effect of a female teacher could be confounded by gender-specific patterns in a
teacher’s assigned classroom environments (e.g., different tracks and class sizes) and in the
unobserved determinants of teacher quality. These important concerns and several related
specification checks are discussed below after presenting the basic test score results.

5. GENDER AND TEST SCORES
Table 4 presents, separately for boys and girls, the estimated effect on test scores of
assignment to a female teacher. The OLS specifications (i.e., columns 1 and 5) control for school
and subject fixed effects as well as the teacher and classroom observables (Table 2). The first FD
specification conditions only on student and subject fixed effects. The subsequent FD
specifications introduce the teacher and classroom observables.
The estimates in Table 4 indicate that a female teacher has a positive but small and
statistically insignificant effect on the test scores of girls. However, the FD estimates also
indicate that assignment to a female teacher reduces the test scores of boys by a statistically
significant amount of nearly .05 standard deviations. The size of this estimated effect falls
somewhat in models that introduce the teacher and classroom controls. However, it should be
noted that the size of these reductions is quite small (i.e., a fraction of a standard error) and that
F-tests indicate that these additional regressors are not jointly significant determinants of test
scores.

16
The comparative results from the OLS and FD specifications provide a useful indication
as to whether a student’s unobserved propensity for achievement is at all related to the gender of
the teacher to whom they are assigned. The results for girls suggest that this is not the case; the
results from the OLS and FD specifications are quite similar. However, in the case of boys’ test
scores, the estimated effect of a female teacher falls considerably as one moves from a model
that conditions on school fixed effects to ones that control for student fixed effects. The direction
of the implied bias suggests that boys with an unobserved propensity for low achievement are
more likely to be assigned to male teachers. Such a non-random sorting of students could explain
why prior studies have not found that a teacher’s gender influences the achievement of boys
(e.g., Nixon and Robinson 1999, Ehrenberg, Goldhaber and Brewer 1995).
Table 5 presents FD estimates of the effect of a female teacher in specifications that
allow this effect to vary by the subject being taught (i.e., equation (6)). The results of this
approach indicate that the results in Table 4 did mask some striking heterogeneity by subject,
especially for girls. More specifically, these results suggest that assignment to a female teacher
had statistically insignificant effects on girls’ achievement in science and English. However,
these estimates also suggest that assignment to a female math teacher significantly lowered girls’
achievement (i.e., .061 standard deviations) while assignment to a female history teacher raised it
(i.e., .074 standard deviations). These results are similar in models that introduce the controls for
teacher and classroom observables. Furthermore, these differences are statistically significant. Ftests indicate that the hypothesis that a female teacher has similar effects across these four
subjects can be rejected.
The results in Table 5 also suggest that the negative effects for boys’ achievement of
assignment to a female teacher differ considerably by subject. More specifically, these estimated

17
effects are particularly pronounced in math and science. However, F-tests indicate that the
hypothesis that these effects are actually the same across subjects cannot be rejected at
conventional levels of significance.

6. SPECIFICATION CHECKS
Taken at face value, the test-score results in Tables 4 and 5 suggest that the achievement
of boys is harmed by assignment to a female teacher while the implications for girls are mixed
and subject-specific. However, despite the presence of student fixed effects, these results could
be quite misleading for a number of reasons. Suppose, for example, that female teachers in a
particular subject are more likely to be assigned to students with a propensity for higher or lower
achievement (e.g., students in a different academic track). Under such a scenario, these results
could falsely suggest the existence (or absence) of educationally relevant gender dynamics
between students and teachers. Similarly, these results could be biased by the presence of
unobserved teacher and classroom traits (e.g., teacher quality and class size) that are associated
with a teacher’s gender.
It is not possible to address these concerns definitively with observational data such as
these. However, there are a number of indirect ways to examine the empirical relevance of these
concerns. For example, the comparative effects of a female teacher on the test scores of boys and
girls can provide one way to assess the existence of bias. More specifically, the results in Table 5
indicate that a female history teacher increases girls’ achievement by a statistically significant
0.074 standard deviations. The fact that female history teachers are not similarly effective in
raising boys’ achievement suggests that this result is not a specious reflection of unobserved
teacher and classroom traits. Similarly, the fact that female science teachers appear to lower the

18
achievement of boys, but not girls, suggests that this estimate is not biased. And these results are
similar when the few students attending single-sex schools are excluded from the sample.11
However, the evidence that female math teachers lower the achievement of boys and girls
is more difficult to interpret. It could be that both boys and girls actually do respond negatively
to female teachers of mathematics. A second candidate explanation is that these results reflect
the bias imparted by unobserved teacher and classroom traits that vary by teacher’s gender. For
example, it could be that female math teachers are assigned to classes with fewer resources or are
simply less qualified than their male counterparts.12 A third alternative explanation is that
students with a propensity for lower achievement in mathematics (e.g., those in lower tracks) are
more likely to be assigned to a female math teacher.
6.1 Effects on “other subject” test scores
A straightforward counterfactual exercise provides an interesting, though ad-hoc, way to
discriminate the third explanation from the first two. This test involves estimating the effect of a
female math teacher on science scores. More specifically, this test involves replicating the
evaluations reported in Table 5 after replacing each student’s test score in math with their score
in science. The premise for this test is the assumption that assignment to a female math teacher
should have relatively small (or non-existent) spillover effects on science achievement if the
results in Table 5 are due to gender dynamics in the classroom or the unobserved quality of the
teacher or classroom. However, if assignment to a female math teacher is associated with large
gains in science achievement, it would suggest that the estimates in Table 5 are biased by a
11

But these cross-gender comparisons could be misleading there is a gender-specific and non-random sorting of
students with a propensity for achievement in a particular subject (e.g., girls likely to excel in history being more
likely to be assigned to female teacher). Some of the additional checks discussed here address this concern.
12
Interestingly, the available data on observed teacher and classroom traits suggests that this is not the case.
Specifically, auxiliary regressions indicate that female math and history teachers are not assigned to larger classes
and are equally likely to have subject-specific qualifications (i.e., state certification or a subject-specific
undergraduate or graduate degree).

19
specious correlation between the student’s propensity for achievement in math and science and
the likelihood of being assigned to a female math teacher.
The key results of this counterfactual exercise are presented in the first columns of Table
6. Interestingly, these results indicate that assignment to a female math teacher lowers girls’
achievement in science by a weakly significant .043 standard deviations. This effect size is
roughly two-thirds of the estimated direct effect of a female math teacher on mathematics
achievement as reported in Table 5. The striking and somewhat implausible similarity of these
effect sizes suggests that the inferences in Table 5 are, at least for girls, biased by the fact that
students with a propensity for lower achievement in math and science are more likely to be
assigned to female math teachers.13
The remaining results reported in Table 6 generalize this test to the other three subjects.
More specifically, these results reflect separate specifications where student scores in science,
reading and history were replaced with their respective scores in math, history and reading, while
keeping the other test scores keeping the other test scores as conventionally defined (i.e., as in
Table 5). In general, these results suggest that the remaining inferences in Table 5 are not
biased.14
For example, the results from Table 5 suggest that a female history teacher significantly
raised the achievement of girls. If assignment to a female history teacher had a similarly large
effect on reading achievement, the validity of that inference would clearly be in doubt. However,
the results in Table 6 indicate that assignment to a female history teacher has no apparent effect

13

This check is, of course, not wholly dispositive because there could be genuinely large spillover effects of math
achievement on science achievement. Other direct evidence on whether students with a propensity for low math
achievement are more likely to be assigned to female math teachers is presented below.
14
The one modest exception is that the estimated effect of a female science teacher on boys’ math scores is similar
in size to the direct effect reported in Table 5. However, this point estimate has a larger standard error and is no
longer weakly significant.

20
on girls’ reading achievement. These comparative results are consistent with the view that the
apparent educational benefits received by girls assigned to female history teachers reflect
something unique to those teachers or their classrooms (e.g., role model effects). As noted above,
this benefit could also reflect the possibility that female history teachers are, on average, of
higher quality or have more resources. However, in light of the fact that boys do not appear to
benefit from female history teachers, the relevance of some gender dynamics is instead strongly
suggested.
6.2 Other evidence of non-random assignment
The comparative evidence from Tables 5 and 6 suggests that this study’s inferences may
be compromised by the assignment to female math teachers of students (at least girls) with a
propensity for lower achievement in math. Another way to examine this issue directly is to
exploit a question teachers were asked about the relative achievement of a sampled students’
classroom. Specifically, the teacher survey included the following question: “Which of the
following best describes the achievement level of the 8th graders in this class compared with the
average 8th grade student in this school?” The four options for this question included “higher
levels,” “average levels,” “lower levels,” and “widely differing.”
Table 7 presents the results of auxiliary regressions, which are specified like those in
Tables 4, 5 and 6 but where the dependent variable is a dummy variable for whether the teacher
characterized the student’s assigned class as achieving at “higher levels”. The results of this
exercise suggest that, in general, female teachers are less likely to be assigned to high-achieving
classes but that this effect is small and statistically insignificant. However, these effects do
appear to vary in a meaningful (though not statistically significant) manner by subject. More
specifically, female math teachers are roughly 5 to 6 percentage points less likely to say their

21
class achieves at a higher level relative to others at the school. These point estimates imply a
statistically significant 17 to 25 percent reduction in the mean probability.
Interestingly, these FD estimates suggest that, in the other three subjects, the teacher’s
gender is unrelated to the relative achievement level of the class. Overall, these results are
consistent with the concern that the assignment of female math teachers to lower-achieving
classes compromises this study’s identification strategy. Therefore, for this remainder of this
study, this analysis excludes the half of the respondents who were drawn from schools that were
randomly assigned to include surveys of mathematics teachers. In other words, the resulting
analysis relies only on the students and teachers from schools where the teacher surveys were
sent to science and English teachers or science and social studies teachers. Because schools were
randomly assigned across subject groupings, this selection should not bias the resulting
inferences. However, it will reduce their statistical power.
Table 8 presents the basic test score results based on this truncated sample. The results
indicate that assignment to a female teacher raises the achievement of girls by a statistically
significant .042 standard deviations but lowers the achievement of boys by a similar and
statistically significant amount (i.e., .046 standard deviations). For girls, there is weakly
significant evidence that the test-score benefits of a female teacher are concentrated in history. In
contrast, for boys, the achievement consequences of assignment to a female teacher are more
uniform across subjects.
6.3 Teacher fixed effects
The previous specification checks suggest that the test score results in Table 8 reflect the
gender interactions between students and teachers (e.g., role model effects or teacher biases) and
not some alternative explanation. For example, these results are unlikely to reflect systematic

22
differences in the quality of female teachers or their classrooms because assignment to a female
teacher appears to promote the achievement of female students while simultaneously harming
that of male students. Similarly, the fact that assignment to a female history teacher raises girls’
achievement in history but has a small and statistically significant effect on their reading
achievement (Table 6) suggests that these results do not reflect the non-random assignment of
girls with a propensity for achievement in those subjects. And the results from Table 7 indicate
that, apart from math classes, a teacher’s gender is unrelated to the perceived achievement level
of their assigned students.
However, the fact that assignment to an opposite-gender teacher appears to have very
similar achievement effects for both girls and boys suggests another, particularly compelling
specification check. Specifically, in models that pool the data on boys and girls, it is possible to
identify the effect of an opposite-gender (i.e., OTHSEX) teacher conditional on unrestrictive
teacher fixed effects. What makes this approach practical is that, for each teacher who was
surveyed by NELS:88, there were often multiple sampled students (i.e., some who did and did
not share the teacher’s gender). More formally, we can implement this approach by allowing the
equation for science achievement to take the following form:
(7)

y1it = αXi + β(OTHSEX1it) + λZ1t + θ1t + µi + ε1it

where θ1t is a teacher fixed effect. Similarly, the equation for achievement in reading and social
studies becomes:
(8)

y2it = αXi + β(OTHSEX1it) + λZ2t + θ2t + µi + ε2it.

And first differencing these equations yields the following:
(9)

(y1it – y2it) = β(OTHSEX1it - OTHSEX2it) + λ(Z1t - Z2t) + (θ1t – θ2t) + (ε1it - ε2it)

23
The term, Z1t, consists of subject fixed effects that are specific to the gender of the student, the
dummy variable for an opposite-race teacher (i.e., OTHRACE) and the two classroom variables
(i.e., CLSSIZE and PCTLEP).
The key results from estimating equation (9) are reported in Table 9. The results in the
first column of Table 9 are based on a version of equation (9) that excludes the teacher fixed
effects. Like the results in Table 8, these baseline results indicate that assignment to an OTHSEX
teacher lowers achievement by a statistically significant amount of nearly .05 standard
deviations. The results in the next column reflect the introduction of fixed effects for the nearly
2300 unique teachers associated with the 8814 first-differenced observations. Not surprisingly,
the introduction of these controls increases the R2 by a factor of 6. However, the estimated effect
of an OTHSEX teacher is largely unchanged (i.e., -.042) and it remains statistically significant at
the 1-percent level. This result indicates that the apparent test-score consequences associated
with the gender interactions between students and teachers cannot be explained by omitted
teacher characteristics.15

7. TEACHER AND STUDENT PERCEPTIONS
The prior results suggest that assignment to an opposite-gender teacher influences the
achievement of both boys and girls and that the educational relevance of these gender
interactions cannot be easily explained by the unobserved characteristics of students, teachers, or
classrooms. However, as noted earlier, test scores may provide a relatively narrow measure of
the relevant educational outcomes associated with the gender dynamics between teachers and

15

Interestingly, it is also possible to introduce fixed effects for each of the 5500 unique classrooms. And doing so
leads to a similar point estimate (i.e., -.035). However, unsurprisingly, this approach also exhausts most of the
sample variation associated with the 8814 first-differenced observations and leads to a dramatically increased
standard error (i.e., .029).

24
students. In particular, the relevance of these interactions for students’ intellectual engagement
with particular subjects could be particularly important for understanding the subsequent patterns
of course taking and achievement among older students. And teacher perceptions of student
performance provide a useful complement to student achievement as measured by a low-stakes
test.
The remaining inferences in this study address these issues by presenting FD estimates of
how assignment to a female teacher influences teacher perceptions of a student’s performance
and a student’s perceptions of the subject taught by a teacher (Table 2). These inferences are
based on the subset of schools where math teachers were not interviewed. The results of these
assessments are generally consistent with those based on test scores. For example, the FD
estimates for girls are presented in Table 10. These results indicate that a given student is
significantly less likely to be seen as disruptive or inattentive when with a female teacher.
Furthermore, when taught by a female, girls were less likely to report that they did not look
forward to a subject, that it was not useful for their future and that they were afraid to ask
questions. However, these estimated effects are statistically indistinguishable from zero.
But these results also mask some interesting heterogeneity by subject. In particular,
assignment to a female science teacher leads to a particularly large reduction in the probability
that the student will be seen as inattentive. And, when assigned to a female science teacher, girls
are significantly less likely to claim that science is not useful for their future. Combined with the
results in Table 8, these estimates suggest that female science teachers are particularly effective
in promoting girls’ involvement with science and do so by promoting their intellectual
engagement rather than by directly raising their achievement.

25
Table 11 presents the key results of similarly specified models when applied to the data
on boys. Most of these estimates are statistically imprecise. However, these results do indicate
that a given boy is significantly more likely to be seen as disruptive when assigned to a female
teacher.16 Furthermore, a boy is significantly more likely to report that he does not look forward
to a particular academic subject when that subject is being taught by a female. The models that
allow for interactions between a teacher’s gender and the academic subject indicate that these
effects are particularly pronounced in history classes.

8. CONCLUSIONS
This study’s results indicate that the gender interactions between teachers and students
have statistically significant effects on a diverse set of educational outcomes: test scores, teacher
perceptions of student performance and student engagement with academic subjects.
And the sizes of these estimated effects are quite large. For example, assignment to an oppositegender teacher lowers student achievement by at least .042 standard deviations. This effect size
implies that just one year with a male English teacher would eliminate nearly a third of the
gender gap in reading performance among 13 year olds (Table 1) and would do so by improving
the performance of boys and simultaneously harming that of girls. Similarly, a year with a
female teacher would close the gender gap in science achievement among 13 year olds by half
and eliminate entirely the smaller achievement gap in mathematics.
The effect sizes associated with teacher and student perceptions are similarly large. For
example, boys are approximately 11 percentage points more likely than girls to be seen as

16

Because assignment to an OTHSEX teacher appears to have relatively similar effects on DISRUPT for both boys
and girls, it is possible to evaluate the robustness of these results to conditioning on teacher fixed effects (e.g., as in
Table 9). The estimate from that approach is quite similar to those reported here, indicating that these results cannot
be attributed to gender patterns in teacher unobservables.

26
disruptive (Table 3). But the estimates presented here indicate that a year with a male teacher
would close this gap by half (Tables 10 and 11). Furthermore, girls are .20 standard deviations
more likely than boys to claim that science is not useful for their future (Table 3). However, the
estimates presented here imply that a year with a female science teacher would close this gap by
at least half (Table 10).
The sizes of these estimates suggest that the gender dynamics between teachers and
middle-school students have a substantial influence on several important educational outcomes.
However, how these interactions may contribute to the gender gaps in educational outcomes also
depends critically on the gender distribution of teachers by subject. To examine this issue, Table
12 presents data on the percentage of teachers who are female by subject and grade. These
conditional means are based on data from the more than 45,000 teachers interviewed by the U.S.
Department of Education’s 1999-2000 Schools and Staffing Survey.
In the 6th grade, the percentage of teachers who were female ranged from 68 to 91 percent
across four subjects (i.e., math, science, reading and history). These percentages decline in later
grades and for all four subjects. However, by 8th grade, most teachers were still female. For
example, 83 percent of 8th grade reading teachers were female. And, interestingly, more than half
of the 8th grade teachers of math and science were female as well.17
Combined with the test score results, these data suggest that a large fraction of boys’
dramatic underperformance in reading reflects the classroom dynamics associated with the fact
that their reading teachers are overwhelmingly female. For example, these estimates imply that,
if half of the reading teachers in 6th, 7th, and 8th grades were male (and their effects were
additive), the reading gap would fall by approximately a third. Similarly, these results also

17

See Table 2.1 in U.S. Department of Education (1997) for similar data from the 1993-94 Schools and Staffing
Survey.

27
suggest that part of boys’ relative propensity to be seen as disruptive in these grades is due to the
gender interactions implied by the preponderance of female teachers. However, the fact that most
middle-school teachers of math, science and, to a lesser extent, history are female also implies
that the gender gaps in these subjects are smaller than they would otherwise be.
The main policy implication of these results is simply to underscore that the gender
interactions between students and teachers do appear to constitute an important “environmental”
influence of educational outcomes for both girls and boys. However, establishing that these
reduced-form effects exist does not provide explicit guidance as to the appropriate policy
responses. A targeted policy response to the existence of these effects would turn critically on
understanding their structural nature. For example, Sax (2005) argues for single-sex classrooms
taught by teachers with gender-specific training by appealing to evidence on the differing
learning styles of boys and girls. Other policy alternatives might be rooted in the conjectured
existence of stereotype threat among students or of biases in the teacher behavior and
expectations. What these results do suggest is that discriminating among these explanations and
designing appropriately targeted policies is a promising avenue for shaping the gender patterns
of educational outcomes.

28
REFERENCES
Abcarian, Robin. “Bright Star indeed; More than just the name of her plane, it’s the new Laura Bush in
her quest for a legacy.” Los Angeles Times, May 7, 2005, Part E, page 1.
American Association of University Women. How Schools Shortchange Girls, Washington, DC: AAUW
Educational Foundation, 1992.
Ashenfelter, Orley and Alan Krueger. “Estimating the returns to schooling using a new sample of twins,”
American Economic Review 84, 1994, pages 1157-1173.
Ashenfelter, Orley and Cecilia Rouse. “Income, schooling and ability: Evidence from a new sample of
identifical twins,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 113, 1998, pages 253-284.
Ayres, L. Laggards in our schools. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1909.
Bettinger, Eric P. and Bridget Terry Long. “Do Faculty Serve as Role Models? The Impact of Instructor
Gender on Female Students,” American Economic Review, May 2005.
Brophy, Jere. “Interactions of Male and Female Students with Male and Female Teachers,” in Gender
Influences in Classroom Interaction, edited by Louise Cherry Wilkinson and Cora B. Marrett,
Academic Press Inc.: Orlando, FL, 1985.
Cahill, Larry. “His Brain, Her Brain,” Scientific American, May 2005, 40-47.
Canes, Brandice J. and Harvey S. Rosen. “Following in her footsteps? Women’s choices of college
majors and faculty gender composition,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 48, 1995, 486504.
Cavanagh, Sean. “Educators revisit girls’ loss of math, science interest,” Education Week, May 4, 2005.
Coley, Richard J. “Differences in the Gender Gap: Comparisons across Racial/Ethnic Groups in
Education and Work,” Policy Information Center, Educational Testing Service: Princeton, NJ,
2001.
Dee, Thomas S. “Teachers, race and student achievement in a randomized experiment” The Review of
Economics and Statistics, February 2004, 86(1), pp. 195-210.
Dee, Thomas S. 2005. “A teacher like me: Does race, ethnicity, or gender matter?” American Economic
Review: forthcoming.
Dee, Thomas S. and Sarah R. Cohodes. “Out-of-field teachers and student achievement: Evidence from
matched-pairs comparisons,” August 2005.
Dillon, Sam. “Harvard Chief Defends His Talk on Women,” The New York Times, January 18, 2005.
Ehrenberg, Ronald.G., Dan D. Goldhaber and Dominic J. Brewer. "Do Teachers' Race, Gender and
Ethnicity Matter? Evidence from the National Educational Longitudinal Study of 1988."
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, April 1995, 48(3), pp. 547-561.
Freeman, Catherine E. Trends in Educational Equity of Girls and Women: 2004 (NCES 2005-016). U.S.
Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics. Washington, DC: U.S.
Government Printing Office.
Goldhaber, Dan D. and Dominic J. Brewer. 2000. “Does teacher certification matter? High school
certification status and student achievement,” Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 22:
129-146.
Halpern, Diane F. Sex Differences in Cognitive Abilities, 3rd Edition. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, 2000.
Hanushek, Eric A., John F. Kain, Daniel M. O’Brien, and Steven G. Rivkin. “The Market for Teacher
Quality,” NBER Working Paper No. 11154, February 2005.
Hedges, Larry V. and Nowell, Amy. “Sex differences in mental test scores, variability, and numbers of
high-scoring individuals,” Science 269(5520), July 7 1995, 41-45.
Ingels, Steven J., Sameer Y. Abraham, Rosemary Karr, Bruce D. Spencer and Martin R. Frankel. National
Education Longitudinal Study of 1988 Base Year: Student Component Data File User’s Manual.
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, 1990.
Jacob, Brian A. “Where the boys aren't: non-cognitive skills, returns to school and the gender gap in
higher education,” Economics of Education Review 21(6), December 2002, 589-598.

29
Jones, Susanne M. and Kathryn Dindia. “A Meta-analytic perspective on sex equity in the classroom,”
Review of Educational Research 74(4), Winter 2004, 443-471.
Kimura, Doreen. Sex and Cognition. Cambridge and London: The MIT Press, 1999.
Kleinfeld, Judith. “The Myth that Schools Shortchange Girls: Social Science in the Service of
Deception,” Women’s Freedom Network, Washington DC: 1998.
Lavy, Victor. “Do Gender Stereotypes Reduce Girls’ Human Capital Outcomes? Evidence from a Natural
Experiment.” NBER Working Paper No. 10678, August 2004.
Lewin, Tamar. “Ideas and Trends: How Boys Lost out to Girl Power,” The New York Times, Section 4,
Page 3, December 13, 1998.
Lippa, Richard A. Gender, nature, and nurture. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 2002.
Neisser, Ulric, Gwyneth Boodoo, Thomas J. Bouchard, A. Wade Boykin, Nathan Brody, Stephen J. Ceci,
Diane F. Halpern, John C. Loehlin, Robert Perloff, Robert J. Sternberg, and Susana Urbina.
“Intelligence: Knowns and Unknowns,” American Psychologist, February 1996, 77-101.
Neumark David and Rosella Gardecki. “Women helping women? Role model and mentoring effects on
female PhD students in economics,” Journal of Human Resources 33 (1), Winter 1998, 220-246.
Nixon, Lucia A. and Michael D. Robinson. “The educational attainment of young women: Role model
effects of female high school faculty,” Demography 36(2): May 1999, 185-194.
Riordan, Cornelius. “The Silent Gender Gap,” Education Week, November 17, 1999.
Robst, John, Jack Keil and Dean Russo. “The effect of gender composition of faculty on student
retention,” Economics of Education Review 17(4), 429-439, 1998.
Rothstein, Donna S. “Do female faculty influence female students’ educational and labor market
attainments?” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 48(3), April 1995, pages 515-530.
Rouse, Cecilia. “Further estimates of the economic return to schooling from a new sample of twins,”
Economics of Education Review 18, 1999, pages 149-157.
Sadker, Myra and David Sadker. Failing at fairness: How our schools cheat girls. New York: Touchstone,
1994.
Sadker, David. “An Educator’s Primer to the Gender War,” Phi Delta Kappan 84(3), November 2002,
page 235-244.
Saltzman, Amy. “Myth or Fact? Do teachers and schools favor boys to girls’ detriment as some studies
seem to show? Are single sex schools the only answer?” U.S. News and World Report, page 4,
November 6, 1994.
Sax, Leonard S. “The Promise and Peril of Single-Sex Public Education,” Education Week, March 2,
2005.
Sommers, Christina Hoff. The War Against Boys: How Misguided Feminism is Harming Our Young
Men. New York: Simon and Schuster; 2000.
Spencer, Steven J., Claude M. Steele and Diane M. Quinn. “Stereotype Threat and Women’s Math
Performance,” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 35(1): 4-28, 1999.
U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, America’s Teachers: Profile of a
Profession,1993–94, NCES 97-460, by Robin R. Henke, Susan P. Choy, Xianglei Chen, Sonya
Geis, Martha Naomi Alt, Stephen P. Broughman, Project Officer. Washington, D.C.: 1997.
U.S. Department of Education. “Psychometric Report for the NELS:88 Base Year Test Battery,” NCES
91-468, by Donald A. Rock, Judith M. Pollak, Jeffrey Owings, Anne Hafner, Washington, D.C.:
1991.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. Cambridge, MA:
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2002.

30
Table 1 –1999 NAEP Scores by Subject, Age and Gender

Subject and age

Average score
Boys
Girls

Raw
difference

Standardized
difference

Science
9 year olds

230.9

227.9

13 year olds

258.7

252.9

17 year olds

300.4

290.6

9 year olds

232.9

231.2

13 year olds

277.2

274.5

17 year olds

309.8

306.8

9 year olds

208.5

214.8

13 year olds

253.5

265.2

17 year olds

281.5

294.6

2.9
(1.7)
5.7
(1.4)
9.7
(2.2)

0.076
0.158
0.223

Math
1.7
(1.3)
2.7
(1.4)
3.1
(1.7)

0.049
0.083
0.097

Reading
-6.3
(2.2)
-11.6
(1.8)
-13.1
(2.1)

-0.161
-0.305
-0.314

Standard errors are reported in parentheses. Sources: U.S. Department of Education (2000) and
the “NAEP 1999 Long-Term Summary Data Tables”
(http://nces.ed.gov/nationsreportcard/tables/Ltt1999/).

31
Table 2 – Descriptive statistics, matched student-teacher observations,
8th grade students, NELS:88
Variable
STEST
DISRUPT
INATT
NOHWK
NOTUSE
NOTLF
AFASK
FT
OTHRACE
TBLACK
THISP
TOTHER
SCERTIFD
TE1
TE2
TE3
TE4
TE5
TE6
TE7
TE8
TE9
TE10
CLSSIZE
PCTLEP
TSCI
TMATH
THIST
TENG

Description
Test score in subject
Student is frequently disruptive
Student is consistently inattentive
Student rarely completes homework
Subject not useful for my future
Do not look forward to subject
Afraid to ask questions in subject class
Female teacher
Teacher of opposite race/ethnicity
Black teacher
Hispanic teacher
Teacher of other race/ethnicity
Teacher certified by state in subject
Teacher experience missing
1-3 years of teacher experience
4-6 years of teacher experience
7-9 years of teacher experience
10-12 years of teacher experience
13-15 years of teacher experience
16-18 years of teacher experience
19-21 years of teacher experience
22-24 years of teacher experience
25+ years of teacher experience
Class size
% of class with limited English proficiency
Science class
Mathematics class
History/social studies class
English class

Mean

Standard
Deviation

Sample
Size

0
.128
.205
.198
0
0
0
.561
.298
.079
.022
.026
.810
.006
.107
.095
.100
.113
.126
.137
.100
.074
.142
23.7
.012
.244
.256
.240
.260

1.0
.334
.404
.398
1.0
1.0
1.0
.496
.458
.269
.147
.160
.392
.078
.309
.294
.300
.316
.332
.344
.300
.262
.349
6.47
.066
.430
.436
.427
.438

41,271
41,580
41,536
41,627
40,733
40,839
40,785
42,648
42,648
42,648
42,648
42,648
42,265
42,648
42,648
42,648
42,648
42,648
42,648
42,648
42,648
42,648
42,648
41,871
39,643
42,648
42,648
42,648
42,648

32
Table 3 – Average student outcomes and teacher gender by subject and student gender, NELS:88

Girls

Math
Boys

Science
Girls
Boys

History
Girls
Boys

English
Girls
Boys

STEST

-.044

.043

-.089

.090

-.058

.060

.081

-.080

DISRUPT

.075

.184

.082

.192

.066

.173

.068

.183

INATT

.160

.264

.169

.252

.161

.237

.141

.260

NOHWK

.135

.242

.139

.256

.145

.249

.136

.277

NOTLF

.075

-.076

.085

-.088

.046

-.048

-.101

.102

NOTUSE

.039

-.040

.100

-.103

.110

-.115

-.112

.114

AFASK

.040

-.041

.016

-.016

.045

-.047

-.011

.012

TFEMALE

.582

.564

.496

.479

.418

.404

.776

.741

Variable

33
Table 4 – Estimated effect of a female teacher on test scores by student gender
Girls
Independent variable

Boys

OLS

FD

FD

FD

OLS

FD

FD

FD

Female teacher

.018
(.017)

.007
(.013)

.010
(.013)

.013
(.015)

-.016
(.020)

-.047‡
(.014)

-.037†
(.015)

-.040†
(.016)

R2

.3561

.0249

.0281

.0292

.3579

.0072

.0081

.0091

Sample size

19167

10361

10166

8999

19004

10255

10074

8885

-

-

.1655

.1682

-

-

.6043

.6226

yes
no
yes
yes

no
yes
no
no

no
yes
yes
no

no
yes
yes
yes

yes
no
yes
yes

no
yes
no
no

no
yes
yes
no

no
yes
yes
yes

p-value (F test)
School fixed effects?
Student fixed effects?
Teacher controls?
Classroom controls?

Standard errors, adjusted for school-level clustering, are reported in parentheses. All models include subject fixed effects. The OLS
models include student-level dummies for race-ethnicity and SES quartile. The p-value refers to an F-test of the joint significance of
the teacher or classroom controls added to the given specification.
* Statistically significant at the 10-percent level
† Statistically significant at the 5-percent level
‡ Statistically significant at the 1-percent level

34
Table 5 – FD estimates of the effect of a female teacher on test scores by student gender and academic subject

(1)

Girls
(2)

(3)

(4)

Boys
(5)

(6)

-.061†
(.026)
-.010
(.026)
.044
(.028)
.074‡
(.026)

-.061†
(.026)
-.002
(.026)
.040
(.029)
.078‡
(.026)

-.066†
(.027)
.017
(.027)
.041
(.031)
.075‡
(.027)

-.082‡
(.027)
-.063†
(.027)
-.041
(.027)
.004
(.031)

-.073‡
(.027)
-.051*
(.027)
-.035
(.028)
.017
(.031)

-.078‡
(.028)
-.048*
(.028)
-.038
(.030)
.010
(.033)

R2

.0274

.0305

.0317

.0081

.0081

.0100

Sample size

10316

10166

8999

10255

10074

8885

p-value (H0: βM = βS = βE = βH)

.0014

.0013

.0021

.1810

.1640

.2373

no
no

yes
no

yes
yes

no
no

yes
no

yes
yes

Independent variable
Female teacher in math
Female teacher in science
Female teacher in English
Female teacher in history

Teacher controls?
Classroom controls?

Standard errors, adjusted for school-level clustering, are reported in parentheses. All models include subject fixed effects. The p-value
refers to an F-test of the hypothesis that the four coefficients are equal.
* Statistically significant at the 10-percent level
† Statistically significant at the 5-percent level
‡ Statistically significant at the 1-percent level

35
Table 6 – Counterfactual FD estimates of the effect of a female teacher on “other-subject” test scores
by student gender and academic subject

Independent variable
Female teacher in math

Math score replaced
by science
Girls
Boys

Science score
replaced by math
Girls
Boys

Reading score
replaced by history
Girls
Boys

History score
replaced by reading
Girls
Boys

-.043*
(.026)
.020
(.027)
.031
(.033)
.081‡
(.026)

-.030
(.025)
-.053*
(.028)
-.040
(.030)
.005
(.031)

-.070†
(.028)
-.036
(.032)
.043
(.031)
.045
(.032)

-.073‡
(.028)
-.046
(.032)
-.019
(.031)
.021
(.036)

-.058†
(.028)
.005
(.027)
.013
(.031)
.074‡
(.027)

-.078†
(.031)
-.026
(.030)
-.026
(.038)
.012
(.033)

-.080‡
(.027)
.003
(.027)
.042
(.031)
-.006
(.027)

-.069†
(.027)
-.038
(.028)
-.036
(.030)
-.007
(.029)

R2

.0315

.0070

.0267

.0118

.0094

.0073

.0084

.0042

p-value (H0: βM = βS = βE = βH)

.0045

.4960

.0090

.1857

.0077

.2507

.0176

.4819

Sample size

8998

8887

9000

8886

8987

8858

9025

8903

Female teacher in science
Female teacher in English
Female teacher in history

Standard errors, adjusted for school-level clustering, are reported in parentheses. All models include subject fixed effects and the
teacher and classroom controls. The p-value refers to an F-test of the hypothesis that the four coefficients are equal.
* Statistically significant at the 10-percent level
† Statistically significant at the 5-percent level
‡ Statistically significant at the 1-percent level

36
Table 7 –Auxiliary regressions, FD estimates of the effect of a female teacher on assignment to a
high-achieving class by student gender and academic subject
Independent variable
Female teacher
Female teacher in math
Female teacher in science
Female teacher in English
Female teacher in history
R2
p-value (H0: βM = βS = βE = βH)

Girls
-.013
(.014)

-.059†
(.026)
.024
(.027)
-.010
(.027)
-.003
(.028)

-

-.016
(.014)

-.047†
(.024)
.020
(.025)
-.018
(.028)
-.016
(.026)

-

.0084

.0051

.0090

.0105

-

.1508

-

.2741

Dependent mean
Sample size

Boys

.24
9261

.27
9261

9191

9191

Standard errors, adjusted for school-level clustering, are reported in parentheses. All models
include subject fixed effects and the teacher and classroom controls. The p-value refers to an Ftest of the hypothesis that the four coefficients are equal.
* Statistically significant at the 10-percent level
† Statistically significant at the 5-percent level
‡ Statistically significant at the 1-percent level

37
Table 8 –FD estimates of the effect of a female teacher on test scores by student gender and
academic subject, excluding mathematics
Independent variable
Female teacher
Female teacher in math
Female teacher in science
Female teacher in English
Female teacher in history
R2
p-value (H0: βS = βE = βH)
Sample size

Girls

Boys

.042†
(.020)

-

-.046†
(.022)

-

-

-

-

-

-

.025
(.027)
.026
(.046)
.090†
(.037)

-

-.054*
(.029)
-.020
(.045)
-.051
(.041)

.0400

.0408

.0067

.0069

-

.0824

-

.1905

4426

4426

4322

4322

Standard errors, adjusted for school-level clustering, are reported in parentheses. All models
include subject fixed effects and the teacher and classroom controls. The p-value refers to an Ftest of the hypothesis that the three coefficients are equal.
* Statistically significant at the 10-percent level
† Statistically significant at the 5-percent level
‡ Statistically significant at the 1-percent level

38
Table 9 – FD estimates of the effect of an opposite-gender teacher on test scores, pooled data on
boys and girls, excluding mathematics
Independent variable

(1)

(2)

Opposite-gender teacher

-.048‡
(.014)

-.042‡
(.016)

R2

.0410

.2621

Sample size

8814

8814

no

yes

Teacher fixed effects?

Standard errors, adjusted for school-level clustering, are reported in parentheses. All models
include subject fixed effects specific to the student’s gender, a dummy variable for students
observed with a teacher of a different race/ethnicity and the classroom controls. Model (1) also
controls for the gender and race-ethnicity of the teacher.
* Statistically significant at the 10-percent level
† Statistically significant at the 5-percent level
‡ Statistically significant at the 1-percent level

39
Table 10 – FD estimates of the effect of a female teacher on girls’ non-test outcomes, excluding mathematics

Dependent variable
DISRUPT
INATT
NOHWK
NOTLF
NOTUSE
AFASK

Female teacher

Science

-.021†
(.010)
-.032‡
(.013)
.025†
(.010)
-.068
(.042)
-.036
(.030)
-.007
(.030)

-.027†
(.012)
-.042†
(.018)
.028*
(.015)
-.113†
(.055)
-.107†
(.042)
.009
(.040)

By academic subject
English
History
-.004
(.026)
-.006
(.032)
.025
(.024)
-.006
(.099)
.075
(.071)
-.017
(.060)

-.021
(.016)
-.030
(.024)
.018
(.021)
-.020
(.080)
.027
(.051)
-.033
(.056)

p-value
(H0: βS = βE = βH)
.1088
.0597
.1277
.2104
.0439
.9228

Standard errors, adjusted for school-level clustering, are reported in parentheses. All models include subject fixed effects and the
controls for teacher and classroom observables. The p-value refers to an F-test of the hypothesis that the three coefficients are equal.
* Statistically significant at the 10-percent level
† Statistically significant at the 5-percent level
‡ Statistically significant at the 1-percent level

40
Table 11 – FD estimates of the effect of a female teacher on boys’ non-test outcomes, excluding mathematics

Dependent variable
DISRUPT
INATT
NOHWK
NOTLF
NOTUSE
AFASK

Female Teacher

Science

.033†
(.013)
.002
(.015)
.030*
(.016)
.093†
(.043)
.009
(.034)
.042
(.030)

.012
(.017)
-.020
(.021)
.019
(.020)
.018
(.051)
-.050
(.042)
.029
(.037)

By academic subject
English
History
.058†
(.029)
.036
(.033)
.016
(.035)
.099
(.110)
.124
(.085)
.031
(.053)

.058†
(.024)
.021
(.027)
.064†
(.027)
.247‡
(.067)
.042
(.058)
.078
(.051)

p-value
(H0: βS = βE = βH)
.0188
.3943
.1029
.0025
.2069
.4300

Standard errors, adjusted for school-level clustering, are reported in parentheses. All models include subject fixed effects and the
controls for teacher and classroom observables. The p-value refers to an F-test of the hypothesis that the three coefficients are equal.
* Statistically significant at the 10-percent level
† Statistically significant at the 5-percent level
‡ Statistically significant at the 1-percent level

41
Table 12 – Percent of teachers who are female by grade and subject,
1999-2000 Schools and Staffing Survey (SASS)

Grade
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

Subject
Science Reading Math
0.681
0.627
0.581
0.461
0.469
0.448
0.441

0.908
0.871
0.831
0.742
0.732
0.717
0.711

0.717
0.647
0.648
0.520
0.523
0.524
0.524

History
0.575
0.495
0.477
0.319
0.330
0.332
0.324

Notes: These conditional means are based on the author’s calculations using SASS respondents
who are regular full and part-time teachers (n = 46,542). The subject designations are based on
each teacher’s main teaching assignment. Sample weights are used.

