                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           HOSPITAL OWNERSHIP AND FINANCIAL
                             PERFORMANCE: A QUANTITATIVE
                                   RESEARCH REVIEW

                                            Yu-Chu Shen
                                           Karen Eggleston
                                              Joseph Lau
                                          Christopher Schmid

                                         Working Paper 11662
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11662


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2005




The authors gratefully acknowledge funding for this research from grant #050953 under the Robert Wood
Johnson Foundation’s Changes in Health Care Financing and Organization (HCFO) Initiative. We thank Jia
Chan, Mantian Hu, Ania Aksan, and Pam Kum for excellent research assistance. We also thank Drs. Dena
Bravata, Ingram Olkin, and our expert panel members for providing valuable inputs: Drs. Kathleen Carey,
Shin-Yi Chou , Leemore Dafny , Guy David, Mark Duggan, Darrel Gaskin, Martin Gaynor, Michael McCue,
Jack Needleman, Michael Rosko, Joanne Spetz , Robert Town, and Kevin Volpp. We are also grateful to
participants at the Research-in-Progress Seminar at Stanford University, the 2005 Academy Health Annual
Research Meeting, and the 2005 International Health Economics Association meeting for their helpful
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Yu-Chu Shen, Karen Eggleston, Joseph Lau and Christopher Schmid. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Hospital Ownership and Financial Performance: A Quantitative Research Review
Yu-Chu Shen, Karen Eggleston, Joseph Lau and Christopher Schmid
NBER Working Paper No. 11662
September 2005, Revised June 2006
JEL No. I11, L30

                                            ABSTRACT

We apply meta-analytic methods to conduct a quantitative review of the empirical literature since

1990 comparing financial performance of US for-profit, not-for-profit, and government-owned

general acute hospitals. We find that the diverse results in the hospital ownership literature can be

explained largely by differences in authors' underlying theoretical frameworks, assumptions about

the functional form of the dependent variables, and model specifications. Weaker methods and

functional forms tend to predict larger differences in financial performance between not-for-profits

and for-profits. The combined estimates across studies suggest little difference in cost among all

three types of hospital ownership, and that for-profit hospitals generate more revenue and greater

profits than not-for-profit hospitals, although the difference is only of modest economic significance.

There is little difference in revenue or profits between government and not-for-profit hospitals.



Yu-Chu Shen
Graduate School of Business and Public
Policy
Naval Postgraduate School
555 Dyer Road
Monterey, CA 93943
and NBER
yshen@nps.edu

Karen Eggleston
Tufts University
303 Braker Hall
8 Upper Campus Rd.
Medford, MA 02155-6722
karen.eggleston@tufts.edu
                                           Introduction

       The hospital industry in the United States is one of the few sectors where three different

types of ownership have co-existed for decades (see Figure 1). Numerous studies investigate

whether private not-for-profit, for-profit and government hospitals differ in patient outcomes,

costs, provision of uncompensated care, or other measures of hospital performance. Conflicting

empirical results, however, have left policymakers with little clear evidence and have limited our

understanding of ownership and performance in the health sector.

       Understanding whether profit status or public/private control affects performance is

important for many policy issues, including how to structure public programs such as Medicare

and the Veterans’ Administration hospital system or how to guarantee access for the uninsured.

Much of current policy governing for-profit conversions in the health care market assumes that

government and not-for-profit hospitals differ from for-profits in policy-relevant ways, such as

providing greater access through more uncompensated care. Anyone setting out to assess the

impact of an ownership-related policy change, such as tax exemption policy for not-for-profit

hospitals, immediately finds that the voluminous literature on not-for-profit, for-profit and

government hospitals gives frustratingly unclear and contradictory evidence, inviting subjective

and selective reference to studies that support the analysts’ views.

       There have been some qualitative reviews of the literature to date (Sloan 2000;

Needleman 2001; Malani et al 2003). In this paper, we go beyond the qualitative approach and

apply formal statistical methods used in the meta-analysis literature to synthesize quantitatively

studies that investigate the effect of ownership on hospital financial performance. Specifically,

we survey the literature that examined the following financial aspects: cost, revenue, profit

margin, and efficiency. This paper is part of a larger project; we explore the relationship



                                                                                                     2
between other quality measures and ownership in a companion paper (Eggleston et al 2006).

The primary goal of this review is to understand what factors account for the wide variation in

study results, and whether there exists a consensus in the empirical evidence to indicate that

ownership matters. Our emphasis on explaining variation, as well as our focus on broader

outcome categories, distinguishes our study from the only precedents in the literature that

perform meta-analysis related to hospital performance (Devereaux et al. 2002 and 2004).

       The paper proceeds as follows. We first discuss theoretical background. Rather than a

comprehensive review, this section focuses instead on a few prominent theories and summarizes

theoretical predictions about how government, not-for-profit and for-profit hospitals might

compare on performance measures we are examining. We then outline the methodology of our

quantitative review. We present results for cost, revenue, profit margins, and efficiency, and

discuss implications for policy and future research.



                                    Theoretical Background

       The comparative advantages of government and private ownership have attracted much

theoretical attention and have a venerable traditional in economics (Vickers and Yarrow 1988).

For example, Laffont and Tirole (1993) list several of economic theory’s ‘conventional

wisdoms’ about government ownership: government-controlled firms can take broad social

welfare as their goal, and may benefit from centralized control, yet also suffer from several

disadvantages. The latter include absence of capital market monitoring; soft budget constraints

(Kornai 1986; Kornai, Maskin, and Roland 2003); expropriation of investments; lack of precise

objectives; as well as lobbying, patronage, and politicized resource allocation (e.g. Shleifer and

Vishny 1994).




                                                                                                     3
       Health economists have drawn upon this general ownership debate to understand mixed

ownership markets for health services. For example, according to property rights theory

(Grossman and Hart 1986, Hart 1995, Hart Shleifer and Vishny 1997), since private providers

(especially for-profits) have well-defined control rights, they have strong incentive to invest in

innovations, but may over-emphasize cost control at the expense of noncontractible quality. By

contrast, a government-owned provider lacks clear control rights to implement changes, and this

constraint softens incentives for innovations. The property rights model predicts that private

owners achieve lower costs, but quality may be higher or lower. Many other theories (e.g., soft

budget constraints, politicized resource allocation) also predict that private for-profit providers

will generally achieve lower costs for a given service than their government counterparts.

       Given the prevalence of not-for-profits in the health sector, much theoretical work by

health economists focuses on not-for-profit providers and how they differ from for-profit firms.

Theories frequently posit that not-for-profit firms have an objective function different from that

of profit maximization. Examples include maximizing quality, quantity and/or prestige

(Newhouse 1970) instead of, or in addition to, maximizing net revenue (Lakdawalla and

Philipson 1998); helping to fulfill demand for local public goods (Weisbrod 1988) or meet unmet

need in the community (Frank and Salkever 1991); or maximizing the well-being of specific

important constituencies, such as the medical staff (Pauly and Redisch 1973) or consumers (Ben-

Ner and Gui 1993). Other theories place emphasis on ownership form as an organizational

choice (Lakdawalla and Philipson 1998; David 2004). In these frameworks, objectives need not

differ, although the choice does sometime reflect—indeed, signals—differences in preferences.

For example, organizations choosing to be bound by a nondistribution constraint have less

incentive to skimp on noncontractible quality or otherwise subvert patient and community trust




                                                                                                      4
(Arrow 1963; Hansmann 1980; Glaeser and Shleifer 2001). Still other theoretical frameworks

emphasize regulation and tax policies, positing that firms differ in their ability to benefit from a

given ownership form (Lakdawalla and Philipson 1998; David 2004).

       Since most models of not-for-profits consider objectives and/or constraints that reduce

emphasis on net revenue, most such models predict—or are at least consistent with—lower costs,

higher net revenue, and comparable or lower quality, of for-profits compared to not-for-profits.

Yet there is no strong theoretical prediction that ownership dictates differences in performance

(e.g., not-for-profits might be “for-profits in disguise”; Weisbrod 1988). Nor does theory suggest

that any ownership differences will swamp other factors strongly predicted to shape behavior,

such as market concentration or payment incentives. Rather, one of the strongest predictions of

economic theory is that providers react to their market environment. Thus any attempt to isolate

the affect of ownership on performance must address the confounding effects of market structure.

         Ironically, despite a large empirical literature on hospital ownership and performance,

there remains a certain disconnect between theory and evidence. Few empirical papers

distinguish among economic theories of ownership form. This disconnect seems to arise for two

reasons. First, many theories generate (or are consistent with) the same predictions. Second,

much of the literature in health services management and clinical evaluation does not focus on

testing economic theories.

         Nevertheless, most empirical studies of hospital performance do “test a theory” in a

broad sense: whether ownership matters for performance. Indeed, many studies that focus on

other research questions, such as the volume-outcome relationship or antitrust issues, include

ownership as a control variable. Apparently the majority of researchers in this field consider

ownership to be a potentially important factor for explaining variation in hospital performance.




                                                                                                       5
Both studies focusing on ownership comparisons and those that merely include ownership as a

control variable report widely varying results about the association between ownership and

financial performance. Our review seeks to explain that variation in light of theoretical

predictions about how and when ownership shapes hospital performance.


                                             Methods

Background on Meta-Analysis in Observational Studies

       As described in more detail below, we adopt meta-analytic methods to perform our

quantitative review. Meta-analysis applies conventional statistical methods to combine the

results from independent studies that use different data and methodologies to assess a similar

research problem. Such formal statistical methods for integrating results are a staple of clinical

science and have been applied successfully to many fields of economics. For example, this

method was used to evaluate the effect of minimum wage laws (Card and Krueger 1995), to

examine the gender gap in wages (Stanley and Jarrell 1998), to evaluate Ricardian Equivalence

(Stanley 2001), and to study the determinants of enterprise restructuring in transition (Djankov

and Murrell 2002). Meta-analysis has helped to clarify several controversial area of research,

such as the effect of second hand smoking or the relationship between exposure to TV violence

and aggressive behavior (Stanley 2001).



Identifying Studies and Extracting Summary Data

       The first step of a quantitative review is to identify all relevant studies through a

systematic procedure. We used a combination of the following keywords (and their variations)




                                                                                                     6
to conduct the initial search in several databases1: hospitals, ownership, for-profit, not-for-profit,

nonprofit. We limited our search to published and unpublished articles or book chapters written

in English between January 1990 and July 2004. This initial search process identified 1357

potentially relevant studies.

        We then applied the following selection criteria. First, we defined our study population

to be general, acute, short-stay hospitals in the United States. Second, we applied an

“intervention” criterion that only includes studies that compare hospitals of different ownership

forms (including studies of ownership conversion, but excluding studies that only compare sub-

categories of ownership, such as religious vs. secular not-for-profits). Third, we limited our

sample to empirical studies using multivariate analysis (i.e., excluding theoretical papers and

case studies). Lastly, we confined our outcome scope to the following broad categories:

financial performance (such as cost, revenue, profit margin, efficiency), patient outcomes

(mortality, complication rates, or other patient outcomes), uncompensated care or community

benefits, and staffing. Two authors (Eggleston and Shen) independently applied the above

selection criteria to identify the relevant studies for our project.2 After we identified this initial

set of relevant studies, we contacted the corresponding authors of all included papers to solicit

any unpublished papers that might fit our project scope. We received responses from authors

that resulted in 77 additional studies. We applied the same selection criteria again to this new set

of studies. At the end of this search and selection process, we identified 141 studies for our

quantitative review. Figure 2 summarizes our selection process.

        In this paper, we report findings from the financial performance quantitative review.

1
  The databases included Medline, EconLit, and Proquest/ABI (for dissertations). We also identified studies through
work cited in the literature or previous qualitative reviews (e.g., Zeckhauser, Patel and Needleman 1995 is an
unpublished report to a Foundation).
2
  Throughout the coding process we found a discrepancy in our independent coding of only 7%; all differences were
reconciled by consensus after joint review.


                                                                                                                 7
Among the 141 relevant studies, 67 focus on financial performance. Many studies analyze

multiple measures of financial performance. Conversely, many specific performance measures

are analyzed only by a few studies. Since we need an adequate sample size to be able to apply

meta-analytic methods, we only review outcomes that are analyzed by at least 10 studies. The

four most commonly studied financial outcomes that we review extensively are: hospital cost,

revenue (including returns on assets), profit margin, and efficiency (including both cost and

technical efficiency).

        Data extraction. For each included study, we extracted study information into a pre-

defined abstraction form that covered the following sets of information: data sources, sampling

frame (covered years, covered regions, sample size), detailed outcome definition, ownership

coefficients and their associated statistics (such as standard errors, t-statistics, p-value, degrees of

freedom of the model), and empirical methods. We coded empirical methods using the

following set of binary variables: whether the study included patient demographic characteristics,

patient severity of illness information (such as a case mix index), hospital-level characteristics

(such as bed size, share of Medicare and/or Medicaid admissions), and market-level

characteristics (such as per capita income, population size, hospital market characteristics), and

whether ownership is only included as a control variable. In addition, we categorized each

study’s methodology by coding whether the study employs panel data estimation methods,

whether the study explicitly models certain market interactions that can potentially bias the

ownership estimates (such as explicit adjustment for selection through Heckman or instrumental

variables, or explicit control for intensity of hospital competition), and the functional form of the

dependent variable (e.g., log transformation, average measure, or other definition). For

efficiency studies, there is an ongoing debate about the merit of data envelopment analysis and




                                                                                                      8
the stochastic frontier regression approach. We extracted information from the efficiency studies

about how they applied these two methods.

         Expert panel. To provide additional guidance on the research questions and analytic

strategies, we recruited thirteen prominent researchers in the area of hospital ownership and

performance to serve on our expert panel.3 These individuals gave input on issues ranging from

the big picture questions to specific analytic methods for explaining and quantifying differences

among studies.



Statistical Methods

         A typical study estimates the impact of ownership on performance as follows:

          Y = α + β1 FP + β 2 GOV + γX + ξ .                              (1)

Y is a measure of hospital financial performance, FP indicates for-profit ownership, GOV

signifies government ownership (the omitted group is not-for-profit ownership—NFP), X is a

vector of hospital and market characteristics, and ξ is the error term. If estimated properly, the

coefficients β1 and β2 capture the average effect on Y of for-profit and government ownership,

respectively, relative to not-for-profit ownership. However, as with any observational studies,

unobserved factors could lead to biased estimates of the coefficients. We provide details below

on classifying studies based on the extent to which study methods can reduce this potential bias.

In this section, we describe the methods used to answer the three questions of our quantitative

review:

             1. What is the magnitude of the relationship between ownership and financial

                  performance—what is the “effect size” of each study?

3
 We invited researchers to serve on the expert panel based on the number of studies included in our list that they
had co-authored, their areas of expertise, recent work in the field, and availability and willingness to serve on the
panel. We thank their contribution. The names of our expert panel are listed in the acknowledgement section.


                                                                                                                        9
           2. How precise or reliable is this estimated effect size?

           3. How do differences in analytic methods and other study features affect the

               estimates of effect size?

We first discuss how we define and compute the effect size for our review. We then describe the

meta-regression procedure used to explore how differences in study features lead to different

conclusions about ownership’s effect on financial performance. We finally consider empirical

issues that arise when applying meta-analytic methods to the hospital literature.

       Defining effect size. To synthesize and compare studies, we must first develop a

summary measure of each study’s results, an “effect size,” that can be compared across studies.

In randomized clinical trials where meta-analytic methods are often applied, the effect size is

simply the difference in average outcome between the treatment and the control group, divided

by the appropriate standard deviation. However, all hospital ownership studies are observational

studies that use some form of multivariate analysis. Intuitively, the coefficients β1 and β2 capture

the effect size of for-profit and government ownership, relative to not-for-profit ownership,

respectively. However, the magnitude of β’s depends on the units of the dependent variable,

which vary considerably because studies measure the same financial outcome differently. For

example, some studies measure cost in dollars, while others transform the cost measure to

logarithmic form.

       Another possible metric is the t-statistic associated with the ownership coefficient

estimate, which is unit-free. However, the magnitude of the t-statistic increases proportionally

with the square root of the sample size. This dependence on sample size suggests that t-statistics

are not the appropriate measure for the economic magnitude of ownership differences.

       To define an effect size that is unit-free and does not depend on sample size, we use the




                                                                                                   10
partial correlation coefficient (Rosenthal 1991). A partial correlation coefficient measures the

correlation between a given ownership form and performance measure Y, controlling for the

effect of covariates X. Although most studies do not report partial correlation coefficients, they

can be computed using statistics that are commonly reported in published studies (Greene 1997):

                                 2
                               t FP
        r* =                                 .
                   2
                 t FP   + degrees of freedom

One concern is that the distribution of r* becomes more skewed as the population value of r*

gets further away from zero. We therefore adopt a standard practice in meta-analysis:

standardizing the effect size by applying the Fisher transformation, which is distributed nearly

normally (Hedges and Olkin 1985):

               1     ⎡1 + r ⎤
        Z r=     log ⎢         .
               2     ⎣1 − r ⎥⎦

One thing to note is that our conclusions are not sensitive to whether we standardize the effect

size or not. We then compute the confidence interval around the effect size to answer our second

research question (see the appendix for details).

       After comparing effect sizes across studies, the next common step is to summarize the

literature by combining the effect sizes across studies. We intentionally leave out the combined

effect size information from this paper. It is tempting to view the combined effect size as a

summary measure of whether the empirical literature as a whole predicts ownership to be a

significant factor in affecting hospital financial performance. However, as we will discuss in

more detail below, studies in the hospital ownership literature usually have overlapping samples

and data sources. This implies that the statistical power of our quantitative review does not

increase proportionally with the sample size of each additional study; thus, the precision of the

combined effect size will be overstated. Instead, we focus on explaining the variation in effect


                                                                                                    11
sizes across studies through the meta-regression approach described below.

         Explaining Variation in Study Results. To answer our third question—how do study

features affect the estimated ownership effect size? —we categorize studies’ methodology and

employ meta-regression analysis. These approaches allows us to examine whether study features

such as analytic methods, functional forms, or region studied can explain differences in effect

sizes across studies. For example, do studies that control for market-level confounding factors

such as intensity of competition find larger or smaller effects of ownership per se on financial

performance than studies that do not control for such confounding factors?

         The included studies vary widely in analytic methods. Given the limited number of

studies in each financial outcome category, it is necessary to categorize the diverse methods in a

concise way. With input from our expert panel, we classified studies into the following three

categories:

•        Type III: if the study meets both of the following conditions:

         (a) uses panel estimation or otherwise explicitly accounts for the potential unobserved

factors in the estimation model (such as by using instrumental variables);

         (b) includes two of the following three sets of controls: patient level, hospital level, or

market level;

•        Type II: if the study meets either condition (a) or (b)4;

•        Type I: if the study meets neither condition (a) nor (b).

We then can compare differences in effect sizes and their precision according to methodological

classification.

         This 3-tier classification is designed to capture how many unobserved factors might

4
  In the studies we reviewed, only one study meets criteria (a) but not (b). Therefore Type II method basically
includes all cross-sectional studies that meet criteria (b), i.e., include controls at the hospital, market, and/or patient
level.


                                                                                                                         12
remain to bias the estimated ownership effect. Recall that in general, studies estimate the

average effect of ownership, i.e., β1 and β2 in eq (1), which might be biased by the presence of

unobserved factors. Type III studies control for the most confounding and thus have the fewest

unobserved factors; Type I studies lack many control variables and thus are likely to have the

most unobserved factors biasing the ownership estimates. Panel estimation methods are included

as Type III studies, because these methods, such as fixed-effects models, are usually viewed as

appropriate tools to eliminate bias arising from time-invariant unobserved factors.

       Another interpretation is that the 3-tier classification captures the broadness of the causal

effect. There are various mechanisms through which ownership matters in affecting hospitals’

financial performance: for-profit hospitals might pursue healthier patients or select a location

with a wealthier population. If a study controls for both patient characteristics and market

characteristics (such as Type III studies), then it essentially estimates a very narrow effect of

ownership—it compares for-profit and not-for-profit hospitals assuming that both have

comparable patient populations and market characteristics. Thus one can view Type I studies as

estimating the broadest causal effect—including location choice, market competition and other

factors with ownership—and Type III studies as estimating the narrowest causal effect.

       To assess the importance of methodology as well as other factors in explaining variations

in study results, we conduct meta-regressions. The dependent variables in our meta-regressions

are the standardized effect sizes from each study. The explanatory variables are the empirical

features of each study. The model is necessarily parsimonious, since there are only a few studies

for each measure of financial performance, and many study features are highly collinear

(correlation matrices of study features are included in the appendix). Because our sample size is

small for each outcome category, we examine different types of study features in separate meta-




                                                                                                    13
regressions.

   •   In the first set, we focus on analytic methods, using indicator variables for the 3-tier

       method classification defined above. In addition, we include an indicator of whether

       ownership is only included as a control variable and not the focus of the study.

   •   The second set of meta-regression focuses on the functional form of the dependent

       variables. Differences in functional forms reflect authors’ underlying assumptions about

       cost and revenue structure. For example, among the 18 cost studies comparing not-for-

       profit and for-profit hospitals, 3 examine the dollar value of cost per discharge, 11

       analyze the log transformation of cost measures, and the remaining 4 studies use other

       cost definitions. Similarly for revenue studies, some compare for-profit and not-for-

       profit hospitals’ revenue in dollars per discharge, while others compare the differences in

       percentages. To examine whether these differences in specification of the dependent

       variable affect conclusions regarding ownership and performance, we create an indicator

       that takes on the value of 1 if the dependent variable is log transformed and 0 otherwise.

       For the efficiency studies, some authors assume that efficiency follows a deterministic

       model (data envelopment model) while others allow for random errors (stochastic frontier

       model). We create an indicator to differentiate these two approaches.

   •   The third set of meta-regressions focuses on the regions covered. In particular, we are

       interested to know whether single-state analyses differ substantially from analyses that

       use national samples.

   •   The last set of meta-regressions examines the sources of data. In particular, we

       categorize studies based on whether they use administrative data only (such as Medicare

       hospital cost reports or state department of health hospital data), survey data only (such



                                                                                                    14
       as AHA surveys), or use both types of data. Concerns with survey data include record

       accuracy and attrition. However, survey data usually contains a richer set of information.

       Issues in quantitative review of the hospital ownership literature. Most meta-

analyses of clinical trials ask how well a treatment works overall. The traditional meta-analytic

methods are designed to answer the same question in the same population. In those cases, a

fixed-effects model is used to combine effect sizes across studies, which assumes that there is

one single underlying true effect. However, in our case the research questions are not

homogeneous even within a narrowly defined financial outcome group. It is worth noting that

with our selection strategy, we include not only studies whose research question focuses on the

relationship between financial performance and ownership, but also studies that answer some

other research questions about hospital finance that include ownership as a control variable in

their multivariate analyses. Because of the heterogeneity of research questions and results, we

use a random-effects model for the meta-regression. The random-effects model assumes no

single true effect, but rather that there is an underlying distribution of this true effect, commonly

assumed to follow a normal distribution (Lau et al. 1998). The random-effects model assumes

there is between-study variation in addition to within-study variation around the estimated effect

size; therefore, the confidence intervals constructed under a random-effects model are larger than

under a fixed-effects model.

       Another issue in integrating the studies is that not all studies report the necessary

statistics. In many instances, particularly for policy journals, authors report only the significance

level of the coefficient. We contacted the corresponding authors to get the exact t-statistics

where possible. In cases where we could not get the exact number, we estimate the t-statistic by




                                                                                                   15
generating a random number within the reported significance range.5

         Unlike meta-analyses of clinical trials, where the sample in each study comes from

mutually exclusive patient populations, many studies we reviewed analyzed the same set of

hospitals in overlapping years. There are fewer than 5000 general acute hospitals in the US. As

Table 1 shows, many studies analyze national samples, and most studies use one of two common

data sources: either the American Hospital Association Annual Survey or the Medicare Hospital

Cost Reports (also known as Healthcare Cost Report Information System, HCRIS). Our effect

size measures, defined by partial correlation coefficients, should remain valid when observations

are correlated (Rosenthal 1991). However, the studies do not represent independent samples, and

statistical power will not increase proportionally with each additional study’s sample size even if

we pool studies. Therefore we do not report the combined effect size since the precision of such

measure would be overstated.

         The non-independent nature of study samples sits at odds with the assumption behind the

traditional meta-analysis. However, we believe applying the meta-analytic methods to our

quantitative review still provides valuable insight. By comparing studies on a common metric

(i.e., the standardized effect size) and characterizing methods, we are able to decipher how

methodological differences influence study results.

         Nevertheless, we stress that our results are most valuable for explaining variation, not for

providing “one true answer” about how ownership affects financial performance. It should also

be noted that the meta-regression approach cannot predict a specific hospital’s performance. But

our analysis does suggest what study designs are most likely to predict performance differences


5
  For example, a study might report results significant at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels. If the ownership
coefficient is not statistically significant, the estimated t-statistic is a random number between 0 and 1.64. If the
ownership coefficient is significant at the 0.10 level, the estimated t-statistic will be a random number between 1.64
and 1.96; and so on.


                                                                                                                    16
by ownership form, and suggest ways in which future research should get into the “black box” of

hospital performance variation.

                                              Results

       Table 1 summarizes the studies included in this quantitative review. Many studies

analyze multiple financial outcomes. Among the 40 included studies, 25 analyze a broad sample

of hospitals (either a national sample or hospitals in MSAs, which account for over 55 percent of

US community hospitals). Half of the studies utilize multiple years of data, and the studied

years range from 1981 to 1998.

       Table 2 presents the percentage of studies with each study feature that we included in the

meta-regression. The top panel shows the features of studies that compare not-for-profit with

for-profit ownership; the bottom panel describes studies that compare not-for-profit with

government ownership. The share of studies with a given feature varies across the four financial

outcomes. The top panel shows that the percent of studies classified as Type III methods ranges

from 21 percent for efficiency studies to 44 percent for cost studies. About 40 percent of studies

do not focus on ownership but include this information in their models.     Sixty-one percent of

cost studies analyze log-transformed cost, whereas only 27 percent of revenue studies analyze

the log-transformed version of revenue. Among efficiency studies, 32 percent assume a

deterministic model while the rest assumes a stochastic frontier model. Many of these study

features are highly correlated. We include the correlation among these study features for each

outcome category in the appendix. For example, those that studied California hospitals are also

likely to be Type I (with correlation of 0.77-0.79, depending on the outcome studied); except for

studies of efficiency, Type III studies tend to utilize both administrative and survey data (with

correlations ranging from 0.34-0.55).




                                                                                                    17
         The sample size of our quantitative review shrinks considerably when we look at studies

that compare not-for-profit and government ownership (bottom panel of Table 2). Generally

these studies are a subset of the ones that compare not-for-profit and for-profit ownership.

         Review of Cost Studies. There are 18 studies that analyze cost differences between for-

profit and not-for-profit hospitals. Five studies examined total cost (which includes both

operating cost and capital cost) while the other 13 studies used operating cost as the dependent

variable. We first summarize the effect sizes of for-profit ownership compared to not-for-profit

ownership of hospitals (Figure 3A). We group the studies by the methodology type. Figure 3A

also reports the confidence intervals around each study’s effect size.6

         Figure 3A shows that the effect size ranges from -0.23 (indicating that for-profits have

lower cost than not-for-profit hospitals) to +0.27 (indicating for-profit hospitals have higher costs

than not-for-profit hospitals). Except for the Type I studies, most studies have relatively small

effect sizes. The three Type I studies are all studies using data from a single state and cover only

a single year. The study with the largest negative effect also analyzed data from just one state

(Florida).

         Figure 3B summarizes the effect sizes for studies comparing not-for-profit and

government hospitals. A negative effect size indicates that government hospitals operate at

lower cost than their not-for-profit counterparts. The variation in effect sizes across studies is

even smaller than that between not-for-profit and for-profit hospitals.

         The standardized effect size that we use provides less intuitive interpretation of the

ownership effect for clinical or policy decisions. One way to interpret the effect sizes is through


6
  Several studies analyze different years and/or states separately, and thus have multiple effect sizes (one
corresponding to each year or state estimate). For the summary plot in Figure 3 and similar plots for other
performance measures, we average the multiple effect sizes so that we report one effect size per study, and adjust the
standard error of the effect size to reflect the total sample size used in that particular study.


                                                                                                                  18
the r2, which represents percent variation explained by the ownership indicator. As Figure 3A

shows, even the study with the largest effect size (0.27) would only account for 7 percent of the

study variation. In addition, by the conventional Cohen standard, magnitudes of our effect sizes

mostly fall into what is considered the “small” effect region (r<0.10), indicating that ownership

appears to play a much less important role in influencing hospital performance than other

hospital characteristics, even when it is a significant predictor. This result is not surprising,

given that there are so many other factors influencing a hospital’s operations. .

        The economic significance of this cost difference seems small. Consider, for example, an

alternative way to illustrate how modest the ownership effect size is, by comparing the

ownership effect to that of teaching status, size, and urban/rural location. In one Type III paper

(Carey 1997), the comparable effect size for “heavy teaching” hospital cost (compared to non-

teaching hospital cost) is more than five times that of the ownership effects, and the effect size

for “large urban” is more than three times the magnitude of the ownership effects.

        In Table 3, we analyze what study features might drive differences in ownership effect

sizes across studies that compare not-for-profit and for-profit hospitals. We report the meta-

regression results of cost studies in the first column.7          In all cases the chi-square test for

heterogeneity clearly rejects the null hypothesis that our combined studies are a homogeneous set

(data not shown), thus validating our approach of using random effects regression models in our

meta-regressions.8 The analytic method regression (first panel) clearly indicates that the

ownership effect diminishes as we move from studies that estimate the broadest causal effect

(Type I) to ones with the narrowest causal effect (Type III). In other words, studies that control


7
  Unlike the summary plot where only one averaged effect size is associated with each study, we include all effect
sizes from each study in the meta-regression; hence Tables 3 and 4 show larger sample sizes in some categories than
in the corresponding figures.
8
  If we do not reject the test of heterogeneity, then there is no need to conduct a meta regression.


                                                                                                                19
for a wider range of confounding factors find less difference in cost between for-profit and not-

for-profit hospitals. Studies that focus on a research question other than ownership are no

different from ones that focus on ownership, after controlling for methodology. The last row of

the first panel indicates that 93 percent variation in the standardized effect size is due to

heterogeneity in methodology.

       The second panel of Table 3 shows that functional form matters as well. Studies without

log transformation of the dependent variable tend to produce larger effect sizes. Given that

healthcare costs are highly skewed, it would appear that log transformation is warranted. Studies

that use log of cost as the dependent variable tend to find no significant difference in cost

between for-profit and not-for-profit hospitals.

       Effect sizes vary widely between studies using data from different parts of the country.

While California and Florida tend to produce larger and negative effect sizes that indicate for-

profit hospitals have lower costs in those states, studies of Virginia’s for-profit hospitals suggest

they have higher costs than their not-for-profit counterparts. However, it should be noted that

the two studies using Virginia data (Shukla 1997 and Wang et al. 2001) are both classified as

Type I method and both have very wide confidence intervals around the effect sizes due to small

numbers of hospitals included. The limited sample size of our meta-regression precludes us

from ascertaining whether the larger effect size of these studies derives from state differences,

urban/rural mix of hospitals, analytic methods, or some combination of the above factors. We

also examine whether differences in effect sizes can be explained by the authors’ choice of total

cost or operating cost; we do not find any significant differences (results not shown). The last

panel of Table 3 shows that studies using survey data only tend to find a larger gap in cost

between not-for-profit and for-profit hospitals. However this study feature is highly collinear




                                                                                                    20
with the functional form: the 4 studies that use only survey data all estimated the ownership

effect using the actual cost without log transformation.

         Table 4 reports meta-regressions exploring what study features explain differences

among studies that compare government hospitals to not-for-profit hospitals. Since the variation

in effect sizes is much smaller than that between not-for-profits and for-profits, we do not find

much difference in effect size as we compare across analytic methods, functional form of the

dependent variable, or regions. The only significant study feature is that studies whose research

focus is not on ownership tend to find government hospitals less costly than not-for-profit

hospitals.

         Review of Revenue Studies. Among the 11 studies that examine revenue differences

between for-profit and not-for-profit hospitals, 4 studies analyze returns on assets, 2 examine

total revenue, and the rest focus on net patient revenue. Figure 4A summarizes the effect sizes

for studies on revenue and returns on assets, categorizing studies by their methods. Unlike cost

studies, where there is a wide range of effect sizes from negative to positive numbers, all revenue

studies report either no difference between for-profits and private not-for-profits, or a positive

effect size, indicating that for-profits earn greater revenue. But similar to the cost studies, Type I

studies estimate much bigger for-profit effect than Type II and Type III studies. The three Type

I studies have small sample sizes, as reflected by the wider confidence intervals around the effect

sizes.

         Only four studies examine revenue differences between not-for-profit and government

hospitals (Figure 4B). All of them find little or no revenue difference between the two

ownership forms.

         The second column of Table 3 reports the meta-regression results for revenue studies




                                                                                                     21
comparing not-for-profit and for-profit hospitals. Similar to the cost studies, the magnitude of

the effect size shrinks substantially as we move from Type 1 to Type III studies. Type I studies

tend to find for-profits earn substantially higher revenue than not-for-profits. The more control

there is for confounding factors, the less likely a study will find differences between for-profits

and not-for-profits.

       Similar to cost studies, studies without log transformation of the dependent variable tend

to produce larger effect sizes.. Studies analyzing California and Virginia hospitals tend to

produce larger effect sizes than studies using a national sample. However, all 4 studies of

California and Virginia use Type I methods. Since these two state indicators are perfectly

collinear with the Type I method indicator, we cannot separate out the state effect from the effect

of analytic methods. We do not perform meta-regressions to explain variations in revenue

between not-for-profit and government hospitals due to limited sample size.

       Review of Profit Margin Studies. Among the financial performance measures studied,

profit margin has the most consistent definition across studies. Virtually all 14 studies that

examine profit margins of for-profit and not-for-profit hospitals define profit margin as the

difference between revenue and cost divided by revenue. All studies find either no difference or

that for-profit hospitals earn higher profit margins than not-for-profit hospitals do (Figure 5A),

with the Type I studies finding larger effects than others. The effect size ranges from -0.09 to

+0.28 (the two studies with negative effect sizes both have confidence intervals that include

zero). Given that there appears to be little cost difference between the two private ownership

forms, our results would suggest that the higher profit margins of for-profit hospitals derive from

their higher revenues. In contrast, Figure 5B shows that among the 6 studies that examine profit

margin differences between not-for-profit and government hospitals, 4 found no differences




                                                                                                     22
while the remaining 2 studies found opposite effects. (Shen 2003b, which found a positive effect,

studied conversion of not-for-profits to government ownership.) The effect sizes are smaller

than those in Figure 5A and statistically insignificant, indicating smaller differences between

not-for-profits and government-owned hospitals than between not-for-profits and for-profit

hospitals.

       The meta-regression results in Table 3 once again show that analytic methods can explain

much of the between-study variation in estimates of how much net revenue for-profits earn

relative to not-for-profit hospitals. Ninety-three percent of the variation in the standardized effect

size can be attributed to the heterogeneity across studies. Type II and Type III methods produce

similar effect sizes; both tend to find much smaller effect sizes than those estimated with Type I

methods. In other words, studies that control for more confounding factors—particularly market

competition —tend to find less of a profit margin advantage of for-profits over not-for-profits.

The two studies of Virginia hospitals report much larger profit differences than the other studies

(as for cost and revenue), but they also have the largest confidence intervals around their effect

sizes. Similar to cost studies, studies using only survey data tend to find a larger gap in profit

margin between not-for-profit and for-profit hospitals. Unlike cost studies, this study feature is

not strongly correlated with other study features (all correlations were below 0.32). We do not

find any study features that can explain variation in study findings about net profits earned by

government and not-for-profits (2nd column in Table 4), likely because there is less variation to

explain.

       Review of Efficiency Studies. Measuring hospital efficiency has been a controversial

area of the hospital ownership literature (for example, see the discussion in the 1994 volume 14




                                                                                                     23
issue of the Journal of Health Economics).9 In addition to estimating hospital cost functions (as

discussed above), there are two methodologies that researchers often employ: data envelopment

analysis (DEA) and stochastic frontier regression (SFR). SFR analysis incorporates data on

input prices, and measures efficiency as least cost production (in other words, it measures

efficiency from all sources of cost), whereas DEA uses data on inputs and outputs, and measures

efficiency as the least amount of input for a given amount of output (this is referred to as

technical efficiency, and is considered a subset of cost efficiency). Both approaches make

inferences about efficiency from a residual. The major empirical difference between the two

approaches is that SFR assumes the residual term reflects both inefficiency and random factors,

while DEA is a purely deterministic model that assumes all departures from the best-practice

frontier reflect inefficiency. DEA offers the advantage of being relatively flexible in modeling

the underlying production technology but makes no adjustment for random error. There is a

concern that DEA analysis is only useful when the sample size is very large (about 1,000

observations or more), and that the deterministic nature of the model does not suit the hospital

industry. SFR explicitly models random error, but it also assumes a structure for the underlying

production technology. In either case, wrong assumptions about the functional form,

misspecification of the models or omitted variables could easily bias the results.

         In our quantitative review, we include both cost efficiency and technical efficiency since

one is the subset of the other, and this allows us to compare studies using DEA and SFR

approaches. In Figure 6, we group the effect sizes by whether the study analyzed a single state

or a broader sample.10 Figure 6A shows that the 4 studies that analyze single states (3 Florida

studies and 1 Washington study) all find for-profit hospitals to be more efficient than not-for-

9
 We especially thank our expert panel for providing input on this topic.
10
  We chose this way to display effect sizes to reflect what the meta-regression found to be significant in explaining
variation between studies.


                                                                                                                   24
profit hospitals. In contrast, 7 out of 9 national studies find for-profits to be less efficient than

not-for-profit hospitals.

       The last column of Table 3 shows that effect sizes do not vary that much across the three

categories of analytic methods. However, studies that do not focus on ownership (36%) tend to

report for-profits to be more efficient than not-for-profit hospitals. DEA models also produce

larger effect sizes than SFR. The Florida effect shows up in the third panel of Table 3,

suggesting that for-profit hospitals are more efficient than not-for-profit hospitals in Florida.

Since effect sizes do not appear to differ across studies using different methodologies, we can

infer that this large effect size in Florida—suggesting that for-profits are more efficient than not-

for-profits—is not driven by methodological differences, although it does rely on just three

studies. We do not find data types to explain the variation in study results.

       Comparison between not-for-profit and government hospitals in general finds little

consistent efficiency difference between these two ownership forms (Figure 6B). Estimates

based on Florida data tend to find government hospitals more efficient than their not-for-profit

counterparts, although again this result derives from just two studies, and cost function estimates

do not find a similarly significant “Florida effect.” This study feature is also highly correlated

with the use of administrative data. Not surprisingly, we find studies using only administrative

data tend to find government hospitals more efficient than not-for-profit hospitals. Without more

studies, we cannot separate out the Florida effect from the data source effect for the comparison

between not-for-profit and government hospitals.



Publication Bias and Sensitivity Analysis

          The potential for publication bias has received substantial attention in quantitative




                                                                                                        25
reviews in both the clinical literature as well as some in other areas of economics (e.g., estimates

of the effects of the minimum wage on employment as discussed in Card and Krueger 1995).

The concern is that published results may be biased, because published studies are less likely to

include negative results (e.g. for clinical trials) or results not supporting a strong theoretical

prediction (e.g., about how the minimum wage reduces employment for low-wage workers). A

priori we might suspect less concern with such bias in the hospital ownership and performance

literature. As noted in the background section, some theories and previous evidence suggest

little difference in behavior between ownership forms. Many, but not all, studies of hospital

performance include ownership as a control variable even if it is not the key variable of interest,

suggesting that researchers do not all agree on whether ownership per se is an important

confounder of other hospital performance results.

          Following the approach by Card and Krueger (1995), we test the existence of

publication bias by examining the relationship between the absolute value of t-statistics and the

square root of degrees of freedom. Figure 7 clearly shows that the t-statistics increase with the

degrees of freedom; we do not see a pattern in which most t-statistics hover around 2 regardless

of sample size. Consistent with our expectation, we conclude that there is no evidence of

publication bias in this literature.

        Two of the studies (Zeckhauser, Needleman, and Patel 1995; Ferrier and Valdmanis 1996)

separately analyze sub-groups of for-profit hospitals, those that belong to larger systems and

those that are independent. (Both types of for-profit are compared to not-for-profit hospitals).

In our main review, we use the reported ownership effects from the for-profit chains; in our

sensitivity analysis, we use the information from for-profit independent hospitals. The overall

results are very similar, and conclusions remain the same. Our conclusions are also robust to




                                                                                                     26
separating cost efficiency from technical efficiency.

         Disease-specific analyses are often better equipped to avoid confounding from

differences in mix of services provided and to control for differences in patient case mix and

severity. In sensitivity analyses for the hospital cost review, we include additional studies of

cost in which the dependent variable is not the broad hospital operating cost. These additional

studies include some that analyze cost associated with specific disease treatment (such as heart

attacks, asthma, or hysterectomy) and studies of Medicare payments.11 These additional studies

also have relatively small effect sizes with no significant differences between for-profits and not-

for-profits. We focus on the present set of 18 studies to have a relatively homogenous set of

dependent variables.

                                                    Discussion

         We conduct a systematic quantitative review of the empirical literature since 1990

comparing financial performance of US not-for-profit, for-profit, and government-owned general

acute hospitals. The salient point from this quantitative review is that the diverse results in the

hospital ownership and performance literature derive largely from differences in authors’

underlying theoretical frameworks, assumptions about the functional form of the dependent

variables, and model specifications. Methods that control for fewer factors and less appropriate

functional forms tend to predict larger differences in financial performance between not-for-

profits and for-profits.

         More specifically, studies that control for a wider range of confounding factors—

including at the patient, hospital, and market levels or using panel data estimation techniques—

find smaller differences in financial performance between for-profit and not-for-profit hospitals.


11
  The additional studies are Ettner et al. (2001), Huang et al. (2002), Kessler and McClellan (2002), Sloan et al.
(1999), and Bazzoli (2004).


                                                                                                                     27
Studies that use a logarithmic transformation of cost and revenue for those dependent variables,

as their skewed distributions suggest is appropriate, tend to find no significant difference

between for-profit and not-for-profit hospitals. This is true for cost, revenue, and profit margin

comparisons. For efficiency studies, the meta-regression suggests that methodological

differences play less of a role in explaining the variation in findings than differences in

geographic region.

       There are various mechanisms through which ownership matters in affecting hospitals’

financial performance: for-profit hospitals might pursue healthier patients or selectively locate

near a wealthier population. While all studies are essentially estimating the average effect of for-

profit and/or government ownership, one can view the difference between Type I and III studies

as the difference between broad and narrow ownership effects. Type III studies are estimating

ownership effects assuming all hospitals have comparable patient populations and market

conditions (i.e., such studies are designed to disentangle ownership from the effects of patient

case-mix, market competition, and other confounding factors). Type I studies include within the

estimated ownership effect market conditions and revenue seeking behaviors that can potentially

affect the patient mix. For most financial performance measures, the estimated differences

between for-profit and not-for-profit hospitals vary significantly between studies using data from

different regions of the country. Single-state studies, primarily from the south and west, tend to

find larger differences between for-profit and not-for-profit hospitals. Unfortunately, with the

exception of efficiency studies, it is difficult to disentangle what drives these differences, partly

because state-specific analyses often use Type I method and/or only a single year of data, so that

regional differences are confounded by differences in analytic methods.

       Even though our quantitative review provides some insight on what the magnitude of the




                                                                                                    28
ownership effect might be overall, such findings must be interpreted with great caution. Studies

in this literature do not represent independent estimates of the “treatment” effect of ownership on

performance. Most draw from two widely used sources of data, and many analyze overlapping

regions and years, so that the same hospitals and patient populations underlie estimates from

different studies. Ideally, one can implement a quasi Durbin-Watson test of serial correlation or

impose a certain covariance structure on the meta regression estimations. However, the

statistical properties of such approaches are not well understood in the context of meta analysis,

and their development is beyond the scope of this project. Given increasing interest in

quantitative review of the health services research literature, developing this set of tools to

address overlapping samples in quantitative reviews would be valuable future work.

       Even though we do not combine effect sizes to provide one summary statistic as

commonly done in traditional meta-analysis, we do see some consistency in findings across

studies, especially for revenue and profit margins. Even though evidence to date suggests little

difference in cost among all three types of hospital ownership, studies that compared revenues all

found either that for-profits earn greater revenue and higher profits or that there is no difference

between for-profits and not-for-profits. There is less clear evidence of a difference in revenue or

net revenue between government and not-for-profit hospitals.

       It is not surprising that for-profits tend to earn more profit: that is their mission, and is the

prediction of virtually all economic models that contrast for-profit and not-for-profit behavior.

However, the conventional wisdom that for-profit hospitals would operate more efficiently (i.e.,

at lower cost) was not supported in this review. Overall, the dispersion and inconsistency of

estimates about how ownership form correlates with financial performance mirrors the larger

question of what drives wide variations in performance across hospitals of the same type (e.g.




                                                                                                     29
McClellan and Staiger 2001). Future research can be most fruitful if it goes beyond the standard

administrative datasets to explain this wide variation in performance both with more in-depth

data about the “black box” of hospital decision-making and with analysis of market spillover

effects. Our current exploration of the literature between non-financial performance measures

and hospital ownership would provide further insight about ownership behavior differences.

Evidence from other countries can also contribute significantly to furthering our understanding

of ownership and behavior.




                                                                                                  30
                                              Bibliography

                             Studies Included in the Quantitative Review

Bazzoli, G. J., B. Chan, S. M. Shortell, and T. D'Aunno. "The Financial Performance of Hospitals
    Belonging to Health Networks and Systems." Inquiry 37, no. 3 (2000): 234-252.

Bazzoli, Gloria J., Richard C. Lindrooth, Romana Hasnain-Wynia, and Jack Needleman. "The Balanced
    Budget Act of 1997 and U.S. Hospital Operations." Inquiry 41, no. 4 (2004): 401-417.

Becker, E. R., and S. J. Potter. "Organizational Rationality, Performance, and Social Responsibility:
    Results from the Hospital Industry." Journal of Health Care Finance 29, no. 1 (2002): 23-48.

Brown, H., and I. I. I. Shelton. "Managed Care and Technical Efficiency." Health Economics 12, no. 2
    (2003): 149-158.

Burgess, James F. Jr, and Paul W. Wilson. "Hospital Ownership and Technical Inefficiency."
    Management Science 42, no. 1 (1996): 110-123.

Campbell, E. S., H. Xiao, and M. K. Smith. "Types of Hysterectomy. Comparison of Characteristics,
   Hospital Costs, Utilization and Outcomes. " Journal of Reproductive Medicine 48, no. 12 (2003):
   943-949.

Campbell, Ellen S. "Hospital Efficiency and Indigent Care." Applied Economics 22, no. 11 (1990): 1597-
   1610.

Carey, Kathleen. "Hospital Cost Containment and Length of Stay: An Econometric Analysis." Southern
    Economic Journal 67, no. 2 (2000): 363-380.

Carey, Kathleen. "A Panel Data Design for Estimation of Hospital Cost Functions." Review of Economics
    and Statistics 79, no. 3 (1997): 443-453.

Chan, B., R. Feldman, and W. G. Manning. "The Effects of Group Size and Group Economic Factors on
    Collaboration: A Study of the Financial Performance of Rural Hospitals in Consortia." Health
    Services Research 34, no. 1, Part 1 (1999): 9-31.

Chirikos, Thomas N., and Alan M. Sear. "Measuring Hospital Efficiency: A Comparison of Two
     Approaches." Health Services Research 34, no. 6 (2000): 1389-1408.

Chrikos, Thomas N., and AM Sear. "Technical Efficiency and the Competitive Behavior of Hospitals."
     Socio-Economic Planning Sciences 28, no. 4 (1994): 219-227.

Connor, Robert A., Roger D. Feldman, and Bryan E. Dowd. "The Effects of Market Concentration
    Horizontal Mergers on Hospital Costs and Prices." International Journal of the Economics of
    Business 5, no. 2 (1998): 159-180.

Eggleston, K., Schmid, C. and Lau, J., Chan, J. and Shen Y. “Systematic review of hospital ownership
    and quality of care: what explains the different results in the literature?” 2006. Manuscript.




                                                                                                        31
Ettner, Susan L., and Richard C. Hermann. "The Role of Profit Status Under Imperfect Information:
     Evidence from the Treatment Patterns of Elderly Medicare Beneficiaries Hospitalized for Psychiatric
     Diagnoses." Journal of Health Economics 20, no. 1 (2001): 23-49.

Ferrier, Gary D., and Vivian Valdmanis. "Rural Hospital Performance and its Correlates." Journal of
     Productivity Analysis 7, no. 1 (1996): 63-80.

Folland, S. T., and R. A. Hofler. "How Reliable are Hospital Efficiency Estimates? Exploiting the Dual to
     Homothetic Production." Health Economics 10, no. 8 (2001): 683-698.

Fournier, Gary M., and Jean M. Mitchell. "New Evidence on the Performance Advantages of
    Multihospital Systems." Review of Industrial Organization 12, no. 5-6 (1997): 703-718.

Gapenski, L. C., W. B. Vogel, and B. Langland-Orban. "The Determinants of Hospital Profitability."
    Hospital and Health Services Administration 38, no. 1 (1993): 63-80.

Gautam, K., C. Campbell, and B. Arrington. "Financial Performance of Safety-Net Hospitals in a
    Changing Health Care Environment." Health Services Management Research 9, no. 3 (1996): 156-
    171.

Goes, J. B., and C. Zhan. "The Effects of Hospital-Physician Integration Strategies on Hospital Financial
    Performance." Health Services Research 30, no. 4 (1995): 507-530.

Hogan, Andrew J., and Roger Wroblewski. "The Determinants of Hospital Efficiency: A Data
    Envelopment Analysis." Public policy applications of management science. (1993): 115-144.

Huang, Z. J., B. J. LaFleur, J. M. Chamberlain, M. F. Guagliardo, and J. G. Joseph. "Inpatient Childhood
    Asthma Treatment: Relationship of Hospital Characteristics to Length of Stay and Cost: Analyses of
    New York State Discharge Data, 1995." Archives of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine 156, no. 1
    (2002): 67-72.

Kessler, Daniel P., and Mark B. McClellan. "The Effects of Hospital Ownership on Medical
    Productivity." RAND Journal of Economics 33, no. 3 (2002): 488-506.

Koop, Gary, Jacek Osiewalski, and Mark F. J. Steel. "Bayesian Efficiency Analysis through Individual
    Effects: Hospital Cost Frontiers." Journal of Econometrics 76, no. 1-2 (1997): 77-105.

Lawrence, Carol M. "The Effect of Ownership Structure and Accounting System Type on Hospital
    Costs." Research in governmental and nonprofit accounting. 6, (1990): 35-60.

Li, T., and R. Rosenman. "Cost Inefficiency in Washington Hospitals: A Stochastic Frontier Approach
     using Panel Data." Health Care Management Science 4, no. 2 (2001): 73-81.

Mark, T. L. "Analysis of the Rationale for, and Consequences of, Nonprofit and for-Profit Ownership
    Conversions." Health Services Research 34, no. 1 Part 1 (1999): 83-101.

McCue, M. J., and D. Burroughs. "A Trend Analysis of Financial Accounts. from TEFRA to PPS 7."
   Hosp Top 71, no. 4 (1993): 17-26.




                                                                                                       32
Menke, T. J. "The Effect of Chain Membership on Hospital Costs." Health Services Research 32, no. 2
   (1997): 177-196.

Molinari, C., L. Morlock, J. Alexander, and C. A. Lyles. "Hospital Board Effectiveness: Relationships
    between Governing Board Composition and Hospital Financial Viability." Health Services Research
    28, no. 3 (1993): 358-377.

Ozcan, Y. A., R. D. Luke, and C. Haksever. "Ownership and Organizational Performance. A Comparison
    of Technical Efficiency Across Hospital Types." Medical Care 30, no. 9 (1992): 781-794.

Picone, G., S. Y. Chou, and F. Sloan. "Are for-Profit Hospital Conversions Harmful to Patients and to
     Medicare?" Rand Journal of Economics 33, no. 3 (2002): 507-523.

Potter, S. J. "A Longitudinal Analysis of the Distinction between for-Profit and Not-for-Profit Hospitals
     in America." Journal of Health and Social Behavior 42, no. 1 (2001): 17-44.

Rosko, M. D. "Cost Efficiency of US Hospitals: A Stochastic Frontier Approach." Health Economics 10,
    no. 6 (2001b): 539-551.

Rosko, M. D. "Impact of HMO Penetration and Other Environmental Factors on Hospital X-
    Inefficiency." Medical Care Research Review 58, no. 4 (2001a): 430-454.

Rosko, M. D. "Impact of Internal and External Environmental Pressures on Hospital Inefficiency." Health
    Care Management Science 2, no. 2 (1999): 63-74.

Sari, Nazmi. "Efficiency Outcomes of Market Concentration and Managed Care." International Journal
      of Industrial Organization 21, no. 10 (2003): 1571-1589.

Shen, Yu-Chu. "Changes in Hospital Performance After Ownership Conversions." Inquiry 40, no. 3
    (2003): 217-234.

Shukla, R. K., J. Pestian, and J. Clement. "A Comparative Analysis of Revenue and Cost-Management
    Strategies of Not-for-Profit and for-Profit Hospitals." Hospital Health Services Administration 42,
    no. 1 (1997): 117-134.

Sloan, Frank A., Picone GA, Taylor DH Jr, and Chou S. "Does Where You Are Admitted Make A
     Difference? An Analysis of Medicare Data." In Frontiers in Health Policy Research Volume 2, A.M.
     Garber, ed. (1999): 1-25.

Vitaliano, Donald F., and Mark Toren. "Hospital Cost and Efficiency in a Regime of Stringent
     Regulation." Eastern Economic Journal 22, no. 2 (1996): 161-175.

Wang, B. B., T. T. Wan, J. Clement, and J. Begun. "Managed Care, Vertical Integration Strategies and
   Hospital Performance." Health Care Management Science 4, no. 3 (2001): 181-191.

Wilcox-Gok, Virginia. "The Effects of for-Profit Status and System Membership on the Financial
    Performance of Hospitals." Applied Economics 34, no. 4 (2002): 479-489.




                                                                                                          33
Younis, M., J. Rice, and J. Barkoulas. "An Empirical Investigation of Hospital Profitability in the Post-
    PPS Era." Journal of Health Care Finance 28, no. 2 (2001): 65-73.

Zeckhauser, Richard, Jayendu Patel, and Jack Needleman. The Economic Behavior of for-Profit and
    Nonprofit Hospitals: The Impact of Ownership on Responses to Changing Reimbursement and
    Market Environments. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University, 1995.

Zuckerman, Stephen, Jack Hadley, and Lisa Iezzoni. "Measuring Hospital Efficiency with
    Frontier Cost Functions." Journal of Health Economics 13, no. 3 (1994): 255-280.

                                            Other References

Arrow, Kenneth J. "Uncertainty and the Welfare Economics of Medical Care." American Economic
    Review (1963): 941-973.

Ben-Ner, Avner, and Benedetto Gui. The Nonprofit Sector in the Mixed Economy. Ann Arbor: University
    of Michigan Press, 1993.

Card, David, and Alan B. Krueger. "Time-Series Minimum-Wage Studies: A Meta-Analysis." American
    Economic Review 85, no. 2 (1995): 238-243.

Carey, K. "Hospital Cost Efficiency and System Membership." Inquiry 40, no. 1 (2003): 25-38.

Cohen J. Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences. New York: Academic
   Press;1977.

David, Guy. “The Convergence Between Nonprofit and For-Profit Hospitals in the United States.” Ph.D.
    Dissertation, University of Chicago, 2004.

Devereaux, P. J., P. T. Choi, C. Lacchetti, B. Weaver, H. J. Schunemann, T. Haines, J. N. Lavis, B. J.
    Grant, D. R. Haslam, M. Bhandari, T. Sullivan, D. J. Cook, S. D. Walter, M. Meade, H. Khan, N.
    Bhatnagar, and G. H. Guyatt. "A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Studies Comparing
    Mortality Rates of Private for-Profit and Private Not-for-Profit Hospitals." CMAJ Canadian Medical
    Association Journal 166, no. 11 (2002): 1399-1406.

Devereaux, P. J., D. Heels-Ansdell, C. Lacchetti, T. Haines, K. E. Burns, D. J. Cook, N. Ravindran, S. D.
    Walter, H. McDonald, S. B. Stone, R. Patel, M. Bhandari, H. J. Schunemann, P. T. Choi, A. M.
    Bayoumi, J. N. Lavis, T. Sullivan, G. Stoddart, and G. H. Guyatt. "Payments for Care at Private for-
    Profit and Private Not-for-Profit Hospitals: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis." CMAJ
    Canadian Medical Association Journal 170, no. 12 (2004): 1817-1824.

Djankov, Simeon, and Peter Murrell. "Enterprise Restructuring in Transition: A Quantitative Survey."
    Journal of Economic Literature 40, no. 3 (2002): 739-792.

Duggan, Mark. "Hospital Market Structure and the Behavior of Not-for-Profit Hospitals." RAND Journal
    of Economics 33, no. 3 (2002): 433-446.




                                                                                                            34
Frank, Richard G., and David S. Salkever. "The Supply of Charity Services by Nonprofit Hospitals:
    Motives and Market Structure." RAND Journal of Economics 22, no. 3 (1991): 430-445.

Glaeser, Edward L., and Andrei Shleifer. "Not-for-Profit Entrepreneurs." Journal of Public Economics
    81, no. 1 (2001): 99-115.

Grossman, S., and O. Hart. "The Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A Theory of Vertical and Lateral
    Integration." Journal of Political Economy 98, (1986): 1119-1158.

Hansmann, Henry B. "The Role of Nonprofit Enterprise." Yale Law Journal 89, no. 5 (1980): 835-901.

Hart, Oliver. Firms, Contracts, and Financial Structure. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press,
     Clarendon Press, 1995.

Hart, Oliver, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. "The Proper Scope of Government: Theory and an
     Application to Prisons." Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, no. 4 (1997): 1127-1161.

Hedges, Larry V. and Ingram Olkin. Statistical Methods for Meta-Analysis. Orlando, FL: Academic
    Press, Inc. 1985.

Kornai, János. “The Softness of the Budget Constraint.” Kyklos 39 (1986): 3–30.

Kornai, János, Eric Maskin, and Gerard Roland, “Understanding the Soft Budget Constraint,” Journal of
    Economic Literature XLI(4) (2003): 1095-1136.

Laffont, Jean-Jacques, and Jean Tirole. "Chapter 17 " In A Theory of Incentives in Procurement and
     Regulation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1993, 637-659.

Lakdawalla, Darius, and Tomas Philipson. "Nonprofit Production and Competition." National Bureau of
    Economic Research Working Paper 6377, 1998.

Lau, Joseph, John PA Ioannidis, Christopher H Schmid. “Summing up evidence: one answer is not
     always enough.” Lancet. 351 (1998), 123-127.

Malani, Anup, Tomas Philipson, and Guy David. "Theories of Firm Behavior in the Nonprofit Sector: A
    Synthesis and Empirical Evaluation." In The Governance of Not-for-Profit Organizations. Edited by
    Edward L. Glaeser ed. NBER Conference Report series. Chicago and London: University of
    Chicago Press, 2003, 181-215.

McClellan, Mark, and Douglas Staiger. "Comparing Hospital Quality at for-Profit and Not-for-Profit
   Hospitals." In The Changing Hospital Industry: Comparing Not-for-Profit and for-Profit
   Institutions. Edited by David M. Cutler ed. NBER Conference Report series. Chicago and London:
   University of Chicago Press, 2000, 93-112.

Needleman, Jack. "The Role of Nonprofits in Health Care." Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law
    26, no. 5 (2001): 1113-1130.

Newhouse, Joseph P. "Toward a Theory of Nonprofit Institutions: An Economic Model of a Hospital."
   American Economic Review 60, (1970): 64-74.


                                                                                                       35
Pauly, Mark V., and Michael Redisch. "The Not-for-Profit Hospital as a Physicians' Cooperative."
     American Economic Review 63, no. 1 (1973): 87-99.

Rosenthal, R. Meta-Analytic Procedures for Social Research. Revised Edition. Revised Edition ed.
    Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications, 1991.

Rosenthal, R. and D. Rubin. A simple, general purpose display of magnitude of experimental
    effect. Journal of Educational Psychology, 74 (1982), 166-169.

Sloan, Frank A. "Hospital Ownership and Cost and Quality of Care: Is there a Dime's Worth of
     Difference?" Journal of Health Economics 20, no. 1 (2001): 1-21.

Sloan, Frank A. "Not-for-Profit Ownership and Hospital Behavior." Handbook of Health Economics. 1B,
     (2000): 1141-1174.

Stanley, T. D. "Wheat from Chaff: Meta-Analysis as Quantitative Literature Review." Journal of
     Economic Perspectives 15, no. 3 (2001): 131-150.

Stanley, T. D., and Stephen B. Jarrell. "Gender Wage Discrimination Bias? A Meta-Regression Analysis."
     Journal of Human Resources 33, no. 4 (1998): 947-973.

Vickers, John, and George Yarrow. Privatization: An Economic Analysis. Cambridge and London: MIT
    Press, 1988.

Weisbrod, Burton A. The Nonprofit Economy. and London: Harvard University Press, 1988.




                                                                                                   36
                         Appendix. Technical Details on the Effect Sizes

       The precision of the effect size. In order to answer the second question, how precise is

the effect size, we need to compute the confidence interval around the effect size. The adjusted

effect size, Zr, is distributed normally, with variance that is proportional to the inverse of sample

size. Specifically,

                          1
       variance(Zr) =        .
                         n−3

Then for each study, we can compute the 95% confidence interval around the adjusted effect size

as follows:

                        1
        Z r ± 1.96 *       .
                       n−3




                                                                                                   37
                     Figure 1. US Community Hospital Beds (in thousands), total and by ownership, 1928-2000

  1200




  1000




   800


                                                                                                                                                          Total
                                                                                                                                                          Not-for-profit
   600
                                                                                                                                                          For-profit
                                                                                                                                                          Government


   400




   200




     0
     28

           35

                 46

                       50

                             55

                                   60

                                         62

                                               64

                                                     66

                                                           68

                                                                 70

                                                                       72

                                                                             74

                                                                                   76

                                                                                         80

                                                                                               82

                                                                                                     84

                                                                                                           86

                                                                                                                 88

                                                                                                                       90

                                                                                                                             92

                                                                                                                                   94

                                                                                                                                         96

                                                                                                                                               98

                                                                                                                                                     00
   19

          19

                19

                      19

                            19

                                  19

                                        19

                                              19

                                                    19

                                                          19

                                                                19

                                                                      19

                                                                            19

                                                                                  19

                                                                                        19

                                                                                              19

                                                                                                    19

                                                                                                          19

                                                                                                                19

                                                                                                                      19

                                                                                                                            19

                                                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                                                        19

                                                                                                                                              19

                                                                                                                                                    20
Source: Eggleston (2005), based on Rorem (1930); Hayes (1954); American Hospital Association Hospital Statistics (various years).




                                                                                                                                                                           38
Figure 2. Flowchart of Literature Search Results
 Potentially relevant studies from 1990 to 2004 that were identified and screened for retrieval
 through Medline, Econlit, Proquest, ABI, and through contacting all corresponding authors of
 initially included studies (n=1434)



                       Defining population

                                                         Non-hospital studies (n=529)
                  Hospital studies (n=905)

                                                         Non-US hospital studies (n=83)
                  US hospital studies (n=822)
                                                         Non-acute general short stay hospital studies (n=36)
             Acute general short stay hospital studies
                            (n=786)


                         Intervention criteria

                                                         Not ownership comparison studies (n=385)
                  Ownership comparison studies (n=401)


                         Study design criteria

                                                         Non-empirical studies and case studies (n=61)
                   Empirical studies (n=340)



                           Outcome criteria

                                                         Outcome outside the scope of the study (n=171)
              Studies within the outcome scope (n=169)
                                                         Other exclusions: duplicates (e.g. dissertation and published
                                                         paper); sample size below 50 hospitals; did not report
                                                         necessary statistics and author unable to supply them; etc.
                                                         (n=28)

          141 empirical studies fit the selection criteria.




                                                                                                          39
                      Figure 3. Summary of Effect Sizes For Hospital Cost
                3A. Comparison between Not-For-Profit and For-Profit Hospitals

                                                                     Effect size
       Study                                                         (95% CI)
       method_type==1
        gautam1996                                                   0.11 ( 0.04, 0.18)
        shukla1997                                                   0.27 ( 0.05, 0.49)
        wang2001                                                     0.32 ( 0.10, 0.54)

       method_type==2
        campbell1990                                                 -0.23 (-0.38,-0.08)
        goes1995                                                     -0.06 (-0.10,-0.02)
        fournier1997                                                 -0.03 (-0.08, 0.02)
        connor1998                                                   -0.01 (-0.03, 0.01)
        becker2002                                                    0.04 ( 0.01, 0.06)
        clement1997                                                   0.06 ( 0.02, 0.09)
        lawrence1990                                                  0.12 ( 0.03, 0.20)

       method_type==3
        shen2003b                                                    -0.06 (-0.08,-0.04)
        wilcox-gok2002                                               -0.05 (-0.10, 0.00)
        carey2000                                                    -0.04 (-0.05,-0.02)
        carey1997                                                     0.00 (-0.02, 0.03)
        mark1999                                                      0.02 ( 0.01, 0.03)
        zeckhauser1995                                                0.05 (-0.00, 0.10)
        bazzoli2000                                                   0.09 ( 0.03, 0.15)
        potter2001                                                    0.11 ( 0.10, 0.13)



                                                                          FP has higher cost
FP has lower cost        -.5   -.25         0         .25      .5
                                        Effect size


               3B. Comparison between Not-For-Profit and Government Hospitals
                                                                     Effect size
     Study                                                           (95% CI)
     method_type==1
      gautam1996                                                     -0.06 (-0.13, 0.01)

     method_type==2
      goes1995                                                       -0.05 (-0.09,-0.01)
      becker2002                                                     -0.04 (-0.07,-0.01)
      hogan1993                                                      -0.02 (-0.10, 0.06)
      campbell1990                                                    0.02 (-0.13, 0.17)
      clement1997                                                     0.08 ( 0.04, 0.12)

     method_type==3
      bazzoli2000                                                    -0.10 (-0.14,-0.05)
      menke1997                                                      -0.06 (-0.10,-0.02)
      shen2003b                                                       0.01 (-0.01, 0.03)
      carey1997                                                       0.01 (-0.01, 0.04)
      potter2001                                                      0.04 ( 0.02, 0.05)




                         -.5   -.25         0          .25          .5
                                        Effect size
 GOV has lower cost                                                      GOV has higher cost




                                                                                           40
              Figure 4. Summary of Effect Sizes For Hospital Revenue
          4A. Comparison between Not-For-Profit and For-Profit Hospitals
                                                                   Effect size
Study                                                              (95% CI)
method_type==1
 molinari1993                                                          0.22 ( 0.07, 0.37)
 wang2001                                                              0.24 ( 0.02, 0.46)
 shukla1997                                                            0.28 ( 0.06, 0.50)

method_type==2
 connor1998                                                            0.03 ( 0.01, 0.05)
 clement1997                                                           0.07 ( 0.03, 0.11)
 gapenski1993                                                          0.08 (-0.07, 0.23)
 younis2001                                                            0.12 ( 0.10, 0.14)

method_type==3
 shen2003b                                                         -0.02 (-0.04, 0.00)
 bazzoli2000                                                        0.00 (-0.05, 0.06)
 mark1999                                                           0.02 ( 0.01, 0.03)
 wilcox-gok2002                                                     0.04 (-0.01, 0.09)




              -.5        -.25         0              .25          .5
         FP has lower revenue     Effect sizeFP   has higher revenue


         4B. Comparison between Not-For-Profit and Government Hospitals


                                                                   Effect size
Study                                                              (95% CI)

method_type==1
molinari1993                                                           0.08 (-0.07, 0.22)


method_type==2
clement1997                                                            0.01 (-0.03, 0.05)


method_type==3
bazzoli2000                                                        -0.01 (-0.05, 0.03)
shen2003b                                                              0.03 ( 0.01, 0.05)




             -.5         -.25        0          .25           .5
                                 Effect size
        GOV has lower revenue              GOV has higher revenue


                                                                                            41
               Figure 5. Summary of Effect Sizes For Profit Margins
          5A. Comparison between Not-For-Profit and For-Profit Hospitals


                                                                     Effect size
 Study                                                               (95% CI)
 method_type==1
  molinari1993                                                        0.20 ( 0.05, 0.34)
  shukla1997                                                          0.22 ( 0.00, 0.44)
  wang2001                                                            0.26 ( 0.04, 0.48)

 method_type==2
  gapenski1993                                                       -0.09 (-0.24, 0.06)
  goes1995                                                           -0.03 (-0.07, 0.01)
  picone2002                                                          0.02 ( 0.02, 0.03)
  clement1997                                                         0.04 ( 0.00, 0.08)
  connor1998                                                          0.06 ( 0.03, 0.08)
  thorpe2001                                                          0.28 ( 0.25, 0.32)

 method_type==3
  bazzoli2000                                                         0.01 (-0.05, 0.07)
  mark1999                                                            0.02 ( 0.01, 0.03)
  wilcox-gok2002                                                      0.02 (-0.02, 0.07)
  shen2003b                                                           0.02 ( 0.00, 0.04)
  zeckhauser1995                                                      0.04 (-0.01, 0.10)




                   -.5     -.25         0              .25          .5
           FP earns lower profit    Effect size   FP earns higher profit


         5B. Comparison between Not-For-Profit and Government Hospitals

                                                                     Effect size
Study                                                                (95% CI)

method_type==1
 molinari1993                                                        -0.04 (-0.18, 0.11)


method_type==2
 thorpe2001                                                          -0.13 (-0.17,-0.10)
 goes1995                                                            -0.03 (-0.07, 0.01)
 clement1997                                                         -0.02 (-0.06, 0.02)


method_type==3
 bazzoli2000                                                             0.00 (-0.04, 0.04)
 shen2003b                                                               0.06 ( 0.03, 0.08)




                  -.5     -.25         0               .25          .5
         GOV earns lower profit    Effect size       GOV earns higher profit



                                                                                              42
                          Figure 6. Summary of Effect Sizes For Efficiency
                   6A. Comparison between Not-For-Profit and For-Profit Hospitals


                                                                     Effect size
          Study                                                      (95% CI)
          national==0
           li2001                                                        0.09 (-0.00, 0.18)
           chirikos2000                                                  0.11 ( 0.07, 0.15)
           chirikos1994                                                  0.12 (-0.03, 0.26)
           ferrier1996                                                   0.20 ( 0.09, 0.30)
           sari2003                                                      0.30 ( 0.24, 0.37)

          national==1
           rosko1999                                                 -0.17 (-0.20,-0.14)
           brown2003                                                 -0.12 (-0.16,-0.07)
           rosko2001b                                                -0.11 (-0.13,-0.09)
           folland2001                                               -0.07 (-0.10,-0.04)
           koop1997                                                  -0.06 (-0.11,-0.02)
           zuckerman1994                                             -0.06 (-0.11,-0.01)
           ozcan1992                                                 -0.05 (-0.09,-0.01)
           burgess1996                                                0.08 ( 0.04, 0.12)
           rosko2001a                                                 0.12 ( 0.08, 0.17)




 FP is less efficient      -.5    -.25         0         .25        .5   FP is more efficient
                                           Effect size



                  6B. Comparison between Not-For-Profit and Government Hospitals
                                                                     Effect size
         Study                                                       (95% CI)
         national==0
           vitaliano1996                                             -0.06 (-0.20, 0.07)
           ferrier1996                                               -0.05 (-0.15, 0.06)
           sari2003                                                      0.06 (-0.01, 0.12)
           chirikos2000                                                  0.17 ( 0.13, 0.21)


         national==1
           brown2003                                                 -0.18 (-0.23,-0.14)
           zuckerman1994                                             -0.06 (-0.11,-0.01)
           koop1997                                                      0.01 (-0.04, 0.05)
           burgess1996                                                   0.04 (-0.00, 0.08)
           hogan1993                                                     0.05 (-0.03, 0.13)
           ozcan1992                                                     0.05 ( 0.02, 0.09)




GOV is less efficient      -.5    -.25        0          .25        .5 GOV is more efficient
                                          Effect size




                                                                                                43
         Figure 7. Relationship Between T-Stat and Degrees of Freedom
15
10
5
2
0




     0               50                   100               150         200
                          square root of degrees of freedom

                  absolute value of t-stat            Fitted values




                                                                              44
                                                    Table 1. Summary of Included Studies¥
                                                                                                                                     Type of
                                           Profit                                                                      Total         ownership
article ID          Cost       Revenue     Margin     Efficiency Covered region Covered years                          sample size   studied
bazzoli2000             X           X         X                     US                  1995                                  1112   N,F,G
becker2002              X                                           US                  1994                                  4705   N,F,G
brown2003                                                  X        MSA                 1992-1996                             1907   N,F,G
burgess1996                                                X        US                  1988                                  2112   N,F,G
campbell1990            X                                           FL                  1986                                   176   N,F,G
carey1997               X                                           US                  1987-1991                             8665   N,F,G
carey2000               X                                           US                  1987-1992                            16752   N,F
chirikos1994                                               X        FL                  1989                                   189   N,F
chirikos2000                                               X        FL                  1982-1993                             2232   N,F,G
clement1997             X           X           X                   MSA                 1995                                  2462   N,F,G
connor1998              X           X           X                   US                  1994                                  3617   N,F
ferrier1996                                                X        AK, LA, OK, TX 1989                                        360   N,F,G
folland2001                                                X        US                  1985                                  2007   N,F
fournier1997            X                                           FL                  1984-1986                              534   N,F,G
gapenski1993                        X           X                   FL                  1989                                   169   N,F
gautam1996              X                                           MSA                 1990-1992                              825   N,F,G
goes1995                X                       X                   CA                  1981-1990                             3232   N,F,G
hogan1993               X                                  X        US                  1983-1984                              600   NF,G
koop1997                                                   X        US                  1987-1991                             1910   N,F,G
lawrence1990            X                                           US                  1986                                   499   N,F
li2001                                                     X        WA                  1988-1993                              450   N,F
mark1999                X           X           X                   US                  1987-1995                            30459   N,F*
menke1997               X                                           US                  1995                                  2200   N,G
molinari1993                        X           X                   CA                  1985                                   186   N,F
ozcan1992                                                  X        MSA                 1987                                  3000   N,F,G
picone2002                                      X                   US                  1985-1995                            40095   N,F,G*
potter2001              X                                           US                  1980, 1985, 1990, 1994               19453   N,F,G
rosko1999                                                  X        US                  1994                                  3262   N,F
rosko2001a                                                 X        MSA                 1997                                  1966   N,F
rosko2001b                                                 X        MSA                 1990-1996                            10388   N,F
sari2003                                                   X        FL                  1990-1997                              876   N,F,G
shen2003b               X           X           X                   US                  1987-1998                             8915   N,F,G*
shukla1997              X           X           X                   VA                  1993                                    83   N,F
thorpe2001                                      X                   MSA                 1991-1997                            21000   N,F,G
vitaliano1996                                              X        NY                  1991                                   219   N,G
wang2001                X           X           X                   VA                  1993                                    83   N,F
wilcox-gok2002          X           X           X                   FL                  1984-1987                             1666   N,F
younis2001                          X                               US                  1991, 1995                            8019   N,F
zeckhauser1995          X                       X                   CA, FL              1982, 1984, 1986, 1988, 1990         11075   N,F
zuckerman1994                                              X        US                  1987                                  1600   N,F,G
Total                   20          11          14         16
¥
  The following additional studies are included in the sensitivity analysis: Ettner et al. (2001), Huang et al. (2002), Kessler and McClellan
(2002), Sloan et al. (1999), and Bazzoli et al (2004). The complete bibliography information is listed in the reference section.
MSA=Metropolitan Statistical Areas (Urban)
* Studies of ownership conversions
                   Table 2. Share of Studies With A Given Study Feature

Study Features                                         Cost    Revenue    Profit   Efficiency
                         Not-For-Profit and For-Profit Comparison Studies
Methodology classification
       Type I                                            17%       27%       21%          21%
       Type II                                           39%       36%       43%          57%
       Type III                                          44%       36%       36%          21%
Emphasis on ownership
       Ownership is the research focus                   50%       55%       50%          64%
       Ownership included as a control variable          50%       45%       50%          36%
Functional form
       Dependent variable is not log transformed         39%       73%
       Dependent variable is log transformed             61%       27%
Efficiency study model assumption
       Assumes a stochastic frontier model                                                68%
       Assumes a deterministic model (DEA)                                                32%
Covered region
       National or other state sample                    61%       55%       50%          79%
       Virginia                                          11%       18%       14%           0%
       California                                         8%        9%       18%           0%
       Florida                                           19%       18%       18%          21%
Data type
       Administrative data only                          33%       55%       36%          21%
       Survey data only                                  44%       45%       57%          50%
       Use both administrative and survey data           22%        0%         7%         29%
       Number of studies                                    18       11         14          14
                       Not-For-Profit and Government Comparison Studies
Methodology classification
       Type I                                             9%       25%       17%          10%
       Type II                                           45%       25%       50%          80%
       Type III                                          45%       50%       33%          10%
Emphasis on ownership
       Ownership is the research focus                   18%       25%       17%          50%
       Ownership included as a control variable          82%       75%       83%          50%
Functional form
       Dependent variable is not log transformed         36%       50%
       Dependent variable is log transformed             55%       50%
Efficiency study model assumption
       Assumes a stochastic frontier model                                                55%
       Assumes a deterministic model (DEA)                                                45%
Covered region
       National or other state sample                    82%       75%       67%          80%
       Virginia                                           0%        0%         0%          0%
       California                                         9%       25%       33%           0%
       Florida                                            9%        0%         0%         20%
Data type
       Administrative data only                          18%       25%       17%          20%
       Survey data only                                  36%       75%       67%          30%
       Use both administrative and survey data           45%        0%       17%          50%
       Number of studies                                    11        4          6          10
                     Table 3. Random-Effects Meta Regression: Comparison Between Not-For-Profit and For-Profit Hospitals
                                                                                Dependent Variable is the Standardized Effect Size
Study Features                                                        Cost                     Revenue             Profit Margin            Efficiency
                                                             Coef.        SE           Coef.        SE          Coef.       SE          Coef.       SE
Methodology classification
     Type I (reference group)                                      0.21 **      0.06        0.28   **    0.05        0.19 **     0.08       0.00         0.06
     Type II                                                      -0.20 **      0.07       -0.18   **    0.05       -0.16 **     0.08      -0.04         0.07
     Type III                                                     -0.17 **      0.06       -0.26   **    0.06       -0.16 *      0.08      -0.04         0.09
     Ownership included as a control variable                     -0.03         0.03       -0.05   *     0.03        0.04        0.05       0.15 **      0.06
Proportion of variation due to heterogeneity (I-square)                         0.93                     0.64                    0.91                    0.96
Functional form
     Dependent variable is not log transformed (ref)               0.09 **      0.02        0.09 **      0.03
     Dependent variable is log transformed                        -0.10 **      0.03       -0.07         0.05
Proportion of variation due to heterogeneity (I-square)                         0.88                     0.91
Mode assumption
     Assumes a stochastic frontier model (reference)                                                                                       -0.01         0.04
     Assumes a purely deterministic model                                                                                                   0.12 *       0.06
Proportion of variation due to heterogeneity (I-square)                                                                                                  0.96
Covered region
      National or other states (reference group)                   0.04 **      0.02         0.04 *      0.02         0.06 **     0.03       0.00        0.03
      Virginia                                                     0.26 **      0.09         0.23 **     0.07         0.18 *      0.10
      California                                                  -0.03         0.04         0.18 *      0.09         0.00        0.05
      Florida                                                     -0.07 *       0.04         0.01        0.05        -0.07        0.05       0.16 **     0.07
Proportion of variation due to heterogeneity (I-square)                         0.93                     0.92                     0.93                   0.96
Data type
      Use administrative data only (reference group)               0.00         0.03         0.10 **     0.03         0.04        0.02       0.11        0.07
      Use survey data only                                         0.10 **      0.04                                  0.24 **     0.04      -0.08        0.10
      Use both administrative and survey data                      0.01         0.04        -0.08 *      0.04        -0.01        0.03      -0.10        0.08
Proportion of variation due to heterogeneity (I-square)                         0.86                     0.76                     0.50                   0.97
      Number of observations                                                      33                       13                       20                     18
* p<0.10 ** p<0.05
Note:
1.Each panel represents a separate regression; a positive coefficient indicates that the given study feature predicts a higher level of the dependent
variable for for-profits than not-for-profit hospitals.
       Table 4. Random-Effects Meta Regression: Comparison Between Not-For-Profit and Government Hospitals
                                                                     Dependent Variable is the Standardized Effect Size
Study Features                                                        Cost                Profit Margin            Efficiency
                                                             Coef.        SE           Coef.       SE          Coef.       SE
Methodology classification
     Type I (reference group)                                     -0.01         0.06        0.02        0.15      -0.10         0.11
     Type II                                                       0.06         0.06       -0.03        0.12       0.10         0.10
     Type III                                                      0.04         0.06        0.04        0.13       0.10         0.15
     Ownership included as a control variable                     -0.05 *       0.02       -0.05        0.10       0.05         0.07
Proportion of variation due to heterogeneity (I-square)                         0.76                    0.92                    0.95
Functional form
     Dependent variable is not log transformed (ref)               0.00         0.02        0.00        0.02
     Dependent variable is log transformed                        -0.01         0.02        0.02        0.02
Proportion of variation due to heterogeneity (I-square)                         0.81                    0.02
Mode assumption
     Assumes a stochastic frontier model (reference)                                                               0.00         0.04
     Assumes a purely deterministic model                                                                          0.04         0.06
Proportion of variation due to heterogeneity (I-square)                                                                         0.94
Covered region
      National or other states (reference group)                   0.00         0.01        -0.02       0.04      -0.02         0.03
      California                                                  -0.05         0.05        -0.02       0.08
      Florida                                                      0.02         0.09                               0.15 **      0.05
Proportion of variation due to heterogeneity (I-square)                         0.80                    0.95                    0.90
Data type
      Use administrative data only (reference group)               0.07         0.04        -0.02       0.07       0.11 *       0.06
      Use survey data only                                        -0.07         0.04        -0.11       0.10      -0.14 *       0.07
      Use both administrative and survey data                     -0.08 *       0.04         0.02       0.08      -0.09         0.07
Proportion of variation due to heterogeneity (I-square)                         0.79                    0.88                    0.91
      Number of observations                                                      20                        7                     13
* p<0.10 ** p<0.05
Note:
1.Each panel represents a separate regression; a positive coefficient indicates that the given study feature predicts a higher level
of the dependent variable for government than not-for-profit hospitals.
Appendix A1. Correlation Matrix of Study Features For Cost Studies
Studies comparing NFP and FP
                                                  1         2          3      4       5       6       7       8       9      10      11      12     13
1. Method type I                               1.00
2. Method type II                             -0.36      1.00
3. Method type III                            -0.40     -0.71       1.00
4. Ownership as control                        0.15      0.34      -0.45    1.00
5. Functional form is not log transformed      0.56      0.06      -0.48    0.11    1.00
6. Functional form is log transformed         -0.56     -0.06       0.48   -0.11   -1.00    1.00
7. National sample                            -0.25     -0.06       0.25    0.11   -0.06    0.06    1.00
8. California sample                           0.79     -0.28      -0.32    0.00    0.44   -0.44   -0.44    1.00
9. Virginia sample                            -0.13      0.17      -0.07    0.10    0.17   -0.17   -0.38   -0.11    1.00
10. Florida sample                            -0.22      0.18      -0.02   -0.21   -0.39    0.39   -0.62   -0.17   -0.15    1.00
11. Administrative data only                   0.32      0.16      -0.40    0.00   -0.08    0.08   -0.64    0.50   -0.21    0.55    1.00
12. Administrave and survey data              -0.40     -0.25       0.55    0.00   -0.48    0.48    0.25   -0.32    0.34   -0.30   -0.63    1.00
13. Survey data only                           0.12      0.12      -0.21    0.00    0.67   -0.67    0.43   -0.19   -0.16   -0.26   -0.38   -0.48   1.00

Studies comparing NFP and GOV                     1         2         3       4       5       6       7       8       9      10      11      12
1. Method type I                               1.00
2. Method type II                             -0.29      1.00
3. Method type III                            -0.29     -0.83       1.00
4. Ownership as control                        0.15      0.43      -0.52    1.00
5. Functional form is not log transformed      0.42      0.07      -0.31   -0.13    1.00
6. Functional form is log transformed         -0.35     -0.27       0.47    0.04   -0.83    1.00
7. National sample                             0.15     -0.52       0.43   -0.22   -0.13    0.04    1.00
8. Virginia sample                            -0.10      0.35      -0.29    0.15    0.42   -0.35   -0.67    1.00
9. Florida sample                             -0.10      0.35      -0.29    0.15   -0.24    0.29   -0.67   -0.10    1.00
10. Administrative data only                  -0.15      0.52      -0.43    0.22   -0.36    0.43   -0.39   -0.15    0.67    1.00
11. Administrave and survey data              -0.24     -0.31       0.45   -0.13   -0.18    0.31   -0.13    0.42   -0.24   -0.36    1.00
12. Survey data only                           0.35     -0.10      -0.10   -0.04    0.45   -0.63    0.43   -0.29   -0.29   -0.43   -0.69   1.00
Appendix A2. Correlation Matrix of Study Features For Revenue Studies
Studies comparing NFP and FP
                                                 1          2        3      4       5       6       7       8       9      10      11      12     13
1. Method type I                              1.00
2. Method type II                            -0.46       1.00
3. Method type III                           -0.46      -0.57     1.00
4. Ownership as control                       0.26       0.07    -0.31    1.00
5. Functional form is not log transformed     0.24      -0.52     0.30   -0.23    1.00
6. Functional form is log transformed        -0.38       0.39    -0.04    0.26   -0.42    1.00
7. Outcome is return to assets                0.11       0.14    -0.24   -0.02   -0.57   -0.51    1.00
8. National sample                           -0.67       0.31     0.31    0.10   -0.36    0.56   -0.17    1.00
9. California sample                          0.77      -0.36    -0.36    0.04    0.44   -0.29   -0.15   -0.52    1.00
10. Virginia sample                           0.52      -0.24    -0.24    0.35   -0.22   -0.19    0.38   -0.35   -0.15    1.00
11. Florida sample                           -0.29       0.13     0.13   -0.43    0.18   -0.29    0.09   -0.52   -0.22   -0.15    1.00
12. Administrative data only                  0.15       0.31    -0.45   -0.27    0.23   -0.26    0.02   -0.47    0.43   -0.35    0.43    1.00
13. Administrave and survey data             -0.15      -0.31     0.45    0.27   -0.23    0.26   -0.02    0.47   -0.43    0.35   -0.43   -1.00   1.00
Studies comparing NFP and GOV
                                                 1          2        3      4       5       6       7       8       9
1. Method type I                              1.00
2. Method type II                            -0.33       1.00
3. Method type III                           -0.58      -0.58     1.00
4. Ownership as control                       0.33       0.33    -0.58    1.00
5. Functional form is log transformed        -0.58       0.58     0.00   -0.58    1.00
6. Outcome is return to assets                0.58      -0.58     0.00    0.58   -1.00    1.00
7. National sample                           -1.00       0.33     0.58   -0.33    0.58   -0.58    1.00
8. Virginia sample                            1.00      -0.33    -0.58    0.33   -0.58    0.58   -1.00    1.00
9. Administrative data only                  -0.33       1.00    -0.58    0.33    0.58   -0.58    0.33   -0.33   1.00
Appendix A3. Correlation Matrix of Study Features For Profit Studies
Studies comparing NFP and FP
                                                  1          2          3             4           5          6      7       8       9      10     11
1. Method type I                               1.00
2. Method type II                             -0.45      1.00
3. Method type III                            -0.39     -0.65        1.00
4. Ownership as control                        0.17      0.29      -0.45            1.00
5. National sample                            -0.52      0.29        0.15           0.14       1.00
6. California sample                           0.78     -0.35      -0.30            0.00      -0.41       1.00
7. Virginia sample                             0.21     -0.03      -0.15            0.28      -0.47      -0.19    1.00
8. Florida sample                             -0.24     -0.03        0.24          -0.47      -0.47      -0.19   -0.22    1.00
9. Administrative data only                    0.34     -0.04      -0.24           -0.15      -0.45       0.55   -0.35    0.43    1.00
10. Administrave and survey data              -0.25     -0.13        0.34           0.00       0.29      -0.47    0.40   -0.35   -0.86    1.00
11. Survey data only                          -0.14      0.32      -0.21            0.28       0.28      -0.11   -0.13   -0.13   -0.21   -0.32   1.00

Note: Correlation matrix is omitted for studies comparing NFP and GOV hospitals, due to small sample size.
Appendix A4. Correlation Matrix of Study Features For Efficiency Studies
Studies comparing NFP and FP
                                                  1          2         3      4       5       6       7       8       9      10     11
1. Method type I                               1.00
2. Method type II                             -0.60      1.00
3. Method type III                            -0.27     -0.60       1.00
4. Ownership as control                       -0.03      0.34      -0.39    1.00
5. Functional form is SFR                     -0.39      0.02       0.36    0.03    1.00
6. Functional form is DEA                      0.39     -0.02      -0.36   -0.03   -1.00    1.00
7. National sample                            -0.15     -0.10       0.27   -0.34    0.20   -0.20    1.00
8. Florida sample                              0.15      0.10      -0.27    0.34   -0.20    0.20   -1.00    1.00
9. Administrative data only                    0.15     -0.25       0.15   -0.03   -0.20    0.20   -0.58    0.58    1.00
10. Administrave and survey data              -0.17      0.29      -0.17   -0.15    0.38   -0.38    0.17   -0.17   -0.52    1.00
11. Survey data only                           0.06     -0.09       0.06    0.19   -0.24    0.24    0.33   -0.33   -0.33   -0.63   1.00
Studies comparing NFP and GOV
                                                  1          2         3      4       5       6       7       8       9      10     11
1. Method type I                               1.00
2. Method type II                             -0.67      1.00
3. Method type III                            -0.11     -0.67       1.00
4. Ownership as control                        0.33      0.00      -0.33    1.00
5. Functional form is SFR                     -0.37      0.05       0.30   -0.10    1.00
6. Functional form is DEA                      0.37     -0.05      -0.30    0.10   -1.00    1.00
7. National sample                             0.17     -0.25       0.17   -0.50   -0.20    0.20    1.00
8. Florida sample                             -0.17      0.25      -0.17    0.50    0.20   -0.20   -1.00    1.00
9. Administrative data only                   -0.17      0.25      -0.17    0.00    0.20   -0.20   -0.38    0.38    1.00
10. Administrave and survey data              -0.22      0.33      -0.22   -0.22    0.15   -0.15   -0.22    0.22   -0.33    1.00
11. Survey data only                           0.33     -0.50       0.33    0.20   -0.30    0.30    0.50   -0.50   -0.50   -0.65   1.00
