                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          THE END OF LARGE CURRENT ACCOUNT
                          DEFICITS, 1970-2002: ARE THERE LESSONS
                                 FOR THE UNITED STATES?

                                           Sebastian Edwards

                                         Working Paper 11669
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11669


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2005




This is a revised version of a paper presented at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole
Conference, "The Greenspan Era," August 2005. I thank Ed Leamer for helpful discussions, and Roberto
Alvarez for his excellent assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Sebastian Edwards. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The End of Large Current Account Deficits, 1970-2002: Are There Lessons for the United
States?
Sebastian Edwards
NBER Working Paper No. 11669
September 2005
JEL No. F02, F43, O11

                                            ABSTRACT

The future of the U.S. current account     and thus of the U.S. dollar     depend on whether foreign
investors will continue to add U.S. assets to their investment portfolios. However, even under
optimistic scenarios, the U.S. current account deficit is likely to go through a significant reversal at
some point in time. This adjustment may be as large of 4% to 5% of GDP. In order to have an idea
of the possible consequences of this type of adjustment, I have analyzed the international evidence
on current account reversals using both non-parametric techniques as well as panel regressions. The
results from this empirical investigation indicate that major current account reversals have tended
to result in large declines in GDP growth. I also analyze the large U.S. current account adjustment
of 1987-1991.



Sebastian Edwards
UCLA Anderson Graduate School of Business
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C508
Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
sebastian.edwards@anderson.ucla.edu
                                                   1


    I.   Introduction
         When Alan Greenspan was appointed Chairman of the Federal Reserve in 1987,
the United States was running a current account deficit of 3.4% of GDP. This was
considered to be very large figure at the time. During the next three years the current
account deficit declined substantially, and by fourth quarter of 2004 it had shrunk to 1%
of GDP. In 1991, and partially due to foreign contributions to the financing of the Gulf
War, the United States posted a current account surplus of 0.7% of GDP. By the second
quarter of 1992 the current account was again in deficit. Since then the deficit has grown
steadily to its current level of approximately 6% of GDP.
         A number of analysts have become increasingly alarmed by this very large and
growing external imbalance. Some authors have argued that by relying on foreign central
banks’ purchases of government securities, the U.S. has become vulnerable to changes in
expectations and economic sentiments. If capital flowing into the U.S. were to stop
suddenly, it is argued, there would be a large depreciation of the dollar and, as a
consequence, higher inflationary pressures. This would force the Federal Reserve to act
decisively, hiking the Federal Funds rate significantly.1 This, the story goes, would result
in a recession in the U.S. and in a slowdown of the world economy.2 The belief that a
significant external adjustment and a large decline in the dollar are unavoidable is based
on reasoning along the following lines: At approximately 6% of GDP the U.S. current
account deficit is clearly unsustainable; thus, in the next few years the deficit has to be
cut approximately in half. In a recent paper, Mussa has said:


         “[T]here is probably a practical upper limit for the US net external liabilities at
         something less than 100 percent of US GDP and, accordingly...current account
         deficits of 5 percent or more of US GDP are not indefinitely sustainable.” (Mussa
         2004, p 114).


         From a policy and empirical points of view, an important question is whether
these developments – a significant real depreciation, higher interest rates and a sharp

1
  Obstfeld and Rogoff (2004, 2005).
2
  See, for example, Barry Eichengreen’s op-ed piece in the December 21, 2004 issue of the Financial
Times.
                                                      2


decline in GDP growth -- are indeed necessary outcomes of a current account reversal of
the type many analysts forecast for the U.S. during the next few years. In principle, the
real consequences of a current account reversal will depend on a number of factors,
including whether the reversal is abrupt or gradual, whether the country is large or small,
and whether the country is open to the rest of the world. According to standard theory,
gradual reductions in the current account deficit do not have to be costly. In addition,
current account adjustments in large and very open countries are expected to have
different consequences than in smaller and more closed economies.
         The purpose of this paper is to analyze the international evidence on current
account reversals during the period 1971-2001. Although the U.S. case is unique, an
analysis of the international experience will provide some light on the likely nature of a
future U.S. current account adjustment. In particular, this research will provide
information on whether a significant current account reversal would entail a decline in
growth and, thus, an increase in unemployment.3 Previous studies on the (real)
consequences of current account reversals have generated conflicting results: after
analyzing the evidence from a large number of countries, Milesi-Ferreti and Razin (2000)
concluded that major current account reversals have not been costly. According to them,
“reversals… are not systematically associated with a growth slowdown (p. 303).”
Frankel and Cavallo (2004), on the other hand, concluded that sudden stops of capital
inflows (a phenomenon closely related to reversals) have resulted in growth slowdown.4
In this paper I analyze several aspects of current account reversals, including:5
             •    The incidence of current account reversals in different regions and groups
                  of countries.
             •    The relationship between reversals and “sudden stops” of capital inflows.




3
   Parts of this paper draw partially on my previous research on the current account and external
adjustment. The results reported here however, differ from previous analyses in several respects, including
the data set, the definition of “reversal,” the emphasis on large and industrial countries and the statistical
techniques used.
4
  See also Croke, Kamin and Leduc (2005), Debelle and Galati (2005), Freund and Warnock (2005),
Adalet and Eichengreen (2005), and Edwards (2004, 2005).
5
  In Edwards (2004) I used a smaller data set to investigate reversals in emerging countries. In Edwards
(2005a) I included the case of industrial countries. However, I did not analyze whether the magnitude and
speed of the reversal affected the nature of the associated costs.
                                              3


           •   The relation between current account reversals and exchange rate
               depreciation.
           •   The relation between current account reversals and interest rates.
           •   The relation between current account reversals and inflation.
           •   The factors determining the probability of a country experiencing a current
               account reversal.
           •   The costs – in terms of growth slowdown – of current account reversals.


       In analyzing these issues I have relied on two complementary statistical
approaches: First, I use non-parametric tests to analyze the incidence and main
characteristics of current account reversals. And second, I use panel regression-based
analyses to estimate the probability of experiencing a current account reversal, and the
cost of such reversal in terms of (short-term) declines in GDP growth. Although the data
set covers all regions in the world, throughout most of the paper I emphasize the
experiences of large countries and industrial countries.
       The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In section II I provide some
background information on the U.S. current account. The analysis deals both with
historical trends, as well as with recent developments. I show that there are no modern
historical precedents of a large country, such as the United States, running persistent and
very large current account deficits. In Section III I use a cross-country data set to analyze
the international evidence on current account reversals. I use non-parametric tests to
analyze the behavior of interest rates, exchange rates, terms of trade, and economic
growth in the period following a current account reversal. I use two alternative
definitions of reversals, and I investigate whether the speed of the adjustment matters. In
Section IV I use panel regression techniques to investigate two important issues: (a) what
determines the probability that a country will experience a reversal; and (b) whether
countries that have experienced reversals have faced real costs in the form of a decline in
the rate of GDP growth. In this analysis I explicitly deal with potential endogeneity
problems by estimating an instrumental variables version of a treatment regression. In
Section V I discuss the U.S. current account adjustment of 1987-1991. Although this
episode does not qualify as a “reversal,” as defined in this paper, it is the closest the U.S.
                                                     4


has been to a major current account reduction in modern times. Finally, in Section VI I
present some concluding remarks. The paper also has a statistical appendix.


II.       The U.S. Current Account Imbalance: An Unprecedented Story
          In this section I provide some background information on the evolution of the
U.S. current account during the last thirty years. The analysis is divided in three parts:
First, I deal with long-term trends and I discuss briefly the relation between the current
account and the real exchange rate. Second, I focus on the more recent period, and I
discuss the evolution and funding of the current account and its components during the
last few years. Finally, I take a comparative perspective, and I compare the recent
evolution of the U.S. current account and net international investment position with that
of other countries. I show that no other large country in modern times has run a
persistently large current account deficit of a magnitude (measured as percentage of
GDP) similar to that posted by the U.S. This lack of other historical cases makes the
analysis of the current U.S. situation particularly interesting and difficult.
II.1 A Long Run Perspective
          In Figure 1 I present quarterly data for the U.S. current account balance as
percentage of GDP, for the period 1973-2004.6 I also include data on the evolution of the
Federal Reserve’s trade-weighted index of the U.S. dollar real exchange rate (an increase
in the RER index represents a real exchange rate appreciation).7 Several interesting
features emerge from this figure:
              •    First, it shows that deficits have become increasingly large since 1992.
              •    Second, Figure 1 shows that for the first decade of floating exchange rates
                   (1973-1982), the US ran, on average, a small current account surplus of
                   0.04% of GDP. In contrast, for the period 1983-2004 the mean current
                   account balance has been a deficit of 2.4% of GDP.
              •    Figure 1 also shows that during the period under consideration the RER
                   index experienced significant gyrations.



6
    Parts of this section draw on Edwards (2005a).
7
    This is the Federal Reserve RER index.
                                                    5


             •   Finally, Figure 1 shows a pattern of negative correlation between the
                 trade-weighted real value of the dollar and the current account balance.
                 Periods of strong dollar have tended to coincide with periods of (larger)
                 current account deficits. Although the relation is not one-to-one, the
                 degree of synchronicity between the two variables is quite high: the
                 contemporaneous coefficient of correlation between the (log of the) RER
                 index and the current account balance is –0.53; the highest correlation of
                 coefficient is obtained when the log of the RER is lagged three quarters (-
                 0.60).
        In Figure 2 I disaggregate the data on the current account into four categories: (a)
the balance of trade of goods and services as a percentage of GDP; (b) the balance of
trade in (non financial) services as a percentage of GDP; (c) the income account, also as a
percentage of GDP; and (d) the transfers account as a percentage of GDP. As may be
seen in Panel A, large and persistent trade deficits preceded in time the era of large
current account deficits. Already in the late 1970s, the trade account was negative, and
since mid 1976 it has had only one surplus quarter (1992Q2).8 Panel B shows that since
1996 the surplus in (non-financial) services has declined steadily; in 2004 it was only 0.3
percent of GDP. As Panel C shows, the income account has been positive throughout
the 1973-2004 period. To some extent, this is surprising, since for quite some years now
the U.S. international investment position has been negative (that is, the U.S. has been a
net debtor). The reason for the positive income account is that the return on U.S. assets
held by foreigners has systematically been lower than the return on foreign assets in
hands of U.S. nationals. Finally, Panel D shows that, with the exception of one quarter,
the transfers account has been negative since 1973; during the last few years it has been
stable at approximately 0.7% of GDP.
II.2 Recent Imbalances
        In Table 1 I present data on the current account as a percentage of GDP, and its
financing for the period 1990-2004. As may be seen, during the last few years the nature
of external financing has changed significantly. Since 2002 net FDI flows have been


8
  Mann (2004) shows that most of the U.S. trade deficit is explained by a deficit in automobiles and
consumer goods.
                                                    6


negative; this contrasts with the 1997-2001 period when FDI flow contributed in an
important way to deficit financing. Also, after four years on net positive equity flows
(1998-2002), these became negative in 2003-04. As the figures in Table 1 show, during
2003 and 2004 the U.S. current account deficit was fully financed through net fixed
income flows, and in particular through official foreign purchases of government
securities.9
        In Figure 3 I present the evolution of the U.S. NIIP as percentage of GDP. As
may be seen, this has become increasingly negative: in 2004 U.S. net international
liabilities reached 29 percent of GDP. An important feature of the NIIP is that gross U.S.
international assets and gross U.S. international liabilities are held in different currencies.
While more than 70% of gross foreign assets held by U.S. nationals are denominated in
foreign currency, approximately 95% of gross U.S. liabilities in hands of foreigners are
denominated in U.S. dollars. This means that net liabilities as a percentage of GDP are
subject to “valuation effects” stemming from changes in the value of the dollar. Dollar
depreciation reduces the value of net liabilities; a dollar appreciation, on the other hand,
increases the dollar value of U.S. net liabilities. Because of this valuation effect, the
deterioration of the U.S. NIIP during 2002-2004 was significantly smaller than the
accumulated current account deficit during those two years; see Table 2 for details.
        An important policy question refers to the “reasonable” long run equilibrium
value of the ratio of U.S. net international liabilities to GDP; the higher this ratio, the
higher will be the “sustainable” current account deficit. According to some authors, the
current ratio of almost 30% of GDP is excessive, while others believe that a NIIP to GDP
ratio of up to 50% would be reasonable.10
        From an accounting point of view, the current account is the difference between
savings and investment. A number of authors have argued that a worsening of a current
account balance that stems from an increase in investment is very different from one that
results from a decline in national savings. Some have gone as far as arguing that very
large deficits in the current account “don’t matter,” as long as they are the result of higher
(private sector) investment (Corden, 1994). Figure 4 shows that the recent deterioration

9
  See, for example, Martin Wolf’s October 1st, 2003 article in the Financial Times, “Funding America’s
recovery is a very dangerous game,” (page 15).
10
    See Obstfeld and Rogoff (2004) and Mussa (2004).
                                                    7


of the U.S. current account has largely been the result of a decline in national savings,
and in particular of public and household savings. Some analysts have argued that the
recent decline in U.S. savings has been, at least partially, the result of the Fed’s policy of
(very) low interest rates. According to this view, low interest rates have helped fuel very
rapid increases in housing prices and a concomitant process of “mortgage extraction.”
This has resulted in a decline in household savings to historically low levels. This, plus
the decline in government savings, is behind the increase in the current account deficit.11
        A simple implication of this trend – and one that is emphasized by most authors –
is that an improvement in the U.S. current account situation will not only imply a RER
adjustment; it will also require an increase in the national savings ratio, and in particular
in household savings. Symmetrically, a correction of current global imbalances will also
require a decline in Europe’s and Japan’s savings rates and/or an increase in their
investment rates.12
II.3 The U.S. Current Account Deficit in International Perspective
        In Table 3 I present data on the distribution of current account balances in the
world economy, as well as in six groups of nations – Industrial, Latin America, Asia,
Middle East, Africa and Eastern Europe – for the period 1970-2001. As may be seen, at
almost 6% of GDP the U.S. deficit is very large from a historical and comparative
perspective. It is in the top decile of deficits distribution for all industrial countries in the
first thirty years of floating. As the data in Table 3 suggest the U.S. looks more like a
Latin American or Asian country, than like an industrial nation.
        Since 1970 the U.S. has been the only large industrial country that has run current
account deficits in excess of 5%. This reflects the unique position that the U.S. has in the
international financial system, where its assets have been in high demand, allowing it to
run high and persistent deficits. On the other hand, this fact also suggests that the U.S. is
moving into uncharted waters. As Obstfeld and Rogoff (2004, 2005), among others, have
pointed out, if the deficit continues at its current level, in twenty five years the U.S. net
international liabilities will surpass the levels observed by any country in modern times.



11
   Stephen Roach from Morgan Stanley has been a forceful supporter of this view.
12
   That is, the global “savings glut” identified by Bernanke (2005) would have to be reversed. See also the
Chairman’s Greenspan’s Speech to the International Monetary Conference in Beijing, June 6, 2005.
                                                      8


         During the last 30 years only small industrial countries have had current account
deficits in excess of 5% of GDP: Australia, Austria, Denmark, Finland, Greece, Iceland,
Ireland, Malta, New Zealand, Norway and Portugal. What is even more striking is that
very few countries – either industrial or emerging -- have had persistently high current
account deficits for more than five years. In Table 4 I present a list of countries with
persistently high current account deficits for 1970-2001. In constructing this table I
define a country as having a “High Deficit” if, in a particular year, its current account
deficit is in its region’s tenth decile.13 I then defined a persistently high deficit country,
as a country with a “High Deficit” (as defined above) for at least 5 consecutive years.14
As may be seen in Table 4 the list of persistently high deficit countries is extremely short,
and none of these countries is large. This illustrates the fact that, historically, periods of
high current account imbalances have tended to be short lived, and have been followed
by periods of current account adjustments.
         In Table 5 I present data on net international liabilities as a percentage of GDP for
a group of advanced countries that have historically had a large negative NIIP position.15
As may be seen, the picture that emerges from this table is quite different than that in
Table 4 on current account deficits. Indeed, a number of advanced nations have had –
and continue to have – a significantly larger net international liabilities position than the
U.S. This suggests that, at least in principle, the U.S. NIIP could continue to deteriorate
for some time into the future. However, even if this does happen, at some point this
process would have to end, and the U.S. net international liabilities position as percentage
of GDP would have to stabilize. It makes a big difference, however, at what level U.S.
net international liabilities do stabilize. For example, if in the steady state foreigners are
willing to hold the equivalent of 35% of U.S. GDP in the form of net U.S. assets, the U.S.
could sustain a current account deficit of (only) 2.1% of GDP.16 If, on the other hand,


13
    Notice that the thresholds for defining High deficits are year and region-specific. That is, for every year
there is a different threshold for each region.
14
    For an econometric analysis of current account deficits persistence see Edwards (2004). See also
Taylor (2002).
15
    For the U.S. the data are from the Bureau of Economic Analysis. For the other countries the data are,
until 1997, from the Lane and Milessi-Ferreti (2001) data set. I have updated them using current account
balance data. Notice that the updated figures should be interpreted with a grain of salt, as I have not
corrected them for valuation effects.
16
    This calculation assumes a 6% rate of growth of nominal GDP going forward.
                                               9


foreigners’ net demand for U.S. assets grows to 60% of GDP – which, as shown in Table
5, is approximately the level of (net) foreign holdings of Australian assets --, the U.S.
sustainable current account deficit would be 3.6% of GDP. Moreover, if foreigners’ are
willing to hold (net) U.S. assets for the equivalent of 100% of GDP – a figure that Mussa
(2004) considers implausible – the sustainable U.S. current account deficit can be as high
as 6% of GDP – approximately its current level. Since there are no historical precedents
for a large advanced nation running persistently large deficits, it is extremely difficult to
have a clear idea on what will be the actual evolution of foreigners’ demand for U.S.
assets.
          It is worth noting that an analysis for a longer period of time confirms the view
that the recent magnitude of the current account deficit has no historical precedent in the
United States. According to Backus and Lambert (2005) the U.S. ran a current account
deficit of 5% of GDP in 1815, and a somewhat smaller but persistent deficit during the
1830s and 1870s. Greenspan (2004, p. 6) has pointed out that the large deficits during
the 19th century were financed with capital flows related to “specific major development
projects (such as railroads).”


III.      On Current Account Reversals: An International Comparative Analysis
          Most recent analyses have concluded that the current level of the U.S. current
account deficit is unsustainable in the long-run. Even under an optimistic scenario,
where foreigners’ demand for U.S. securities doubles from its current level, there would
have to be a significant decline in the deficit. For example, if the (negative) NIIP were to
go from its current level of 30% of GDP to 60% of GDP, the sustainable current account
deficit would be 3.6%. This is almost three percentage points below its current level. In
reality, however, the adjustment is likely to be even larger. The reason for this is that in
order for the NIIP to go from -30% to -60% of GDP in a reasonable period of time the
current account deficit needs to overshoot its steady state level by a significant margin.
In Edwards (2005a) I present a model where the NIIP reaches 60% of GDP after 7 years;
in this case, the current account deficit continues to increase, until it reaches a peak of
7.1% of GDP. It then declines until it converges to 3.6% of GDP. According to this
work, and other recent models summarized in Table 6, at some point in time the U.S. will
                                                     10


undergo a significant current account adjustment. Although no one seems to know when
this adjustment will actually take place, almost every analyst agrees that it will have to
take place.
         A key question is what will be the nature of this adjustment process? In this
Section I address this issue by analyzing the international experience with current account
reversals in the period 1970-2001. Although the U.S. case is unique – both because of
the size of its economy and because the dollar is the main vehicle currency in the world –,
an analysis of the international experience will provide some light on the likely nature of
the adjustment. A particularly important question is whether this adjustment will entail
real costs in the form of lower growth and higher unemployment.
         In Table 7 I present a summary of previous studies on the real consequences of
current account reversals and “sudden stops” in capital inflows (a phenomenon closely
related to reversals). As may be seen, these studies have used different samples, different
time periods, and slightly different definitions of reversals. These studies have also
reached different results: for instance, after analyzing the evidence from a large number
of countries, Milesi-Ferreti and Razin (2000) concluded that major current account
reversals have not been costly. According to them, “reversals… are not systematically
associated with a growth slowdown (p. 303).” Frankel and Cavallo (2004) concluded
that sudden stops of capital inflows (a phenomenon closely related to reversals) have
resulted in growth slowdown, while Crocke, Kamin and Leduc (2005) argue that there is
no evidence suggesting that reversals have historically been associated with growth
slowdown (see Table 7 for details).17
         In this section I analyze several aspects of current account reversals, including:18
              •   The incidence of current account reversals in different regions and groups
                  of countries.
              •   The relationship between reversals and “sudden stops” of capital inflows.


17
   It should be noted that the study by Crocke et al (2005), as well as those by Debelle and Galalti (2005)
and Freund and Warnok (2005) have used a rather mild definition of reversal, consisting of a reduction in
the current account deficit of 2% of GDP in one year
18
   In Edwards (2004) I used a smaller data set to investigate reversals in emerging countries. In that paper,
however, I did not consider the experience of large or industrial countries with reversals. Also, in that
paper I used very simple framework for analyzing growth. In contrast, in this section I use a two steps
dynamic of growth approach.
                                                       11


              •   The relation between current account reversals and exchange rate
                  depreciation.
              •   The relation between current account reversals and interest rates.
              •   The relation between current account reversals and inflation.
              •   The factors determining the probability of a country experiencing a current
                  account reversal.
              •   The costs – in terms of growth slowdown – of current account reversals.


         In analyzing these issues I rely on two complementary statistical approaches:
First, I use non-parametric tests to analyze the incidence and main characteristics of
current account reversals. And second, I use panel regression-based analyses to estimate
the probability of experiencing a current account reversal, and the cost of such reversal,
in terms of short-term declines in output growth. Although the data set covers all regions
in the world, in the discussion presented in this section, and in an effort to shed light on
the U.S. case, I emphasize the experience of large countries and industrial countries.
III.1 Current Account Reversals during 1970-2001: The International Evidence
         I consider two definitions of current account reversals: (a) The first one considers
a reduction in the current account deficit of at least 4% of GDP in a one year period, and
an accumulated reduction of at least 5% of GDP in three years. This definition is called
“Reversal 4%.” (b) The second definition considers a reduction in the current account
deficit of at least 2% of GDP in one year, with an accumulated reduction in three years of
5% of GDP. This definition is called “Reversal 2%.”19 In the “Reversal 4%” definition,
the adjustment is front loaded, while in the first one it is more evenly distributed through
time. In Figure 5 I present data on the number of reversals by country group for the years
1971-2001.
         In Table 8 I present data on the incidence for both definitions of current account
reversals for the complete sample as well as for six groups of countries. As may be seen,
for the overall sample the incidence of reversals is 6.5% and 9.4%, for “Reversals 4%”
and “Reversal 2%”, respectively. The incidence of reversals among the industrial
19
   In both cases the timing of the reversal is recorded as the year when the episode begins. Also, for a
particular episode to classify as a current account deficit reversal, the initial balance has to be indeed a
deficit.
                                               12


countries is much smaller however, at 1.3% and 3.3% for “Reversals 4%” and “Reversal
                      2
2%”. The Pearson-         and F-tests reported in Table 8 indicate that the hypothesis of
equal incidence of reversals across regions is rejected strongly.
       The advanced countries that have experienced current account Reversals 4% are:
           •   Greece (1986),
           •   Italy (1975),
           •   Malta (1997)
           •   New Zealand (1975),
           •   Norway (1978, 1989),
           •   Portugal (1982, 1983, 1985).
       The industrial (or advanced) countries that have experienced current account
Reversals 2% are:
           •   Denmark (1997)
           •   Finland (1976, 1977, 1993, 1994),
           •   Greece (1986),
           •   Iceland (1993)
           •   Ireland (1982),
           •   Italy (1975),
           •   Malta (1997)
           •   New Zealand (1976, 1986, 1988),
           •   Norway (1978, 1979, 1980, 1989),
           •   Portugal (1977, 1978, 1982,1984, 1985, 1986),
           •   Spain (1977),
           •   Sweden (1994).


       With the exception of Italy, all of these countries are very small indeed; this
underlies the point that there are no historical precedents of large countries undergoing
profound current account adjustments. As pointed out above, this implies that the results
reported in this paper on current account reversals should be interpreted with a grain of
salt, and should not be mechanically extended to the case of the U.S.
                                                       13


         The data analysis presented above has distinguished countries by their stage of
development and geographical location. An alternative way of dividing the sample – and
one that is particularly relevant for the discussion of possible lessons for the U.S. – is by
country size. I define “large countries” as those having a GDP in the top 25% of the
distribution in 1995 (according to this criterion there are 44 “large” countries in the
sample). The incidence of “Reversals 4%” among “large” countries is 3.9% for 1971-
2001; the incidence of “Reversals 2%” among “large” countries is 6.3%.
III.2 Current Account Reversals and Sudden Stops of Capital Inflows
         Since the mid-1990s a number of authors have analyzed episodes of sudden stops
of capital inflows.20 Although from an analytical perspective sudden stops and current
account reversals are closely related, there is no reason for this relationship to be one-to-
one. If there are changes in international reserves, it is perfectly possible that a country
that suffers a sudden stop does not experience, at the same time, a current account
reversal. In countries with floating exchange rates, however, changes in international
reserves tend to be relatively small, and the relation between sudden stops and reversals
should be stronger.
         I defined a “sudden stop” episode as an abrupt and major reduction in capital
inflows to a country that up to that time had been receiving large volumes of foreign
capital. More specifically, an episode is defined as a “sudden stop” if the following two
conditions are met: (1) the country in question must have received an inflow of capital
(relative to GDP) larger than its region’s third quartile during the two years prior to the
“sudden stop.” And (2), net capital inflows must have declined by at least 5% of GDP in
one year.21
         In Table 9 I present a data on the incidence of “sudden stops” and current account
reversals (I use both definitions of reversal), for three samples: (a) large countries,
defined as those countries that whose GDP is in the top quartile of the distribution; (b)
industrial countries; and (c) the complete sample. Table 9 shows that for the complete
sample, 37.7% of countries subject to a sudden stop also faced a “Reversal 4%” current

20
    For recent papers, see Calvo et al (2004) and Frankel and Cavallo (2004). For capital flows and crises,
see Eichengreen (2003).
21
   In order to check for the robustness of the results, I also used two alternative definitions of sudden stops,
which considered a reduction in inflows of 3 and 7 of GDP in one year. Due to space considerations,
however, I don’t report detailed results using these definitions.
                                                        14


account reversal. At the same time, 34.9% of those with “Reversals 4%” also
experienced (in the same year) a sudden stop of capital inflows. Panel C also shows that
45.0% of countries subject to a sudden stop faced a “Reversal 4%” current account
reversal. Also, 30.5% of those with Reversals 2% experienced (in the same year) a
                                                2
sudden stop of capital inflows. The                 tests reported in Table 9 indicate that for all
countries in the sample the hypothesis of independence between reversals and sudden
stops is rejected. The results for industrial and large countries are quite similar. For both
                  2
samples the           test indicates that the null hypothesis of independence between the two
phenomena cannot be rejected. An analysis of the lead-lag structure of reversals and
sudden stops suggest that sudden stops tend to occur either before or at the same time –
that is, during the same year – as current account reversals. Indeed, according to a series
                          2
of non-parametric             tests it is possible to reject the hypothesis that current account
reversals precede sudden stops.
III.3 Current Account Reversals and Exchange Rates
           An important policy question – and one that is particularly relevant within the
context of current policy debate in the U.S. – is whether current account reversals have
historically been associated with large exchange rate depreciations.22 In Figure 6 I present
the evolution of the median nominal exchange rate (with respect to the US dollar) in
reversal countries. These data are presented as an index with a value of 100 the year of
the reversal. The data are centered on the year of the reversal; they go from three years
prior to the current account reversal to three years after the reversals. In this Figure a
lower value of the index reflects a nominal depreciation. As may be seen, in all three
samples – “large,” “industrial” and “all” countries – there is a nominal depreciation in the
period surrounding the reversal. These depreciations range from 14% to 40%, depending
on sample and the definition of reversal. In most emerging countries a large depreciation
tends to have a short run contractionary effect on GDP growth. The reason for this is that
in most of these countries many debts are expressed in foreign currency. Thus, currency
depreciation tends to have a “balance sheet” effect, increasing the domestic currency
value of these debts.23


22
     For the relationship between depreciations and crises see Eichengreen et al (1996).
23
     See Adalet and Eichengreen (2005).
                                                     15


         Figure 7 shows the behavior of the (median) real effective exchange rate index.
As before, a decline in the index is a real depreciation. As may be seen, for the “large
countries” sample, there is a real exchange rate depreciation the year of the reversal, with
respect to the year before the adjustment. Moreover, for this sample of large countries
the RER continues to depreciate during the next three years. The accumulated (median)
RER depreciation between years -1 and +3 is 8.7% for the “Reversal 4%” definition of
reversal; it is 11.8% for “Reversal 2%”. Figure 6 also shows that there is a RER
depreciation in the “industrial countries” sample. In this case, however, there is an
overshooting, and the maximum depreciation is achieved one year after the reversal – it is
7.2% for Reversal 4% and 5.2% for Reversal 2% episodes. Finally, the last panel in
Figure 6 shows that for the “all countries” sample there are no significant changes in
(median) RER behavior in the +/- 3 years that surround a current account reversal.
         For comparison purposes, and in order to gain further insights, I constructed a
dataset for a “control group” of countries that have not experienced a current account
reversal. I then computed a battery of χ2 tests for the equality of distributions (Kruskal-
Wallis tests) between the reversal countries and the control group.24 The results from
these tests are presented in Table 10 (p-values in parentheses).25 As may be seen, these
χ2 tests show that nominal exchange rates have behave differently in the reversal
countries and in the control group countries – this is the case independently of the
reversal group one looks at. They also show that, for the large countries sample, RERs
have behaved differently in the reversal and control group countries.
         The exchange rate adjustments in the reversal countries reported in Figures 6 and
7 are relatively small when compared with the “required” exchange rate depreciation that
has been calculated in a number of studies, including those summarized in Table 6.
Obstfeld and Rogoff (2004), for example, estimate that eliminating the U.S. current
account deficit would imply a (real) depreciation of between 16 and 36 percent.
Blanchard, Giavazzi and Sa (2005) have estimated a required depreciation of the U.S.
trade weighted dollar in the order of 40%. There are many possible reasons for these
24
   The tests are performed on the changes in the variables of interest, during two time spans: between 3
years before and 3 years after the reversals, and between one year before and the year of the reversal. Three
different control groups were constructed; one for each sample.
25
   These 2 tests refer to accumulated exchange rate changes in the -3 to +3 year period surrounding a
reversal.
                                                   16


differences, including that the U.S. is a very large country, while the countries that have
experienced reversals are much smaller. Also, the values of elasticities and other
parameters may be different in the U.S. than in the average reversal country. Yet another
possibility has to do with the level of economic activity and aggregate demand. Most
recent models on the U.S. current account assume that the economy stays in a “full
employment” path. It is possible, however, that the countries that have historically
experienced reversals have also gone through economic slowdowns, and that a reduction
in aggregate demand contributed to the adjustment effort.
III.4   Current Account Reversals, Interest Rates and Inflation
        A number of analysts have argued that one of the most serious consequences of a
rapid current account reversal (and the concomitant nominal depreciation) is its effect on
inflationary pressures and inflation. I this section I investigate this issue by analyzing the
behavior of inflation and nominal (lending) interest rates in the period surrounding
reversal episodes.26 Figure 8 depicts data on (median) inflation rates for the three
reversal samples; Figure 9, on the other hand, has data on nominal interest rates. As may
be seen from Figure 8, in the “large countries” sample, there is a sharp increase in the
(median) rate of inflation the year of the reversal. Although it stabilizes somewhat,
inflation stays above its pre-reversal level for the three years after the current account
adjustment. Figure 8 also shows that there is an increase in inflation after the reversals.
In the industrial countries, however, the pattern is somewhat different from that of large
countries; also, they exhibit some differences in behavior across the two definitions of
reversals.
        The data in Figure 9 on interest rates shows that in the three samples, and for both
definitions of reversal, nominal interest rates are higher three years after the reversal than
three years prior to the reversal. For the “large countries” the increase is rather gradual.
Interest rates begin to increase two years before the reversal. For “Reversal 2%” interest
rates peak one year after the crisis; for the “Reversal 4%” definition they peak three years
after, In the industrial countries, on the other hand, there are no discernible changes in
interest rates before the reversal; there is, however, a significant jump during the first


26
  Gagnon (2005) analyzes behavior of interest rates behavior in the aftermath of currency crises. He does
not concentrate on reversals, however.
                                                      17


year after the crisis. Finally, the data for the “all countries” show a steady increase in
nominal interest rates in the year surrounding the reversals. Between three years prior to
a “Reversal 4%” episode and one year after the reversal, median interest rates increased
by310 basis points in large countries, 570 basis points for industrial countries and 240
basis points for all countries. Under most circumstances increases in interest rates of this
magnitude are likely to have a negative effect on aggregate demand and economic
activity. In Section IV of this paper I deal with the effects of reversals on economic
growth.
        The Kruskal-Wallis tests in Table 10 indicate that, for the short time horizon,
changes in inflation are significantly higher in the reversal countries than in the control
group. These tests also show that for “large countries” changes in interest rates are
significantly different in the reversal and control groups.
III.5     The Probability of Experiencing Current Account Reversals
        In order to understand further the forces behind current account reversals I
estimated a number of panel equations on the probability of experiencing a reversal. The
empirical model is given by equations (1) and (2):



                                 1,            if ρ tj* > 0,

(1)              ρ tj     =

                                 0,            otherwise.

(2)              ρ tj*   =    αω tj + ε tj .

        Variable ρ jt is a dummy variable that takes a value of one if country j in period t

experienced a current account reversal, and zero if the country did not experience a
reversal. According to equation (2), whether the country experiences a current account
reversal is assumed to be the result of an unobserved latent variable ρ tj* . ρ tj* , in turn, is

assumed to depend linearly on vector ω tj . The error term ε tj is given by given by a

variance component model: ε tj = ν j + µ tj . ν j is iid with zero mean and variance σ ν2 ;
                                                     18


µ tj is normally distributed with zero mean and variance σ µ2 = 1 . The data set used covers
87 countries, for the 1970-2001 period; not every country has data for every year,
however. See the Data Appendix for exact data definition and data sources.
         In determining the specification of this probit model I followed the literature on
external crises, and I included the following covariates:27 (a) The ratio of the current
account deficit to GDP lagged one period. (b) A sudden stop dummy that takes the value
of one if the country in question experienced a sudden stop in the previous year. (c) An
index that measures the relative occurrence of sudden stops in the country’s region
(excluding the country itself) during that particular year. This variable captures the effect
of “regional contagion.” (d) The one-year lagged gross external debt over GDP ratio.
Ideally one would want to have the net debt; however, there most countries there are no
data on net liabilities. (e) The one-year lagged rate of growth of domestic credit. (f) The
lagged ratio of the country’s fiscal deficit relative to GDP. (g) The country’s initial GDP
per capita (in logs).

           The results obtained from the estimation of this variance-component probit
model for a sample of large countries are presented in Table 11; as before, I have defined
“large” as having a GDP in the top 25% of its distribution. The results obtained are quite
satisfactory; the vast majority of coefficients have the expected sign, and many of them
are significant at conventional levels.28 The results may be summarized as follows:
Larger (lagged) current account deficits increase the probability of a reversal, as does a
(lagged) sudden stop of capital inflows. Countries with higher GDP per capita have a
lower probability of a reversal. The results do not provide strong support for the
contagion hypothesis: the variable that measures the incidence of sudden stops in the
county’s region is significant in only one of the equations (its sign is always positive,
however). There is also evidence that an increase in a country’s (gross) external debt
increases the probability of reversals. Although, the U.S. is a very special case the results
reported in Table 11 provide some support to the idea that during the last few years the
probability of the U.S. experiencing a reversal has increased.

27
  See, for example, Frankel and Rose (1996), Milesi-Ferreti and Razin (2000) and Edwards (2002).
28
  Results for the other two samples of countries are quite similar; they are not reported here due to space
considerations.
                                                     19



IV.      Current Account Reversals and Growth
           One of the most important questions regarding a (possible) current account
reversal in the United States is whether it will affect negatively economic activity and
growth. In this Section I investigate the relation between current account reversals and
real economic performance using the comparative data set presented above. I am
particularly interested in analyzing the following issues: (a) historically, have current
account adjustments had an effect on GDP growth? (b), Have the effects of reversals
depend on the structural characteristics of the country in question, including its economic
size (i.e. whether it is a large country), its degree of trade openness and the extent to
which it restricts capital mobility. And (c) have the effects of the reversals on economic
growth depended on the magnitude and speed at which the adjustment takes place. In
addressing these issues I emphasize the case of large countries; as a comparison,
however, I do provide results for the complete sample of countries.
         Authors that have analyzed the real effects of current account reversals have
reached different conclusions. Milesi-Ferreti and Razin (2000), for example, used both
before–and-after analyses as well as cross-country regressions to deal with this issue and
concluded that “reversal events seem to entail substantial changes in macroeconomic
performance between the period before and the period after the crisis but are not
systematically associated with a growth slowdown (p. 303, emphasis added).” Edwards
(2002), on the other hand, used dynamic panel regression analysis and concluded that
major current account reversals had a negative effect on investment, and that they had “a
negative effect on GDP per capita growth, even after controlling for investment (p.
52).”29 Debelle and Galati (2005) used a before and after approach and concluded that
(2%) reversals did not result in a slowdown in growth, a result that was also obtained by
Croke et al (2005). Freund and Warnock (2005), on the other hand, used a multivariate
statistical approach and found that reversals have been associated with a slowdown in
economic growth. None of these studies, however, has analyzed the potential role of the
speed of adjustment on the effects of reversals on growth..


29
  In a recent paper, Guidotti et al (2004) consider the role of openness in an analysis of imports and exports
behavior in the aftermath of a reversal. See also Frankel and Cavallo (2004).
                                                     20


IV.1   Preliminaries
       In Figure 10 I present data on (median) GDP growth per capita in the period
surrounding current account reversals. As may be seen in this Figure, in the three
samples considered in this study there is a decline in GDP growth in the year of the
reversal. This decline is particularly pronounced in the “large countries” and “industrial
countries” samples. It is interesting to notice, however, that the drop in the rate of GDP
growth appears to be short lived. In the “large countries” and “all countries” samples
there is a very sharp recovery in growth one year after the reversal episode. Kruskal-
Wallis tests, reported in Table 10 indicate that in the reversal countries growth is
significantly lower in the years surrounding the reversals than in a control group of
counties that have not experienced a reversal (the p-values range from 0.07 to.0.00).
IV.2   Growth Effects of Current Account Reversals: An Econometric Model
       The point of departure of the econometric analysis is a two-equation formulation
for the dynamics of real GDP per capita growth of country j in period t. Equation (3) is
the long run GDP growth equation; equation (4), on the other hand, captures the growth
dynamics process.

(3)             g~t = α + x j β + r jθ + ω j .

(4)             ∆g jt = λ[ g~ j − g jt −1 ] + ϕv jt + γu jt + ε jt .


g~ j is the long run rate of real per capita GDP growth in country j; x j is a vector of

structural, institutional and policy variables that determine long run growth; r j is a vector

of regional dummies; α, β and θ are parameters, and ω j is an error term assumed to be

heteroskedastic. In equation (3), g jt is the rate of growth of per capita GDP in country j

in period t. The terms v jt and u jt are shocks, assumed to have zero mean, finite variance

and to be uncorrelated among them. More specifically, v jt is assumed to be an external

terms of trade shock, while u jt captures other shocks, including current account

reversals. ε jt is an error term, which is assumed to have a variance component form, and

λ, ϕ, and γ are parameters that determine the particular characteristics of the growth
                                                    21


process. Equation (4) has the form of an equilibrium correction model and states that the
actual rate of growth in period t will deviate from the long run rate of growth due to the
existence of three types of shocks: v t j, u t j and ξ t j. Over time, however, the actual rate
of growth will tend to converge towards it long run value, with the rate of convergence
given by λ. Parameter ϕ , in equation (4), is expected to be positive, indicating that an
improvement in the terms of trade will result in a (temporary) acceleration in the rate of
growth, and that negative terms of trade shock are expected to have a negative effect
on g jt .30 From the perspective of the current analysis, a key issue is whether current

account reversals have a negative effect on growth; that is, whether coefficient γ is
significantly negative. In the actual estimation of equation (4), I used dummy variables
for reversals. An important question – and one that is addressed in detail in the
Subsection that follows – is whether the effects of different shocks on growth are
different for countries with different structural characteristics, such as its degree of trade
and capital account openness.31
          Equations (3) - (4) were estimated using a two-step procedure. In the first step I
estimate the long run growth equation (3) using a cross-country data set. These data are
averages for 1970-2001, and the estimation makes a correction for heteroskedasticity.
These first stage estimates are then used to generate long-run predicted growth rates to
replace g~ in the equilibrium error correction model (4). In the second step, I estimated
             j


equation (4) using GLS for unbalanced panels; I used both random effects and fixed
effects estimation procedures.32 The data set used covers 157 countries, for the 1970-
2001 period; not every country has data for every year, however. See the Data Appendix
for exact data definition and data sources.
          In estimating equation (3) for long-run per capita growth, I followed the standard
literature on growth, as summarized by Barro and Sala-I-Martin (1995), Sachs and
Warner (1995) and Dollar (1992) among others. I assume that the rate of growth of GDP
( g~ ) depends on a number of structural, policy and social variables. More specifically, I
     j


include the following covariates: the log of initial GDP per capita; the investment ratio;

30
     See Edwards and Levy Yeyati (2004) for details.
31
     On capital account liberalization and growth, see Eichengreen and Leblang (2003)
32
     Due to space considerations, only the random effect results are reported.
                                              22


the coverage of secondary education, as a proxy for human capital; an index of the degree
of openness of the economy; the ratio of government consumption relative to GDP; and
regional dummies. The results obtained from these first-step estimates are not reported
due to space considerations.
       In Table 12 I present the results from the second step estimation of the growth
dynamics equation (4), when random effects were used. The results are presented for two
samples -- “large countries,” and “industrial countries” --, and for the two definitions of
reversals discussed above. The estimated coefficient of the growth gap is, as expected,
positive, significant, and smaller than one. The point estimates are on the high side --
between 0.69 and 0.78 --, suggesting that, on average, deviations between long run and
actual growth get eliminated rather quickly. For instance, according to equation (12.1),
after 3 years, approximately 82% of a unitary shock to real GDP growth per capita will
be eliminated. Also, as expected, the estimated coefficients of the terms of trade shock
are always positive, and statistically significant, indicating that an improvement
(deterioration) in the terms of trade results in an acceleration (de-acceleration) in the rate
of growth of real per capita GDP. As may be seen from Table 12, in all regressions the
coefficient of the current account reversals variable is significantly negative, indicating
that reversals result in a deceleration of growth in both samples. For large countries
these results suggest that, on average, a “Reversal 4%” reversal has resulted in a
reduction of GDP growth of 5.25% in the first year. This effect persists through time,
and is eliminated gradually as g converges towards g~ . In the case of “Reversal 2%” the
                                                        j


estimated negative effect is significantly, at -4.3%. According to these results, the
negative growth effects of a “front loaded” current account reversal – that is, a “Reversal
4%”episode -- are significantly larger than those of a more gradual reversal or a
“Reversal 2%” type of episode. The results for the industrial countries sample are
reported in equations 12.3 and 12.4 in Table 12. As may be seen, the negative effect on
growth is milder than for large countries; it is still the case, however, that a “front loaded”
reversal has a more severe effect on growth than a more gradual reversal episodes.
When lagged values of the reversals indicators are added to these regressions their
coefficients turned out to be non-significant at conventional levels.
                                             23


       To summarize, the results presented in Table 12 are revealing, and provide some
light on the costs of an eventual current account reversal in the U.S. Historically, “large
countries” and “industrial countries” that have gone through reversals have experienced
deep GDP growth reductions; these reductions are higher if the current account reversal
is “front loaded.” These estimates indicate that, on average, and with other factors given,
and depending on the sample and the definition of reversal, the declined of GDP growth
per capita has been in the range of 2.2 to 5.3 percent in the first year of the adjustment.
Three years after the initial adjustment GDP growth will still be below its long run trend.
IV.2 Extensions, Endogeneity and Robustness
       In this sub-section I discuss some extensions and deal with robustness issues,
including the potential endogeneity bias of the estimates. More specifically, I address the
following issues: (a) the effects of terms of trade changes; (a) the role of countries
structural characteristics in determining the costs of adjustment.
       A. Terms of Trade Effects: The results in Table 12 were obtained controlling for
terms of trade changes. That is, the coefficient of the Reversal 4% and Reversal 2%
coefficients capture the effect of a current account reversal, maintaining terms of trade
constant. As discussed in Sections II, however, in large countries external adjustment is
very likely to affect the terms of trade. The exact nature of that effect will depend on a
number of factors, including the size of the relevant elasticities and the extent of home
bias in consumption. In order to have an idea of the effect of current account reversals
allowing for international price adjustments, I re-estimated equation (4) excluding the
terms of trade variable for the “large countries” sample. The estimated coefficients for
the reversals coefficients were smaller (in absolute terms) than those in Table 12,
indicating that when the terms of trade are allowed to adjust, the growth effect of the
reversal is less severe. That is, for large countries, the terms of trade adjustment
following a reversal generates offsetting forces on growth. The estimated coefficient of
the Reversal 4% is now -4.1 (it is -5.3 in Table 12). The new estimated coefficient of
Reversal 2% is now -3.6; it was -4.4 in Table 12). Interestingly, when the terms of trade
variable is excluded from the regressions for the “industrial countries” and “all countries”
samples, the coefficients of Reversal are not affected.
                                                    24


        B. Openness and the Costs of Adjustment: Recent studies on the economics of
external adjustment have emphasized the role of trade openness. Edwards (2004), Calvo
et al (2004) and Frankel and Cavallo (2004), among others, have found that countries that
are more open to international trade tend to incur in a lower cost of adjustment. Most of
these studies, however, have not made a distinction between large and small countries,
nor have they distinguished between industrial and other countries. I added two
interactive regressors to equations of the type of (4). More specifically, I included the
following terms: (a) a variable that interacts the reversals indicator with trade openness;
and (b) a variable that interacts the reversal indicator with an index of the degree of
international capital mobility. Trade openness is proxied by the fitted value of the
imports plus exports to GDP ratio obtained from a gravity model of bilateral trade.33
The index on international capital mobility, on the other hand, was developed by
Edwards (2005b), and ranges from zero to 100, with higher numbers denoting a higher
degree of capital mobility. The results obtained are presented in Table 13. As may be
seen, the coefficients of the reversal indicators continue to be significantly negative, as in
the previous analysis. However, the variable that interacts trade openness and reversals is
not significant for large and industrial countries, indicating that for these two groups trade
openness has not affected the way in which reversals affect growth. However, for the
complete sample, this coefficient is significantly positive, indicating that countries that
are more open to trade have a lower cost of reversals. The coefficient for the variable
that interacts reversals with capital mobility is not significant for the “large” and
“industrial” countries sample; it is significantly negative for the “all countries sample”
(results available from the author). The results reported in Table 13, then, suggest that
the way in which structural characteristics affect adjustment are different for different
type of countries. While openness appears to be important for small non-industrial
counties, they are not important for countries that are large or advanced.
        C. Endogeneity : The results discussed above were obtained using a random
effects GLS for unbalanced panels, and under the assumption that the reversal variable is
exogenous. It is possible, however, that whether a reversal takes place is affected by


33
    The use of gravity trade equations to generate instruments in panel estimation has been pioneered by
Jeff Frankel. See, for example, Frankel and Cavallo (2004).
                                             25


growth performance, and, thus, is endogenously determined. In order to deal with this
issue I have re-estimated equation (4) using an instrumental variables GLS panel
procedure. In the estimation the following instruments were used: (a) the ratio of the
current account deficit to GDP lagged one and two periods. (b) A lagged sudden stop
dummy that takes the value of one if the country in question has experienced a sudden
stop in the previous year. (c) An index that measures the relative occurrence of sudden
stops in the country’s region (excluding the country itself) during that particular year.
This variable captures the effect of “regional contagion.” (d) The one-year lagged
external gross debt over GDP ratio. (e) The ratio of net international reserves to GDP,
lagged one year. (f) The one-year lagged rate of growth of domestic credit. (g) The
country’s initial GDP per capita (in logs). The results obtained, not presented here due to
space considerations, show that the coefficients of the reversal indicators are significantly
negative, confirming that historically current account reversals have had a negative effect
on growth. The absolute values of the estimated coefficients, however, are larger than
those obtained when random effects GLS were used.
        D. Alternative Indicators of Current Account Reversals: Throughout the
analysis I have used reversal indicators that constraint the current account deficit
adjustment to be at least 5% of GDP in a three-year period. As a way of gaining
additional insights into the effects of current account reversals, in Table 14 I present
results obtained when two alternative reversal indicators are used: “Reversal 14” is
defined as an episode where the current account deficit declines in at least 4% in one
year, independently of what happens in the years to come. “Reversal 12,” on the other
hand, is defined as an episode where the current account deficit declines in at least 2% in
one year, independently of whether the deficits continues to decline in the following
years. These two new variables, then, provide “less demanding” definitions of reversals.
The results in Table 14, confirm those discussed above. They show that reversals have
had a negative effect on growth in all three samples. In addition, these results indicate
that the magnitude of the reversal matters; deeper reversals (4% in one year) have a more
negative effect on growth than milder reversals (2% in one year). Also, a comparison
between the results in Tables 12 and 14 suggest that the effects on growth of sustained
reversals have a greater effect on growth.
                                                    26


         E. Robustness and Other Extensions: In order to check for the robustness of the
results I also estimated several versions of equation (4) for the large countries sample. In
one of these exercises I introduced lagged values of the reversal indicators as additional
regressors. The results obtained – available on request – show that lagged values of these
indexes were not significant at conventional levels. I also varied the definition of “large
countries;” the main message of the results, however, is not affected by the sample.


V.       The U.S. Current Account Reversal of 1987-1991
         Between 1987 and 1991 the U.S. current account deficit experienced a major
reversal. In the third quarter of 1987 the deficit stood at 3.7%, a figure that was then
considered to be exceptionally high. During the next three years the deficit declined
gradually, and in the fourth quarter of 1990 it was 1% of GDP. During the next two
quarters, and as a result of foreign countries’ contributions to financing of the Gulf War,
the current account briefly posted a surplus of 0.8% of GDP. The 1987-1991 adjustment
process was accompanied by a major depreciation of the U.S. dollar. The dollar began to
loose value in the second quarter of 1985, almost two years before the current account
deficit began its turnaround.34 Although this episode does not qualify as a “reversal” in
the empirical analysis presented in the preceding sections, it is the closest to a major
current account adjustment that the U.S. has experienced in modern times. In this section
I analyze the behavior of some key economic variables in the period surrounding this
adjustment.
         In Figure 11 I present quarterly data for the period 1983-1993 for: (a) the current
account balance; (b) the trade-weighted real exchange rate index for the U.S. dollar; (c)
the cyclical component of real GDP; and (d) the cyclical component of the rate of
unemployment.35 In Figure 12 I present monthly data for the same period (1983-1993)
for: (i) the rate of inflation; (ii) the Federal Funds interest rate; and (c) the 10 year
Treasury Note interest rate. In both Figures I have shaded the period October 1987-June
1991, which corresponds to the actual period when the current account deficit declined.


34
   This two-year lag coincides with the conventional wisdom of the time it takes a dollar depreciation to
affect the current account.
35
   These cyclical components were computed using a Hodrick-Prescott filter on the complete time series
from 1951 through 2005.
                                                        27


From an analytical point of view, however, we are also interested in the behavior of these
key variables in the period immediately preceding and immediately following the
adjustment. The picture that emerges from these Figures may be summarized as follows:
               •    During the adjustment process the U.S. dollar depreciated significantly in
                    real terms. Between the second quarter of 1985 and the second quarter of
                    1991 the dollar lost 30% of its value in real trade-weighted terms.
                    Between the third quarter of 1987 and the second quarter of 1991 – the
                    shaded period in Figures 11 and 12 --, the trade weighted dollar lost 9.5%
                    of its value.
               •    During the early part of the adjustment there was no decline in GDP, nor
                    was there an increase in unemployment. However, during the latter part of
                    the adjustment – starting in the second quarter of 1990 – there was a
                    decline in GDP and a marked increase in unemployment. Indeed, as may
                    be seen from Figure 11, GDP stayed below its stochastic trend well into
                    1993; unemployment was above its own trend until early 1994. According
                    to the National Bureau of Economic Research in August of 1990 the U.S.
                    entered into a recession that lasted until March of 1991.36
               •    During the first part of the adjustment there was a sharp increase in the
                    Federal Funds interest rate. In October 1986 the Federal Funds rate was
                    5.85%; by March 1989 it had increased by 400 basis points, to 9.85%. In
                    June 1989 the Fed cut rates by 25 basis points, and began a period of
                    interest rate reduction. By the end of the adjustment, in June 1991, the
                    Federal Funds rate stood at 5.9%.
               •    The yield on the 10-year Treasury Note increased significantly in the
                    months preceding the actual current account adjustment. The yield went
                    from 7.1% in January 1987, to 9.4% in September of that year – an
                    increase of 230 basis points. From that time and until March 1989, the
                    yield on the 10-year Note moved between 9% and 9.4%. Starting in April
                    1989, long term interest rates began to fall, reaching 8% in April 1991. In
                    June 1993, two years after the current account adjustment had ended, the

36
     I am not necessarily implying causality in this description of the data.
                                              28


                long tem interest rate was 6%. The yield curve became inverted in
                January, 1989, and stayed inverted until January 1990.
            •   In the period preceding the adjustment there was an increase in inflation.
                This continued to exhibit an upward trend until late 199o, when it reached
                6%.


         Two other features of the 1987-1991 current account adjustment episode are
worth noting. First, during that period the U.S. terms of trade (prices of exports over
imports) did not experience significant changes. And second, during this adjustment
episode the actual external adjustment took place through a decline in three categories of
capital inflows: (a) foreigners’ net purchases of private securities (bonds and equities);
(b) foreign central banks net purchases of treasury securities; and (c) net bank credit.
(See Figure 13 for the composition of current account financing for the period 1980-
1993).
         The 1987-1991 current account adjustment in the U.S. was significant, but
gradual. And although the episode does not qualify as a “current account” reversal, as
defined in Section III of this paper, it does provide some useful information. As Figures
11 and 12 show, this adjustment was not characterized by a traumatic collapse in output.
However, its general pattern had many similarities with the major current account
reversals analyzed in Sections III and IV of this paper. The 1987-91 adjustment episode
in the U.S. was characterized by: (a) a steep depreciation of the U.S. dollar. (b) An
increase in inflation. (c) Higher interest rates; the Fed Funds rate increased through the
first half of the adjustment, while the 10 year rate increased in the months prior to the
beginning of the actual adjustment. (d) A decline in GDP below trend towards the latter
part of the adjustment. In fact, the U.S. entered into a recession while the adjustment was
taking place. (e) An increase in the rate of unemployment above trend, during the final
quarters of the adjustment.


VI.      Concluding Remarks
         In this paper I have illustrated the uniqueness of the current U.S. external
situation. As shown in Section II, never in the history of modern economics has a large
                                                        29


industrial country run persistent current account deficits of the magnitude posted by the
U.S. since 2000. This significant increase in the U.S. current account deficit may be
explained by the increase in the international demand for U.S. securities during the last
few years.37 The future of the U.S. current account – and thus of the U.S. dollar – depend
on whether foreign investors will continue to add U.S. assets to their investment
portfolios. However, even under optimistic scenarios the U.S. current account deficit will
have to go through a significant reversal at some point in time.
          In order to have an idea of the possible consequences of this type of adjustment, I
have analyzed the international evidence on current account reversals. The results from
this empirical investigation indicate that major current account reversals have tended to
result in large declines in GDP growth. Historically, “large countries” that have gone
through major reversals have experienced deep GDP growth reductions. Three years after
the initial adjustment GDP growth will still be below its long run trend. An analysis of
the U.S. current account adjustment of 1987-1991 shows that that episode many
similarities with the major current account reversals discussed in this paper.




37
     This, in turn, is a manifestation of the “global savings glut.”
                                                        30



                      Figure 1: Current Account Balance and Real Exchange Rate
                                                                                                   140


                                                                                                   120

              4
                                                                                                   100

              0
                                                                                                   80

              -4


              -8
                   7374757677787980818283848586878889909192939495969798990001020304


                                            Current Account to GDP (left axis)
                                            Real Exchange Rate (right axis)




                      Figure 2: Components of Current Account Deficit, 1973-2004
                                                   (percent of GDP)
                   A: Good and Services                                            B: Services
  2                                                          1.6

  1
                                                             1.2
  0

 -1
                                                             0.8
 -2

 -3                                                          0.4

 -4
                                                             0.0
 -5

 -6                                                          -0.4
       1975   1980    1985   1990   1995   2000                     1975   1980   1985   1990   1995    2000




                       C: Income                                                  D: Transfers
1.6                                                          1.2

                                                             0.8
1.2

                                                             0.4
0.8
                                                             0.0
0.4
                                                             -0.4

0.0
                                                             -0.8

-0.4                                                         -1.2
       1975    1980   1985   1990   1995   2000                     1975   1980   1985   1990   1995    2000

                             Source: International Transactions, Economic Report of President 2005
                                                            31


Figure 3: U.S. Net International Investment Position, 1976-2004
                                            (Percent of GDP)
 20



 10



 0



-10



-20



-30
  1976   1978   1980       1982   1984   1986   1988   1990      1992   1994   1996   1998   2000   2002   2004

                            Source: BEA , International Investment Position




                Figure 4: U.S. Investment and Savings, 1970-2003
                                   (Percent of GDP)




                                                                                               !
                       "                                #        $
                                                                                     32


                                            "           %&       $          '(                          )             ) *

                                  Reversal 4%                                                                                Reversal 2%
7                                Large Countries                                          7                                 Large Countries
6                                                                                         6


5                                                                                         5


4                                                                                         4


3                                                                                         3


2                                                                                         2


1                                                                                         1


0                                                                                         0
    1971 1973 1975 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999                1971 1973 1975 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999




                                 Reversal 4%                                                                                Reversal 2%
4                             Industrial Countries                                        4                              Industrial Countries


3                                                                                         3




2                                                                                         2




1                                                                                         1




0                                                                                         0
    1971 1973 1975 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999                1971 1973 1975 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999




                                  Reversal 4%                                                                                Reversal 2%
35                                All Countries                                           35                                 All Countries
30                                                                                        30


25                                                                                        25


20                                                                                        20


15                                                                                        15


10                                                                                        10


    5                                                                                         5


    0                                                                                         0
        1971 1973 1975 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999                1971 1973 1975 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999
                                         33


           "        &+               '        $       + ,!    (
                                -.                /

                        Large Countries
                    Index: Reversal year = 100
120


110


100


 90
      -3       -2          -1             0             1      2    3

                         Reversal 4%                  Reversal 2%



                       Industrial Countries
                    Index: Reversal year = 100

120

110

100

 90
      -3       -2          -1             0             1      2    3

                         Reversal 4%                  Reversal 2%



                           All Countries
                    Index: Reversal year = 100
120


110


100


 90
      -3       -2          -1             0             1     2     3

                         Reversal 4%                  Reversal 2%
                                  34


           "   &+            ' + '' !           (     + ,!        (
                              -.            /
                        Large Countries
                    Index: Reversal year=100
110

105

100

95

90
      -3       -2       -1              0              1              2   3

                     Reversal 4%                    Reversal 2%


                      Industrial Countries
                    Index: Reversal year=100
110

105

100

95

90
      -3       -2       -1              0              1              2   3

                     Reversal 4%                    Reversal 2%


                          All Countries
                    Index: Reversal year=100
110

105

100

95

90
      -3       -2       -1              0              1              2   3

                     Reversal 4%                    Reversal 2%
                                35


          "          &+              '# '        (
                           -.        /

                     Large Countries
                       percentage

14
12
10
 8
 6
     -3       -2      -1         0           1       2    3

                   Reversal 4%              Reversal 2%



                   Industrial Countries
                       percentage

18

14

10

6
     -3       -2      -1         0           1       2    3

                   Reversal 4%              Reversal 2%



                      All Countries
                       percentage

14
12
10
 8
 6
     -3       -2      -1         0           1       2    3

                   Reversal 4%              Reversal 2%
                                  36


      "         &+                '        $        #      (
                             -.                /
          Nominal Interest Rate: Large Countries
                        percentage
16

14

12

10

8
     -3         -2      -1             0            1      2     3

                       Reversal4                   Reversal2



     Nominal Interest Rate: Industrial Countries
                         percentage
16
14
12
10
 8
 6
      -3        -2      -1             0            1      2     3

                     Reversal 4%                   Reversal 2%



           Nominal Interest Rate: All Countries
                       percentage
14

13

12

11

10
      -3        -2      -1             0            1      2     3

                     Reversal 4%                   Reversal 2%
                                 37


      "        &+                '                * 0   *       1
                            -.           /

                     Large Countries
                       percentage

6

4

2

0
     -3   -2           -1            0        1             2       3
-2

                Reversal 4%                  Reversal 2%



                    Industrial Countries
                        percentage

6

4

2

0
     -3   -2          -1             0        1             2       3

                Reversal 4%                  Reversal 2%



                       All Countries
                        percentage

4


2


0
     -3   -2          -1             0        1         2           3

                Reversal 4%                  Reversal 2%
                                                                        38


Figure 11: Macro Behavior in Period Surrounding U.S. Current Acoount Adjustment, 1987-1991

         2                                                               140

         1
                                                                         130

         0
                                                                         120
         -1
                                                                         110
         -2

                                                                         100
         -3

         -4                                                               90
              83   84   85    86   87   88   89   90   91     92   93           83   84    85   86   87   88   89   90   91   92   93

                             Current Account Deficit to GDP                                Trade-Weighted Real Exchange Rate



         2                                                               2.5

                                                                         2.0
         1
                                                                         1.5

         0
                                                                         1.0

                                                                         0.5
         -1

                                                                         0.0
         -2
                                                                         -0.5

         -3                                                              -1.0
              83   84   85    86   87   88   89   90   91     92   93           83   84    85   86   87   88   89   90   91   92   93

                             Cyclical Component Real GDP                                  Cyclical Component Unemployment Rate
                                                                39


Figure 12: Inflation and Interest Rates in Period Surrounding U.S. Current Acoount Adjustment, 1987-1991

                                   7

                                   6


                                   5


                                   4


                                   3


                                   2


                                   1
                                       83   84   85   86   87   88   89   90   91   92   93

                                                           Inflation Rate


                                  12


                                  10


                                   8


                                   6


                                   4


                                   2
                                       83   84   85   86   87   88   89   90   91   92   93

                                                  Federal Funds Interest Rate


                                  14

                                  13

                                  12

                                  11

                                  10

                                   9

                                   8

                                   7
                                   6

                                   5
                                       83   84   85   86   87   88   89   90   91   92   93

                                             10-Year Treasury Note Interest Rate
                                         40


             Figure 13: U.S. Current Account Financing, 1980-1993

100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
 0%
-20%   1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993

-40%
-60%
-80%

        Reserves (net)                        Foreign private purchases of US treasuries
        Currency                              Securities (net)
        FDI (net)                             Claims reported by non-banks (net)
        Claims reported by banks (net)
                                                                          41



                                                                       Table 1
                                                         U.S. Net Financial Flows: 1990-2004
                                                                      ($ Billion)

                                 1990    1991    1992    1993    1994    1995    1996    1997    1998    1999    2000    2001    2002     2003     2004


Reserves (net)                   31.8    23.2    44.4     70.4    44.9   100.1   133.4    18.0   -26.7    52.3    42.5    23.1   110.3   250.1    358.1

Foreign private purchases         -2.5   18.8    37.1     24.4    34.3    91.5   147.0   130.4    28.6   -44.5   -70.0   -14.4   100.4   113.4    108.1
of U.S. treasuries
Currency                         18.8    15.4    13.4     18.9    23.4    12.3    17.4    24.8    16.6    22.4     5.3    23.8    21.5    16.6     14.8
Securities (net)                 -27.2   -10.5   -19.1   -66.2    -6.2   -45.1   -46.0    44.6    32.1   182.6   338.0   309.2   301.4   178.6    323.2
    Debt securities                  -       -       -       -       -       -    13.0    84.2   145.5   104.2   267.7   300.3   269.8   241.8    360.1
    Equity securities               -        -       -       -       -       -   -36.8    24.7   -30.3    84.5    93.0    12.6    37.5    -63.2    -36.8
FDI (net)                        11.3    -14.7   -28.4   -32.6   -34.0   -41.0    -5.4     0.8    36.4    64.5   162.1    24.7   -62.4   -133.9   -133.0
Claims reported by non-banks     17.3     8.0    13.2     11.3   -35.0    14.4   -32.6    -5.2   -15.1   -21.5    31.9    57.6    32.6    55.1     -41.5
(net)
Claims reported by banks (net)    8.6     3.4    37.4     55.7   100.1   -44.9   -75.1     7.9     4.2   -22.0   -31.7    -7.5    66.1    65.2     -15.6


Net financing                    58.0    43.5    97.9     81.8   127.4    87.3   138.7   221.3    76.2   233.8   478.0   416.6   569.9   542.7    614.0
Current account deficit          79.0     -3.7   48.0     82.0   118.0   109.5   120.2   136.0   209.6   296.8   413.4   385.7   473.9   530.7    665.9
  Source: BEA, U.S. International Transactions and International Investment Position
                                                  42

                                             Table 2
        U.S. Net International Investment Position and Current Account Deficit: 1998-2004
                                            ($ Billion)

                                1998      1999       2000        2001          2002          2003    2004
 NIIP                           900.0     775.5     1388.7       1889.7      2233.0      2430.7        --
 Change in NIIP                 79.3     -124.5      613.3       500.9         343.3     197.7         --
 Current Account Deficit        209.5     296.8      413.4       385.7         473.9     530.7       665.7


 Valuation changes              130.2     421.3     -199.8       -115.2        130.6     333.0         --
 Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis


                                             Table 3
                            Distribution of Current Account Deficits
                                     By Region: 1970-2001

Region                      Mean       Median     1st Perc.     1st Quartile      3rd Quartile      9th Perc.

                                                              A: 1970-2001

Industrialized countries     0.6        0.7         -3.8           -1.6                3.0             4.8
Latin Am. and Caribbean      5.4        4.1         -2.5            1.1                8.0            16.9
Asia                         3.0        2.7         -7.1           -0.6                6.3            11.3
Africa                       6.3        5.3         -3.4            1.2                9.9            16.9
Middle East                  0.0        1.4        -18.8           -5.0                6.4            13.6
Eastern Europe               3.9        3.0         -2.4            0.3                6.1            10.7

Total                        3.9        3.3         -5.0           -0.1                7.1            13.1

 Source: Author’s elaboration based on World Development Indicators
                                      43

                                    Table 4
       List of Countries with Persistent High Current Account Deficits
                            By Region: 1970-2001

Region/ Country                                                Period

Industrialized Countries
Ireland                                                     1978-1984
New Zealand                                                 1984-1988
Latin America and Caribbean
Guyana                                                      1979-1985
Nicaragua                                            1984-1990 & 1992-2000
Asia
Bhutan                                                      1982-1989
Africa
Guinea-Bissau                                               1982-1993
Lesotho                                                     1995-2000
Eastern Europe
Azerbaijan                                                  1995-1999
 Source: Author’s elaboration based on World Development Indicators


                                    Table 5
  Net Sock of Liabilities: U.S and other Industrial Countries: Selected Years
                              (Percent of GDP)

 Country            1980      1985       1990      1995      2000       2003
 Australia           --         --         47.4    55.1       65.2       59.1
 Canada             34.7      36.3         38.0    42.4       30.6       20.6
 Denmark             --         --          --     26.5       21.5       13.0
 Finland            14.6      19.0         29.2    42.3       58.2       35.9
 Iceland             --         --         48.2    49.8       55.5       66.0
 New Zealand         --         --         88.7    76.6      120.8      131.0
 Sweden              --       20.9         26.6    41.9       36.7       26.5
 United States      -12.9      -1.3        4.2      6.2       14.1       22.1
 Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis and Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2001).
                                                                      44



                                                           Table 6
                                    U.S. Current Account Adjustment and the U.S. Dollar:
                                                 Selected Studies, 1999-2005


              AUTHORS                 METHODOLOGY                            MAIN ASSUMPTIONS                            MAIN RESULTS

Mann (1999)                    Model tracks U.S. NIIP through            Income elasticity of imports (1.7)      In base case scenario the NIIP
                             time.                                     exceeds income elasticity of exports    becomes increasingly negative and
                                                                       (1.0).                                  the CA is unsustainable in the
                               Analyzes trajectory of NIIP under                                               medium run.
                             three scenarios, and asks whether          Base case scenario assumes no RER
                             these trajectories are sustainable.       adjustment for the USD.                   Under RER depreciation scenario
                                                                                                               CA is within sustainable ranges even
                              Elasticities-based adjustment             A USD adjustment scenario              in a 10 year long horizon.
                             mechanism.                                assumes a RER depreciation of 25%.
                                                                                                                 Under structural adjustment, CA
                              Considers two scenarios for global         A structural adjustment scenario      deficit is 3% in a 10 year horizon, if
                             growth.                                   assumes that exports’ elasticity        the global economy has high
                                                                       increases to 1.3.                       performance.

Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000)                                               Elasticity of substitution between      Base case result indicates that an
                              Develops and calibrates optimizing       tradables and nontradables is assumed   elimination of the CA deficit will
                             model of small open economy, with         to be equal to one.                     imply a 16% RER depreciation, and a
                             two goods: tradable and nontradable.                                              12% nominal depreciation of the
                                                                        Assumes a 6% nominal interest rate,    USD.
                              Output is exogenous; prices are          and a NIIP of 20% of GDP.
                             assumed to be flexible; monetary                                                    Assuming a share of tradables equal
                             policy stabilizes the price level.         Tradables output is assumed to be      to 15%, results in a RER depreciation
                                                                       25% of GDP.                             of 20%.
                               Analyzes the effect on RER of an
                             exogenous shock that results in a          Assumes that full-employment is          The effect on the nominal value of
                             reduction of the CA deficit of 4.4% of    maintained.                             the USD could be even higher if the
                             GDP.                                                                              reduction in the CA is very rapid.
                                                                           45



                                                           Table 6, continuation

            AUTHORS                     METHODOLOGY                                MAIN ASSUMPTIONS                             MAIN RESULTS

O’Neill and Hatzious (2002)    Analyzes the trajectory of NIIP as a          Analyzes the rates of return obtained     It is unlikely that U.S. will be able to
                              percentage of GDP.                            by foreign owners of U.S. assets.        continue to attract foreign purchasing
                                                                                                                     for its assets at observed low rates of
                                Argues that at the observed levels of        Argues that with the exception of       return. Thus, the U.S. CA deficit is
                              CA deficits, the NIIP is moving               FDI these rates of return have been      clearly unsustainable.
                              towards the levels of Canada,                 modest.
                              Australia and New Zealand. It is                                                        A return to sustainability (2% of
                              difficult to believe that this is possible      Shows that FDI has declined            GDP) will imply a depreciation of the
                              for a large country such as the U.S.          significantly as a source of financing   RER of as much as 43%.
                                                                            of the U.S. CA deficit.
                                Estimates “required” RER
                              depreciation in order to bring CA
                              deficit to 2% and NIIP not to surpass
                              40%.


Wren-Lewis (2004)               Calibrates a partial equilibrium             To determine initial conditions,         CA deficit of 2% of GDP is
                              model to obtain set of bilateral RER          author estimates “underlying” (or        consistent with a yen/dollar rate of 88,
                              consistent with attaining certain             cycle-adjusted) CA balances.             and a dollar/euro of 1.18.
                              (exogenous) current account deficits.
                                                                             Considers 3 possible long term           If there is a positive technological
                               No attempt is made to determine              scenarios: 1%, 2% and 3% CA deficit.     shock, the “sustainable” CA deficit
                              what is the sustainable level of the                                                   may be higher. This would be
                              U.S. current account.                          Three-good partial equilibrium          consistent a yen/dollar rate of 89-100,
                                                                            model (including a nontraded) of         and a dollar/euro of 1.11-1.19.
                               Considers the effect of a U.S. fiscal        small economy.
                              shock and of a U.S. technological                                                       Estimates that if China has a CA
                              shock.                                         Elasticities and other parameter        surplus of 1% of GDP the Rmb/USD
                                                                            values taken from regression analysis    would be 6.71.
                                                                            and from OECD data set.
                                                                       46



                                                        Table 6, continuation

           AUTHORS                     METHODOLOGY                             MAIN ASSUMPTIONS                             MAIN RESULTS
Benassy-Quere et al (2004)    Estimates econometrically RER path         Model estimated simultaneously for       The extent of misalignment of the
                             consistent with nontradable                15 currencies.                           different currencies depends on how
                             equilibrium.                                                                        broad is the adjustment.
                                                                          Data on NFA obtained from lane
                               The RER is assumed to depend on          and Milessi-Ferreti (2004) and            Using the USD as numeraire,
                             the country’s net foreign assets (NFA)     relative productivities obtained as      estimates that in 2003 the euro was
                             position and on relative productivity.     ratio of CPI to PPI.                     undervalued between 1.2% and 7.6%.

                                                                         No attempt is made to impose             Using the USD as numeraire,
                                                                        external equilibrium condition.          estimates that in 2001 the yen was
                                                                                                                 undervalued between 14.3% and
                                                                          Results provided for two cases:        22.1%.
                                                                        USD as numeraire and euro as
                                                                        numeraire.
Mussa (2004)                  Analyzes trajectory of NIIP and             Based on results from large             Relative to its value in mid 2004,
                             argues that it is unlikely that it will    econometric models assumes that a        Mussa calculates that the RER will
                             continue to grow at current pace. If it    1% reduction of the U.S. CA deficit is   have to depreciate another 20% to
                             did it would reach 100% of GDP.            associated with a 10% depreciation of    achieve a long term CA deficit of 2%.
                                                                        the RER.
                              Argues that challenge is for RER                                                    Discusses policies that will assist the
                             adjustment to be gradual and that it                                                adjustment process: (a) Fiscal
                             does not disrupt growth.                                                            consolidation in the U.S. will help
                                                                                                                 keep U.S. demand growing below the
                              Argues that fiscal adjustment in the                                               pace of output growth. (b) Monetary
                             U.S. is necessary for smooth                                                        policy in Europe and Japan should be
                             correction of imbalances.                                                           more expansive.

                               No attempt is made at calculating                                                  Concludes that “some” international
                             the “outer limit” of U.S. NIIP.                                                     policy cooperation is likely to help the
                                                                                                                 adjustment process.
                              Analyzes the RER adjustment
                             compatible with a gradual reduction
                             of the CA deficit to 2% of GDP and a
                             NIIP between 40% and 50%.
                                                                       47



                                                         Table 6, continuation

            AUTHORS                    METHODOLOGY                              MAIN ASSUMPTIONS                          MAIN RESULTS

O’Neill and Hatzious (2004)     Update of O’Neill and Hatzious            Estimates a trade balance equation     A reduction of the CA deficit to 3%
                              (2002) model.                             and uses the coefficients to compute    would imply RER depreciation of the
                                                                        the “required” RER depreciation to      order of 21.6% to 23.6%.
                               Analyzes the trajectory of NIIP as a     achieve different CA adjustment
                              percentage of GDP, and finds that         targets.                                 A reduction of the CA deficit to 2%
                              path is not sustainable.                                                          would imply RER depreciation of the
                                                                         Trade equation also includes foreign   order of 32.1% to 34.1%.
                               Introduces the role of productivity      and U.S. demand growth.
                              gains to original framework.                                                        An elimination of the CA deficit to
                                                                                                                2% would imply RER depreciation of
                                Analyzes the composition of capital                                             the order of 53% to 55%. (Notice that
                              flows into the U.S.                                                               these figures are significantly higher
                                                                                                                than those estimated by Obstfeld and
                               Incorporates the role of valuation                                               Rogoff, 2004).
                              effects.


Obstfeld and Rogoff (2004)      Extension of the Obstfeld-Rogoff         Ratio of CA deficit to tradables is      Assuming constant output, an
                              (2002) model to a two-country world.      25%; CA deficit is 5% of GDP.           elimination of the CA deficit implies
                                                                                                                RER depreciation between 14.7% and
                               Terms of trade are now endogenous.        Output is exogenously given in both    33.6%.
                                                                        countries.
                               Incorporates the effects of valuation                                              If tradables output increases by
                              effects of exchange rate changes on           NIIP is 20% of GDP.                 20%, the RER depreciation ranges
                              NIIP.                                                                             from 9.8% to 22.5%.
                                                                         Home country produces 22% of
                                Exercise assumes an elimination of      world tradables.                         If there is a permanent increase in
                              the CA deficit; that is a reduction in                                            military expenditure, the RER
                              5% of GDP.                                 Simulation is done for alternative     depreciation ranges from 16.0% to
                                                                        values of elasticities, and under       36.1%.
                                                                        different assumptions regarding
                                                                        changes in tradables output and
                                                                        military spending.
                                                                     48



                                                            Table 6, continuation

            AUTHORS                       METHODOLOGY                          MAIN ASSUMPTIONS                             MAIN RESULTS

Roubini and Setser (2004)         Uses macro aggregate model to         First scenario considers a constant       In first scenario, CA deficit 13% of
                                 project the U.S. current account.     RER dollar.                                GDP in 2012.

                                  Imposes exogenous assumptions on      Second scenario considers a constant      In second scenario, CA deficit 9% of
                                 RER, and analyzes CA path             trade deficit at 5% of GDP, and a          GDP in 2012.
                                                                       RER depreciation of approximately
                                                                       7%.                                         In third scenario, the NIIP stabilizes
                                                                                                                  at approximately 55% of GDP, and
                                                                         Third scenario considers a faster rate   the CA deficit declines gradually,
                                                                       of growth of exports, and substantial      reaching 4.3% of GDP in 2012.
                                                                       (50%) depreciation. This scenario
                                                                       also assumes a gradual elimination
                                                                       (by 2012) of the fiscal deficit.


Blanchard, Giavazzi, Sa (2005)    Uses portfolio model to analyze         Considers dynamics of adjustment.         Estimates range of required U.S.
                                 U.S. current account behavior.                                                   dollar real depreciation (today). After
                                                                        Considers valuation effects of            incorporating the role of valuation
                                  Assumes changes in portfolio         changes in the U.S. dollar.                effects the range is estimated to be
                                 preferences in world economy.                                                    between 40% and 90% real
                                                                        Simulates model under certain             depreciation.
                                                                       assumptions for values of key
                                                                       parameters (elasticities, portfolio
                                                                       shares and other).

                                                                         The question asked is: what is the
                                                                       required (real) depreciation of the
                                                                       U.S. dollar to eliminate the current
                                                                       account deficit?
                                                                             49



                                                                        Table 7
                                                       Current Account Reversals and Sudden Stops
                                                                   (Selected Studies)

AUTHOR                DEFINITION                               SAMPLE                      METHODOLOGY                      MAIN RESULTS

                                                           A. CURRENT ACCOUNT REVERSALS

Milesi-Ferretti and   Reduction in the deficit of at least 3   105 low-and middle income   Carries out a before and after   Both domestic and external
Razin (2000)            (5) percentage points of GDP           countries: 1970-1996         study for key economic           factors affect the probability
                        over a period of three years with                                   variables                        of CAR
                        respect to three years before the                                  Estimates a multivariate         Countries with less appreciated
                        event                                                               Probit model for                 RER, higher investment and
                      Maximum deficit after the reversal                                    determinants of the              openness prior to the
                        must be no larger than the                                          probability of occurrence of     reversal tend to grow faster
                        minimum deficit in the three                                        CAR                              after a CAR.
                        years preceding the reversal                                       Estimates a model for            Reversals are not
                      The average deficit must be                                           studying GDP and export          systematically associated
                        reduced by at least one-third                                       growth three-year after a        with a growth slowdown
                                                                                            CAR occurs

Edwards (2002)        Reduction in the deficit of at least 3   149 countries: 1970-1997    Estimates a treatment effect     CAR have a negative effect on
                        percentage points of GDP in one                                     model for studying the           aggregate investment; and
                        year                                                                determinants of CARs and         GDP per capita growth
                      Reduction in the deficit of at least 3                                the impact of CARs on
                        percentage points of GDP in a                                       economic growth and
                        three-year period                                                   investment

Edwards (2005b)       Reduction in the deficit of at least 4   157 countries: 1970-2001    Analyses empirically the         Confirms previous results that
                        percentage points of GDP in one                                     determinants of CAR and its      CAR reduces economic
                        year                                                                impact on economic growth        growth.
                      Reduction in the deficit of at least 6                                using a two-step procedure.     The negative impact of CAR
                        percentage points of GDP in a                                      Distinguishes the impact of       on growth has been in the
                        three-year period                                                   CAR on large countries to        range of 2.1 to 1.4
                                                                                            discuss implications for the     percentage points in
                                                                                            recent U.S. current account      industrial countries (in the
                                                                                            imbalances.                      first year of the adjustment)
                                                                              50



                                                                  Table 7, continuation
AUTHOR               DEFINITION                               SAMPLE                           METHODOLOGY                       MAIN RESULTS

Debelle and Galati   Reduction in the deficit of at least 2   21 industrial countries: 1974-   Before and after study of 21      Does not find systematic
(2005)                 percentage points of GDP over          2003                              episodes of CAR                   evidence of a relationship
                       three years                                                              incorporating as control          between current account
                                                                                                group countries in which          adjustments and output
                                                                                                current account widened           growth and exchange rates
                                                                                                sharply but without               changes.
                                                                                                reversing in the following       There is not a clear association
                                                                                                years                             between CAR and the
                                                                                               In contrast to similar studies     behavior of capital flows.
                                                                                                for industrial countries, it     The experience of the US in
                                                                                                analyzes the dynamics of          1987 has notable differences
                                                                                                financial account in CAR          to similar episodes in other
                                                                                                episodes.                         industrial countries,
                                                                                               It examines the adjustment of      particularly in the role
                                                                                                the US current account in         played by official flows.
                                                                                                the late 1980’s

Freund & Warnock     Deficit exceeded two percent of          High-Income OECD countries:      Estimates a multivariate          CAR tends to be associated
(2005)                 GDP before the reversal.               1980-2003                         model for 26 CAR episodes          with slow economic growth
                     Reduction in deficit of at least 2                                         for studying its impact on         and a real depreciation.
                       percentage points of GDP over                                            relative GDP growth, real        Finds little evidence that
                       three years (from the minimum                                            exchange rate, and the             persistence of deficits, larger
                       to the centered three year                                               extent to which the deficit is     net foreign debt positions.
                       average)                                                                 resolved in the three years        Larger short-term capital
                     Maximum deficit in the five year                                           following the CAR.                 flows, or lower openness
                       after reversal was not larger than                                      Incorporates the role for the       increase the impact of CAR
                       minimum in the three year                                                size of the current trough,        on growth and exchange rate
                       before.                                                                  the persistence of the             adjustment.
                     Deficit was reduced by at least one                                        deficits, spending
                       third                                                                    composition, openness and
                                                                                                the net foreign asset
                                                                                                position.
                                                                              51



                                                                  Table 7, continuation
AUTHOR               DEFINITION                               SAMPLE                             METHODOLOGY                      MAIN RESULTS

Adalet and           Reduction in deficit of at least 2 (3)   49 countries: 1880-1988            Measures frequency,              Incidence of reversals has been
Eichengreen (2005)     percentage points of GDP                                                   magnitude and effects of          unusually great in recent
                       between the first three and                                                CAR for different periods.        years.
                       second three years                                                        Probit and treatment effects     Gold standard era and the
                     Maximum deficit in second three                                              model for estimating the          years since 1970 differs
                       year must be no larger than                                                consequences of CAR on            significantly from one
                       minimum deficit in first three                                             relative-to-world GDP             another.
                       years                                                                      growth in a three-year after    CARs were smaller, less
                     Average deficit must fall by at least                                        period (included year of          frequent and less disruptive
                       a third (as a percentage of GDP)                                           reversal)                         in the gold standard period.
                       between the first three and
                       second three years.

Croke, Kamin and     Deficit exceeded two percent of          23 episodes of CAR in              Carries out a before and after   Shortfall in growth for
Leduc (2005)           GDP before the reversal.               industrial countries since 1980.    study for key economic            contraction episodes appears
                     Reduction in deficit of at least 2                                           variables                         to reflect the playing out of
                       percentage points of GDP over                                             Distinguishes between              standard cyclical
                       three years (from the minimum                                              episodes according to             developments rather than a
                       to the centered three year                                                 whether GDP growth was            response to CAR.
                       average)                                                                   increased or reduced.           Episodes of contraction were
                     Maximum deficit in the five year                                                                               not associated with
                       after reversal was not larger than                                                                           significant and sustained
                       minimum in the three year                                                                                    depreciations of real
                       before.                                                                                                      exchange rates, increases in
                     Deficit was reduced by at least one                                                                            real interest rates, or declines
                       third                                                                                                        in real stock prices.
                                                                               52



                                                                   Table 7, continuation
AUTHOR                 DEFINITION                              SAMPLE                        METHODOLOGY                       MAIN RESULTS

                                                                      B. SUDDEN STOPS

Calvo, Izquierdo and   Year-on-year fall in capital flows      32 countries, 15 emerging     Develops a model for              Large real exchange rate
Mejias (2004)            lies at least two standard            markets and 17 developed       determining the required           (RER) fluctuations in SS
                         deviations below its sample mean      economies: 1990-2001           change in real exchange rate       episodes are an emerging
                       SS phase ends once the annual                                          to adjust the current account      market phenomenon.
                         change in capital flows exceeds                                      deficit.                         Openness coupled with
                         one standard deviation below its                                    Using panel probit and linear       domestic liability
                         sample mean.                                                         probability models studies         dollarization is key
                       Start of a SS phase is determined                                      which factors determine the        determinants of the
                         by the first time the annual                                         occurrence of a sudden stop.       probability of SS.
                         change in capital flows falls one                                   There is a particular emphasis    Interaction of lower openness
                         standard deviation below its                                         on the impact of openness          and high dollarization
                         sample mean                                                          and domestic liability             increase the negative impact
                       Adds a criterion of costly                                             dollarization.                     of SS.
                         disruption in economic activity,                                    Model is estimated for all
                         defined as a contraction in output                                   countries and emerging
                                                                                              markets.

Guidotti,              Year-on-year fall in capital account    All countries in the world:   Studies incidence and main        The impact of SS on economic
Sturzenegger and         lies at least one standard            1974-2002                      empirical regularities            performance differs
Villar (2004)            deviations below its sample mean                                     associated with sudden stops      dramatically across
                       Capital account contraction                                           Distinguishes between SS           countries.
                         exceeds 5 percent of GDP                                             that require or do not require   Open economies and those
                       Do not restrict the cases to those in                                  a domestic current account        with floating exchange rate
                         which output falls.                                                  adjustment.                       regimes recover fairly
                                                                                             Pooled regressions for             quickly, whereas liability
                                                                                              studying the impact of SS         dollarization slows the
                                                                                              on economic growth.               recovery.
                                                                                             Look at what country
                                                                                              characteristics might make a
                                                                                              SS less costly.
                                                                          53



                                                                 Table 7, continuation
AUTHOR              DEFINITION                             SAMPLE                        METHODOLOGY                      MAIN RESULTS
Frankel & Cavallo   Four different definitions of SS for   141 countries: 1970-2002      Instrumental variables Probit    Trade openness makes
(2004)                large and unexpected fall in                                        and OLS regressions for           countries less vulnerable to
                      capital inflows accompanied by                                      studying determinants of SS       sudden stops and currency
                      output contraction.                                                 and currency crises               crises, and the relationship is
                    Year-on-year fall in capital flows                                   Predicted trade from a gravity     event stronger when
                      lies at least two standard                                          equation is used as               correcting for the
                      deviations below its sample or                                      instruments for country           endogeneity of international
                      decade mean                                                         trade openness                    trade.
                    SS ends once the annual change in
                      capital flows exceeds one
                      standard deviation below its
                      sample mean.
                                 54



                              Table 8
         Incidence of Current Account Reversals: 1970-2001
                           (Percentages)

Region                                        Type of Reversal

                                        Reversal 4%    Reversal1 2%

Industrial Countries                        1.3              3.3
Latin American and Caribbean                 5.5             9.4
Asia                                        8.2             10.7
Africa                                       8.8            11.9
Middle East                                 10.4            14.9
Eastern Europe                              5.9              7.3

Total                                        6.5             9.4

  Pearson
    Uncorrected chi2 (5)                    33.8            33.7
    Design-based F(5, 12500)                 6.8            6.7
     P-value                                0.00            0.00

Source: Author’s elaboration based on World Development Indicators
                                   55

                              Table 9
Incidence of Current Account Reversals and Sudden Stops: 1970-2001
                           (Percentages)

   Country Group                      Reversal 4%       Reversal 2%

   A. Large Countries

   Reversal | Sudden                      22.2               28.9
   Sudden | Reversal                      25.6               21.1
         χ2(1)                            43.7               44.4
          P-value                         0.00               0.00

   B. Industrial Countries

   Reversal | Sudden                      9.5                14.3
   Sudden | Reversal                      25.0               15.8
         χ2(1)                            10.3               8.05
          P-value                         0.00               0.00

   C. All Countries

   Reversal | Sudden                     37.7               45.0
   Sudden | Reversal                      34.9               30.5
         χ2(1)                           275.1              274.7
          P-value                         0.00               0.00



  x| y denotes the probability of occurrence of x given the occurrence of y
  Source: Author’s elaboration based on World Development Indicators
                                             56

                               Table 10: Kruskal-Wallis Test

Country Group                 One-year before and         Three-year before and three
                                 reversal year                year after reversal

                          Reversal 4%     Reversal 2%    Reversal 4%     Reversal 2%

                                           Nominal Exchange Rate
Large Countries                6.58           9.45        15.60             14.79
                             (0.01)*        (0.00)*      (0.00)*           (0.01)*
Industrial Countries           2.03           2.98         3.53              2.38
                              (0.15)       (0.08)*       (0.06)*            (0.12)
All Countries                 26.17          44.61        56.50             28.20
                             (0.00)*        (0.00)*      (0.00)*           (0.00)*

                                         Effective real Exchange Rate
Large Countries                5.73           6.01            9.56           5.62
                             (0.01)*        (0.01)*         (0.00)*        (0.02)*
Industrial Countries           1.56           0.21            0.11           1.90
                              (0.21)         (0.65)          (0.74)         (0.17)
All Countries                  7.26          13.30           13.84           6.36
                             (0.00)*        (0.00)*         (0.00)*        (0.01)*

                                                 Inflation Rate
Large Countries                4.88           1.29            0.05          14.19
                             (0.03)*         (0.26)          (0.82)        (0.00)*
Industrial Countries           5.45           1.59            0.29           8.18
                             (0.02)*         (0.21)          (0.59)        (0.00)*
All Countries                 18.73           0.99            5.13          16.67
                             (0.00)*         (0.32)         (0.02)*        (0.00)*

                                            Nominal Interest Rate
Large Countries               14.72           4.37          2.83             3.94
                             (0.00)*        (0.04)*       (0.09)*          (0.05)*
Industrial Countries           1.03           0.07          6.61             6.97
                              (0.31)         (0.80)       (0.01)*          (0.00)*
All Countries                 36.87          21.05         14.94            15.02
                             (0.00)*        (0.00)*       (0.00)*          (0.00)*

                                           Per Capita GDP Growth
Large Countries               15.11           9.87          2.08            20.74
                             (0.00)*        (0.00)*        (0.15)          (0.00)*
Industrial Countries           1.90           0.15          3.26             2.95
                              (0.17)         (0.70)       (0.07)*           (0.09)
All Countries                 13.71           6.14         10.37            19.74
                             (0.00)*        (0.01)*       (0.00)*          (0.00)*

Null Hypothesis: Data from treatment and control countries have been drawn from the same
population.
* Significant at least at 10%.
                                                57


                                      Table 11
      Current Account Reversals: Random Effects Probit Model – Unbalanced Panel
                                         Large Countries
Variable                                          (11.1)         (11.2)        (11.3)       (11.4)

                                                      Reversal 4%                Reversal 2%

Current-Account deficit to GDP                       0.22           0.22         0.23         0.24
                                                   (4.46)*        (4.51)*      (5.18)*      (5.20)*
Sudden stop                                          0.93           0.98         0.63         0.65
                                                  (1.97)**       (2.09)**       (1.39)       (1.44)
Sudden stops in region                               1.82           1.77         3.08         3.10
                                                    (1.47)         (1.45)      (2.72)*      (2.77)*
External debt to GDP                                 0.01           0.01         0.01         0.01
                                                    (1.16)         (1.19)       (1.22)       (1.30)
Domestic credit growth                               -0.00          -0.00        -0.00        -0.00
                                                    (0.10)         (0.15)       (0.13)       (0.14)
Fiscal deficit to GDP                               -0.003             -        -0.007           -
                                                    (0.64)             -        (0.21)           -
Initial GDP per capita                               -0.10          -0.09        -0.03        -0.03
                                                    (0.60)         (0.56)       (0.17)       (0.18)
Observations                                          555            595          555          595
Countries                                              36             37           36           37
Absolute value of z statistics are reported in parentheses; explanatory variables are one-period
lagged variable; country-specific dummies are included, but not reported.
* significant at 1%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 10%
                                                 58

                                         Table 12
                           Current Account Reversals and Growth
                                (Random Effects GLS Estimates)
                                        (12.1)         (12.2)      (12.3)      (12.4)

                                         Large Countries          Industrial Countries

         Growth gap                      0.69            0.70       0.77        0.79
                                       (24.28)*        (24.33)*   (20.22)*    (20.50)*
         Change in terms of trade        0.09            0.10       0.13        0.13
                                        (9.35)*         (9.60)*    (6.69)*     (6.66)*
         Reversal 4%                     -5.25             -        -3.80         -
                                        (9.11)*            -       (4.43)*        -
         Reversal 2%                       -             -4.34        -         -2.49
                                           -            (9.21)*       -        (4.45)*
         Constant                        -0.25           -0.21      -0.70       -0.70
                                       (1.99)**       (1.67)***    (4.22)*     (4.34)*

         Observations                    842            842        413          413
         Countries                        41             41         21           21
         R-squared                       0.45           0.46       0.53         0.53

Absolute value of t statistics are reported in parentheses; country-specific dummies are included,
but not reported; *significant at 1%, **significant at 5%, *** significant at 10%.
                                               59

                                       Table 13
        Current Account Reversals, Trade Openness, Capital Mobility, and Growth
                                 (Random Effects GLS Estimates)
                                           (13.1)        (13.2)       (13.3)       (13.4)

                                             Large Countries         Industrial Countries

      Growth gap                              0.75       0.76           0.75       0.76
                                           (25.22)*    (25.48)*      (25.22)*    (25.48)*
      Change in terms of trade                0.09       0.09           0.09       0.09
                                            (8.31)*     (8.48)*       (8.31)*     (8.48)*
      Reversal 4%                             -2.88        -            -2.88        -
                                          (1.86)***        -        (1.86)***        -
      Reversal 4% * Trade Openness            -0.01                     -0.01
                                             (0.47)                    (0.47)
      Reversal 4% * Capital Mobility          -0.05                     -0.05
                                             (1.57)                    (1.57)
      Reversal 2%                               -         -4.11           -         -4.11
                                                -       (3.20)*           -       (3.20)*
      Reversal 2% * Trade Openness                        -0.04                     -0.04
                                                         (1.31)                    (1.31)
      Reversal 2% * Capital Mobility                      -0.01                     -0.01
                                                         (0.19)                    (0.19)
      Constant                              -0.20         -0.14        -0.20        -0.14
                                           (1.62)        (1.16)       (1.62)       (1.16)

      Observations                          836          836          413          413
      Countries                              41           41           21           21
      R-squared                             0.45         0.45         0.53         0.53

Absolute value of t statistics are reported in parentheses; country-specific dummies are included,
but not reported; *significant at 1%, **significant at 5%, *** significant at 10%.
                                                 60

                                          Table 14
              Alternative Indicators of Current Account Reversals and Growth
                                (Random Effects GLS Estimates)
                                        (14.1)         (14.2)     (14.3)       (14.4)

                                         Large Countries         Industrial Countries

         Growth gap                      0.72            0.72      0.78         0.79
                                       (25.33)*       (25.36)*   (20.72)*     (20.80)*
         Change in terms of trade        0.10            0.11      0.12         0.14
                                       (10.30)*       (10.63)*    (6.64)*      (7.31)*
         Reversal 14                     -4.12             -       -3.58          -
                                        (9.34)*            -      (5.46)*         -
         Reversal 12                       -             -2.85       -          -1.70
                                           -           (9.08)*       -         (5.11)*
         Constant                        -0.21           -0.09     -0.65        -0.63
                                       (1.70)**         (0.67)    (4.02)*      (3.89)*

         Observations                    846           846         416          416
         Countries                        41            41          21           21
         R-squared                       0.47          0.46        0.54         0.54

Absolute value of t statistics are reported in parentheses; country-specific dummies are included,
but not reported; *significant at 1%, **significant at 5%, *** significant at 10%.
                                            61

                                      Appendix
                                Description of the Data

Variable           Definition                                  Source
Current-Account    Reduction in the current account Author’s elaboration based on
Reversal 4%        deficit of at least 4% of GDP in one data of current account deficit
                   year and 5% accumulated in three (World Development Indicators)
                   years. Initial balance has to be a
                   deficit

Current-Account    Reduction in the current account Author’s elaboration based on
Reversal 2%        deficit of at least 4% of GDP in one data of current account deficit
                   year and 5% accumulated in three (World Development Indicators)
                   years. Initial balance has to be a
                   deficit

Current-Account    Reduction in the current account Author’s elaboration based on
Reversal 14        deficit of at least 4% of GDP in one data of current account deficit
                   year. Initial balance has to be a deficit (World Development Indicators)

Current-Account    Reduction in the current account            Author’s elaboration based on
Reversal 12        deficit of at least 2% of GDP in one        data of current account deficit
                   year. Initial balance has to be a deficit   (World Development Indicators)
Sudden Stop        Reduction of net capital inflows of at      Author’s elaboration based on
                   least 5% of GDP in one year. The            data of financial account (World
                   country in question must have               Development Indicators)
                   received an inflow of capital larger to
                   its region’s third quartile during the
                   previous two years prior to the
                   “sudden stop.”

Nominal exchange   Local currency units per dollar             International Financial Statistics,
rate                                                           IMF

Effective real     Trade weighted real exchange rate           International Financial Statistics,
exchange rate                                                  IMF.

Terms of trade     Change in terms of trade-exports as World Development Indicators
                   capacity to import (constant LCU)

Reserves to GDP    Net international reserves over GDP         World Development Indicators

Domestic credit    Annual growth rate of domestic credit       World Development Indicators
growth
                                                62

                                           Appendix
                                     Description of the Data
                                         (Continuation)

Variable                Definition                             Source

External debt to        Total external debt over GDP           World Development Indicators
GDP

Fiscal deficit to GDP   Overall budget to GDP                  World Development Indicators

GDP per capita          GDP per capita in 1995 US$ dollars     World Development Indicators

Index of capital        Index: (low mobility) to 100 (high Edwards (2005b)
mobility                mobility)

Trade Openness          Predicted trade from bilateral gravity Author’s elaboration
                        equation
                                          63


                                      References


Adalet, M. and B. Eichengreen. 2005. “Current Account Reversals: Always a Problem?”
   in R. Clarida (Ed.): G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment,
   The University of Chicago Press, forthcoming.


Backus, D. and F. Lambert (2005), “Current Account Fact and Fiction,” Stern School,
   New York University, 2005.


Barro, R., Sala-I-Martin, X., 1995. Economic Growth. McGraw Hill, New York.


Benassy-Quere, A. Duran-Vigeron, P. Lahreche-Revil, A. and V. Mignon. 2004. “Burden
   Sharing and Exchange Rate Misalignments within the Group of Twenty,” in
   Bergsten, C.F. and J. Williamson (Editors): Dollar Adjustment: How Far? Against
   What?, Institute for International Economics, Washington D.C., November.


Bernanke, B. S. 2005. “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,”
   Remarks at the Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economics, Richmond,
   Virginia, March 10.


Blanchard, O., Giavazzi,F. and F. Sa. 2005. “The U.S. Current Account and the Dollar,”
   NBER Working Paper No. 11137, February.


Calvo, G. A., Izquierdo, A. and L. F. Mejia. 2004. “On the Empirics of Sudden Stops:
   The Relevance of Balance-Sheet Effects,” NBER Working Paper No. 10520, May.


Croke, H. , Kamin S. B. and S. Leduc. 2005. “Financial Market Developments and
   Economic Activity during Current Account Adjustments in Industrial Economies,”
   International Finance Discussion Papers 827, Board of Governors of the Federal
   Reserve System.
                                          64


Corden, W. M. 1994. Economic Policy, Exchange Rates, and the International System.
   Oxford: Oxford University Press, and Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.


Debelle, G. and G. Galati. 2005. “Current Account Adjustment and Capital Flows,” BIS
   Working Papers, No 169, February.


Dollar, D., 1992. “Outward-Oriented Developing Economies Really Do Grow More
   Rapidly: Evidence from 95 LDCs, 1976-1985,” Economic Development and Cultural
   Change, 40(3): 523-44.


Edwards, S. 2005a. “Is The U.S. Current Account Deficit Sustainable? And If Not, How
   Costly Is Adjustment Likely To Be?,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
   forthcoming.


_________ 2005b. “Capital Controls, Sudden Stops and Current Account Reversals,” in
   S. Edwards (ed): International Capital Flows, forthcoming.


_________ 2004. "Thirty Years of Current Account Imbalances, Current Account
Reversals and Sudden Stops,” IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 61, Special Issue: 1-49.
   International Monetary Fund.


________ 2002. “Does the Current Account Matter?” in Preventing Currency Crises in
   Emerging Markets, S. Edwards and J. A. Frankel (editors), The University of Chicago
   Press. 21-69.


Edwards, S. and E. Levy Yeyati. 2004. “Flexible Exchange Rates as Shock Absorbers,”
   European Economic Review, forthcoming.


Eichengreen, B. 2003. Capital Flows and Crises, MIT Press, January.
                                          65


Eichengreen, B. and D. Leblang. 2003. “Capital Account Liberalization and Growth: Was
    Mr. Mahathir Right?,” NBER Working Paper No. 9427, January.


Eichengreen, B., A. K. Rose and Ch. Wyplosz. (1996): “Contagious Currency Crises”,
    NBER Working Paper No. 5681, July.


Frankel, J. A., and A. K. Rose (1996): “Currency Crashes in Emerging Markets: An
    Empirical Treatment,” Journal of International Economics, 41(3-4): 351-366.


Frankel, J. A. and E. A. Cavallo. 2004. “Does Openness to Trade Make Countries
    More Vulnerable to Sudden Stops, Or Less? Using Gravity to Establish
    Causality,” NBER Working Paper No. 10957, December.


Gagnon, J. 2005. “Currency Crashes and Bond Yields in Industrial Countries,” Board
    Og Governors Federal Reserve System, International Finance Section, Working
    paper N0. 838


Freund, C. and F. Warnock. 2005. “Current Account Deficits in Industrial Countries: The
    Bigger They Are, The Harder They Fall?,” in R. Clarida (Ed.): G7 Current Account
    Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment, The University of Chicago Press,
    forthcoming.


Greenspan, A. 2005. Remarks at the International Monetary Conference, Beijing,
    People’s Republic of China, June 6.


Greenspan, A. 2004. “The Evolving U.S. Payments Imbalance and its Impact on Europe
    and the Rest of the World,” CATO Journal, Spring/Summer 2004.


Guidotti, P., Villar, A. and F. Sturzenegger. 2004. “On the Consequences of Sudden
    Stops,” Economia, 4(2): 171-241.
                                            66


Lane, P. and G.M. Milessi-Ferreti. 2001. “The External Wealth of Nations: Measures of
   Foreign Assets and Liabilities for Industrial and Developing Countries,” Journal of
   International Economics, Vol. 55 (2): 263-294.


Mann, C. 2004. “The US Current Account, New Economy Services, and Implications for
   Sustainability,” Review of International Economics, 12 (2): 262 – 276.


________. 2003. “How Long the Strong Dollar?,”, in Bergsten, C.F. and J. Williamson
   (Editors): Dollar Overvaluation and the World Economy, Special Report 16, Institute
   for International Economics, Washington D.C., November.


________. 1999. Is the U.S. Trade Deficit Sustainable?. Institute for International
   Economics, Washington D.C., September.


Milesi-Ferretti, G. M. and A. Razin. (2000), “Current Account Reversals and Currency
   Crises: Empirical Regularities” in P. Krugman (Ed), Currency Crises, U. of Chicago
   Press.


Mussa, M. 2004.“Exchange Rate Adjustments Needed to Reduce Global Payments
   Imbalance,” in Bergsten, C.F. and J. Williamson (Editors): Dollar Adjustment: How
   Far? Against What?, Institute for International Economics, Washington D.C.,
   November.


Obstfeld, M. and K. Rogoff. 2000. "Perspectives on OECD Capital Market Integration:
   Implications for U.S. Current Account Adjustment," in Federal Reserve Bank of
   Kansas City, Global Economic Integration: Opportunities and Challenges, March,
   pp. 169-208.


_______________ 2004. “The Unsustainable US Current Account Position Revisited,”
   NBER Working Paper 10869, November.
                                          67


_____________________. 2005. “Global Exchange Rate Adjustments and Global
   Current Account Imbalances,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, forthcoming.


O’Neill, J. and J. Hatzius. 2004. “US Balance of Payments. Unsustainable, But…,”
   Global Economics Papers No. 104, New York: Goldman and Sachs.


_____________ 2002. “US Balance of Payments: Still Unsustainable,” Global
   Economics Paper No. 70, New York: Goldman-Sachs.


Roubini, N. and B. Setser. 2004. “The US as a Net Debtor: The Sustainability of the US
   External Imbalances,” mimeo, Stern School of Business, August.


Sachs, J.D., Warner, A.M., 1995. “Economic Reform and the Process of Global
   Integration,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (1), 1–118.


Taylor, A. M. 2002. “A Century of Current Account Dynamics,” NBER Working Paper
   No. 8927, May.


Wren-Lewis, S. 2004. “The Needed Changes in Bilateral Exchange Rates”, in Bergsten,
   C.F. and J. Williamson (Editors): Dollar Adjustment: How Far? Against What?,
   Institute for International Economics, Washington D.C., November.
