                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        PUZZLING TAX STRUCTURES IN DEVELOPING
                           COUNTRIES: A COMPARISON OF TWO
                              ALTERNATIVE EXPLANATIONS

                                              Roger Gordon
                                                 Wei Li

                                          Working Paper 11661
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11661


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2005




We would like to thank participants at EASE-16, and especially Andrew Rose, Francis Liu, and Michael
Alba for comments on an earlier draft. We would also like to thank the World Bank for financial support
for this project. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Roger Gordon and Wei Li. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Puzzling Tax Structures in Developing Countries: A Comparison of Two Alternative
Explanations
Roegr Gordon and Wei Li
NBER Working Paper No. 11661
September 2005
JEL No. H21, O23, O17, F13, F23

                                            ABSTRACT

Observed economic policies in developing countries differ sharply both from those observed among
developed countries and from those forecast by existing models of optimal policies. For example,
developing countries rely little on broad-based taxes, and make substantial use of tariffs and
seignorage as nontax sources of revenue.

The objective of this paper is to contrast the implications of two models designed to explain such
anomalous policies. One approach, by Gordon-Li (2005), focuses on the greater difficulties faced
in poor countries in monitoring taxable activity, and explores the best available policies given such
difficulties. The other, building on Grossman-Helpman (1994), presumes that political-economy
problems in developing countries are worse, leading to worse policy choices. The paper compares
the contrasting theoretical implications of the two models with the data, and finds that the political-
economy approach does poorly in reconciling many aspects of the data with the theory. In contrast,
the forecasts from Gordon-Li model are largely consistent with the data currently available.



Roger H. Gordon
Department of Economics 0508
UC, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093
and NBER
rogordon@ucsd.edu

Wei Li
University of Virginia
Darden Graduate School of Business
Administration
Box 6550
Charlottesville, VA 22906-6550
liw@darden.virginia.edu
    Puzzling Tax Structures in Developing Countries: A
         Comparison of Two Alternative Explanations
                                                  by
                               Roger Gordon and Wei Li*


        Abstract: Observed economic policies in developing countries differ sharply both
        from those observed among developed countries and from those forecast by
        existing models of optimal policies. For example, developing countries rely little
        on broad-based taxes, and make substantial use of tariffs and seignorage as
        nontax sources of revenue.

        The objective of this paper is to contrast the implications of two models designed
        to explain such anomalous policies. One approach, by Gordon-Li (2005), focuses
        on the greater difficulties faced in poor countries in monitoring taxable activity,
        and explores the best available policies given such difficulties. The other,
        building on Grossman-Helpman (1994), presumes that political-economy
        problems in developing countries are worse, leading to worse policy choices. The
        paper compares the contrasting theoretical implications of the two models with
        the data, and finds that the political-economy approach does poorly in
        reconciling many aspects of the data with the theory. In contrast, the forecasts
        from Gordon-Li model are largely consistent with the data currently available.



Economic policies in developing countries often differ sharply from those commonly
advocated by economists, generating advice to adopt policies more consistent with both
the successful practices in richer countries and/or those that appear best based on existing
economic theories.


For example, economists advocate a stable currency and low tariff rates. Yet inflation
rates in developing countries are often high, as are tariff rates.




*
  We would like to thank participants at EASE-16, and especially Andrew Rose, Francis Liu, and Michael
Alba for comments on an earlier draft. We would also like to thank the World Bank for financial support
for this project.


                                                   1
Economists advocate setting up procedures to protect property rights, and establishing a
rule of law in particular to aid in the legal enforcement of contracts and in dispute
resolution. Yet, complaints by firms in developing countries about costly and time-
consuming procedures, under-the-table fees, and arbitrary outcomes are common.


Economists strongly discourage state ownership of firms.1 Yet in developing countries
state ownership of firms is common. State ownership of banks is even more common.


Taxes certainly require some interference with market transactions, so the advice would
be to enact taxes with a broad base and low rates so as to lessen the efficiency costs
resulting from the distortions created by the tax structure. Broad-based taxes, such as a
value-added tax, certainly do play an important role in poorer as well as richer countries.
However, a much larger share of revenue in developing than in developed countries
comes from taxes with a narrow base. Even when broad-based taxes are used, the
evidence suggests that in practice revenue is collected from only a fraction of the activity
that by statute should be covered.


In each case, economists normally advocate a shift towards policies that reduce
interference in the functioning of markets.


If existing policies in poorer countries are so costly, though, why are such policies
adopted to begin with? The deviation from conventionally recommended policies is
systematic among poorer countries, and has existed for many years, making it hard to
dismiss this evidence as being a result of some officials misunderstanding the
implications of the policies they choose. Why would developing countries choose to
impose such costs on themselves?


A common explanation for such seemingly perverse policies in developing economies
falls under the general category of "political economy" problems. Here, the presumption


1
 Where monopoly power is present, exceptions might be made, though even here government regulatory
oversight is typically preferred to government ownership.


                                                 2
is that these policies are designed to benefit select groups within a country who have
unusually strong political influence. In particular, a government can favor these groups
by designing the tax system to transfer resources to them, and perhaps by interfering with
market allocations so as to alter equilibrium market prices in ways that benefit particular
favored industries. But these policies may still impose large costs on the rest of the
population, justifying altruistic intervention from outside.


Gordon and Li (2005) develop an alternative hypothesis for such policies. Here, the key
assumption is that poorer countries face much more severe enforcement problems with
their tax system. Enforcement depends heavily on the availability of information from
outside a firm about the scale of any firm's economic activities. Such information,
largely coming from the firm's recorded transactions through the financial sector, is
essential to double-check the information reported by the firm. When firms use the
financial sector, they leave a paper trail, facilitating tax enforcement. In contrast, cash
transactions are virtually impossible to monitor and tax, to the point that the informal
economy and the cash economy are often used as synonyms. When countries have both a
financial sector that provides little value-added to firms, and firms that receive very
heterogeneous benefits from using the financial sector, then the forecasted outcome is
high tax rates in practice paid only by those firms strongly dependent on the financial
sector, so a narrow tax base, with other firms avoiding tax through relying entirely on
cash transactions. The result can be large intersectoral distortions favoring the informal
economy.


Gordon and Li (2005) then argue that the government can lessen these intersectoral
distortions through tariff protection of firms facing high effective tax rates, through
inflation as a tax on firms that rely on cash to avoid tax, through controls on lending so as
to redirect credit to heavily taxed sectors, and through red tape and fees that impose
nontax costs on businesses that in practice pay little or no taxes.


Section 1 provides a derivation of the forecasted tax policy coming from a Grossman-
Helpman (1994) style political economy model, and a comparison of these forecasts with



                                              3
those derived in Gordon-Li (2005). The forecasts from the two models differ in many
respects. The political economy model certainly forecasts favorable tax treatment of
sectors that can lobby the government effectively. However, while the model forecasts
lower or even negative tax rates on income earned in favored sector, as long as such
means are available to aid these industries it does not forecast tariff protection for these
sectors,2 inflation, or other forms of interference with market transactions. The theory
would not forecast an informal (untaxed) sector, at least beyond the sectors that are
effective in lobbying the government. Unlike in the Gordon-Li model, tariff protection
and subsidized credit should be for sectors that face relatively low tax rates, rather than
relatively high tax rates. The two models also have contrasting forecasts for the size of
government and the progressivity of the tax structure in poor vs. rich countries.


In section 2, we look at the empirical evidence more closely to compare the evidence
with the forecasts from these two models. Some forecasts are shared by the models and
some contrast. This evidence is almost entirely consistent with the forecasts from the
Gordon-Li model, and almost entirely inconsistent with the forecasts from the political-
economy model. Section 3 then contains a brief set of concluding remarks.




1. Alternative forecasts for economic policies


         Conventional model


In this section, we develop the implications of a political economy model, and summarize
the implications of the Gordon-Li model in a simple setting. To set the context, though,
we first develop a model of policy in a more conventional setting.


Assume that the country is small and open, so is a price taker in the international market

for the two consumption goods. These international prices are denoted by p1 and p 2 .

2
  To the extent that tax rates cannot vary by industry to the extent desired, however, then the model does
forecast tariff protection and subsidized credit to favored firms.


                                                      4
Both goods are produced in the domestic economy, and the domestic wage rate, w , and
domestic interest rate, r , adjust to clear factor markets. Assume that good 2 is imported
and good 1 is exported.3


The government is considering the choice of tax rates on the domestic output of the two
goods, denoted by s1 and s 2 , along with a tariff at rate τ 2 on imports of good 2,4 and a

tax at rate t K on domestic capital. Consumer prices are then equal to pi (1 + τ i ) . The net-

of-tax prices domestic firms face for output of the two goods are pi (1 + τ i )(1 − si ) , while

the user cost of capital to a firm is r + t K .


The indirect utility function for individual i is denoted by
Vi ( p1 (1 + τ 1 ), p 2 (1 + τ 2 ), r , w) + Wi (G ) , where G measures expenditures on public
services. A conventional model for optimal tax policy assumes that the government
chooses Pareto efficient policies, so maximizes a weighted sum of the welfare of
individuals and the utility of government officials, who consume what tax revenue is left
net of the cost of public services:5


(1)       maxτ 2 , s1 , s 2 , t K , G {       (Vi ( p1 (1 + τ 1 ), p2 (1 + τ 2 ), r , w) + Wi (G )) + U (R − G ) ,
                                          i

Using the aggregate economy's budget constraint, tax revenue R equals gross domestic
output minus domestic consumption, all evaluated at world prices: R =                                    pj(f j −Cj).
                                                                                                     j

By maximizing over the size of government services, G, trading off benefits to residents
with foregone consumption of government officials, we can rewrite the government's
objective function as:


3
  Here, we assume that workers and capital can move without cost between the two domestic industries, so
that there is one set of factor prices characterizing the economy as a whole.
4
  We also include in the notation a placeholder tariff on good 1, denoted τ 1 , just to simplify some of the
notation, even though we normalize the tariffs by setting τ 1 = 0.
5
  This model simultaneously captures the behavior of both "benevolent" and "malevolent" governments, by
allowing officials to extract private benefits from unspent tax revenue, but also having them care about
individual utilities.


                                                                 5
(1a)      maxτ 2 , s1 , s 2 , t K       (Vi ( p1 (1 + τ 1 ), p2 (1 + τ 2 ), r , w) ) + S       pj(f j −Cj)
                                    i                                                      j

for some function S(.) that captures the overall benefits from extra tax revenue.
This model is the basic framework used in deriving optimal tax rates. To replicate a tax
rate on labor income, there would need to be a uniform sales tax rate ( s1 = s 2 ) along with
implicit expensing for capital investments ( rt K = − s1 ). Taxes on capital income may
well arise in such a derivation, and would appear through a tax rate on capital above this
figure. Distortions to relative consumer prices could be implemented through a tariff
along with an offsetting tax on domestic production of that good, as happens with a VAT.
Such distortions could arise, for example, if those with a low marginal utility of income
have high relative demand for one of the two goods. To preserve productive efficiency,
however, as forecast by Diamond and Mirrlees (1971), the model would require that


                                                     p1 (1 − s1 )        p
                                                                       = 1
                                               p 2 (1 + τ 2 )(1 − s 2 ) p 2


so that sales tax rates adjust to compensate for any tariffs, so as to leave the net-of-tax
price faced by producers unchanged by the introduction of the tariff.


In such a setting, there are no grounds for interfering further with market allocations: as
forecast by Diamond-Mirrlees, production should remain efficient. As a result, the model
cannot help explain state ownership of firms or banks, or any government regulations
interfering with market allocations. As set up here, the model does not include a role for
"money," so does not allow an analysis of the optimal inflation rate. One simplified way
to introduce money into the model is by including real cash balances as a third consumer
good. To replicate a proportional tax on labor income, the sales tax rates should again by
equal across goods, implying an equal proportional mark-up over the real costs of each
good. The real cost of money, as noted by Friedman (1956) is virtually zero, implying a
price of money so a nominal interest rate of virtually zero.




                                                               6
           Gordon-Li model


Gordon and Li (2005) add one new issue into the above model: tax enforcement. They
assume that firms can be monitored and taxed only if they make use of the financial
sector, thereby leaving a paper trail. The real benefits of using the financial sector, per
se, for a firm in industry j is assumed to equal a j p j (1 + τ j ) f j , so is proportional to the

value of the firm's output. The cost of using the financial sector is that the firm becomes
subject to tax.6 Since pretax output from a firm using the financial sector is
(1 + a j )(1 + τ j ) p j f j , sales tax and capital tax payments would together equal

s j p j (1 + τ j )(1 + a j ) f j + t K K j . Firms then make use of the financial sector only if

benefits exceed costs, or if


(2)                                a j (1 + τ j ) p j f j > s j (1 + τ j ) p j (1 + a j ) + t K K j


This adds to the conventional analysis a set of constraints on the feasible tax rates
imposed on each industry. Any tax rates violating equation (2) will induce
disintermediation and collect no revenue from that industry.


In richer countries, use of the financial sector may be valuable enough that none of these
constraints are binding. In poorer countries, though, the financial sector may operate
much less well (the a j are smaller), so that these constraints become an important

consideration in any discussion of tax policy. The lower are the a j within a country, the

lower are feasible tax rates and as a result the lower would be government revenue. As
seen below, government revenue as a fraction of GDP is in fact much lower in poorer
than in richer countries. The conventional model, in contrast, does not help explain this
unless government revenue is less valued in poorer countries.



6
    Tariffs are collected regardless.


                                                             7
The presumption in Gordon and Li is that capital-intensive industries will value much
more the use of the financial sector, so have a higher a j .7 To begin with, this will imply

a higher s j in capital-intensive industries when some of the constraints in equation (2)

become binding.


When firms within each industry are homogeneous and the government can set a separate
sales tax rate for each industry, then tax rates would be set so that all firms satisfy the
constraints in equation (2). Any sales tax rate in an industry high enough to violate
equation (2) would create a Pareto loss, since the government would lose its tax base in
that industry while firms are left indifferent, relative to a rate that just satisfies equation
(2).


When firms within an industry are heterogeneous, though, then a higher s j will collect

more revenue from some firms while inducing others to shift into the cash economy.
Depending on the distribution of the a j within an industry, tax rates can potentially be

quite high, with some firms paying this high tax rate and others avoiding it through
disintermediation. The conventional model does not include any structure sufficient to
explain the presence of an informal economy.


Given differences in the optimal s j across industries, Gordon and Li then explore the

role of various other policies to lessen the misallocations resulting from differences in the
optimal s j across industries in response to the constraints in equation (2). Tariffs may

now be used even if they would not be used otherwise. Not only can tariffs help collect
additional revenue, but they can also lessen the distortions created by the differential
sales tax rates by industry by shifting domestic production into the heavily taxed


7
  This could occur because capital-intensive firms are larger so have more customers who are physically
distant, making use of financial intermediaries to handle payments of more value. Capital-intensive firms
will also face lumpy expenditures to purchase capital, making bank loans of more value. To convince
banks of their credit worthiness, maintaining an active account with the bank may be essential. Larger
firms may also not be able to effectively monitor all of the employees who handle cash, and prefer instead
to shift to noncash payments through use of the banking sector.


                                                     8
industries. If the heavily taxed good is imported, then these two potential benefits
reinforce and trade will be discouraged. In contrast, if the heavily taxed good is exported
then these two potential benefits conflict and trade may even be encouraged.


Money is now demanded in particular by firms that avoid taxes by joining the cash
economy, so that inflation becomes a targeted tax on firms otherwise avoiding tax.8
The larger the informal sector the higher the benefits relative to the costs of inflation.


Capital taxes can help focus tax liabilities on capital-intensive firms, who are the most
tied to using the financial sector so the least likely to shift into the informal sector in
response.


Given the efficiency costs arising from a shift of activity out of the most highly taxed
(capital-intensive) sectors, one mechanism to reduce this shift is state ownership of the
most capital-intensive firms. Through state-ownership, the government can in principle
ensure that the sector has the efficient scale and capital intensity. This potential
efficiency gain can quickly become large as tax rates increase, and with high enough tax
rates can dominate the efficiency loss that occurs due to state ownership per se.


An alternative mechanism to increase the scale of activity in the heavily taxed sectors is
to provide them cheap credit. This can be done through state-ownership of the banking
sector. While providing cheap credit to heavily taxed firms results in losses for the state-
owned banks, the government can in principle cover these losses through the resulting tax
revenue collected from the extra capital invested in these heavily taxed sectors.


Government red tape and regulatory controls on firm entry can be another mechanism to
hinder activity in lightly taxed if not entirely untaxed sectors. Even if no revenue is
collected directly through such intervention, to the extent domestic production shifts as a



8
  The feasible "inflation" tax would itself be constrained, though, by the option firms have to use a foreign
rather than a domestic currency for transactions.


                                                      9
result into more heavily taxed sectors there can still be a net efficiency benefit from such
policies.


To see this more formally, consider an individual's choice between being an employee in
the formal sector vs. working in the informal sector. We assume that the individual
makes this choice to maximize indirect utility of V (w) .9 Within the formal sector, the
effective wage rate for individual j is w j = (1 − s j ) p j f Lj , where f Lj measures the

marginal product of labor in the industry. Let the effective wage rate in the informal
sector be (1 + n j ) p j f Lj . Here, n j is a parameter that varies by individual, reflecting that

individual's best available informal jobs and the value of a j (positive or negative) in that

sector, so can be either positive or negative. There is some joint density function
g ( w j , n j ) for w j and n j . Without government intervention, the individual shifts to the

informal sector whenever n j > − s j .


The government is affected by this choice, though, given that output in the formal sector
is taxable whereas output in the informal sector is not. If output in the formal sector is
subject to a sales tax at rate s , then tax revenue drops by sw j L j /(1 − s ) if the individual

leaves the formal sector. Individual choices are then inefficient, since they ignore this
fiscal externality.


What if at some cost, F, the government can hire tax inspectors to locate and identify
businesses operating in the informal sector? We assume that these inspectors cannot
observe (1 + n j ) p j f Lj , nor hours of work, but only the fact that the individual is

working in the informal sector. Many of the people working in the informal sector
presumably are extremely poor,10 making it unattractive on distributional grounds to
impose a fixed monetary fee for working in the informal sector. Instead, consider the
imposition of nontax (time) costs on firms in the informal sector, generated through red

9
  The other arguments of V are surpressed, to economize on notation.
10
   One possible explanation for this is that capital and skilled labor are complementary in production, so
that the capital-intensive firms in the formal sector employ very few unskilled workers.


                                                     10
tape. Assume in particular that the government can impose a time cost of H on each
individual in the informal sector.11 Then the individual shifts into the informal sector if
and only if (1 + n j ) p j f Lj ( L − H ) > (1 − s j ) p j f Lj L or equivalently if

n j > ( H − s j L) /( L − H ) .


Even though red tape imposes costs on those in the informal sector while collecting no
revenue directly, still the government may well choose to create red tape. The key gain is
the resulting shift of higher skilled individuals into the formal sector, with the resulting
increase in tax revenue.


Stated formally, start from H = 0 and consider the change in the government's objective
function from a marginal increase in H:



            ∞ ∞                                     ∞      s      ∂n *
(3)     −   0 − s V I (1 + n) wg ( w, n) dndw + S ' 0          wL      g ( w,− s )dw ,
                                                          1− s    ∂H

where n* = ( H − sL) /( L − H ) represents the skill level just indifferent between being in

the formal or the informal sectors, so that ∂n* / ∂H = (1 − s ) / L evaluated at H = 0 .
Expression (3) can easily be positive, in which case red tape is a useful means of
expanding the formal sector. This is more likely to occur to the extent that S ' >> VI and
s >> 0 , implying in addition that the average value of n among those in the informal
sector will be small or negative.


The Gordon-Li model took the range of values of the a j , measuring the value to each

firm j of making use of the financial sector, as exogenous. While the state of skills and
technology within the financial sector are largely outside of the direct control of the


11
  What if tax inspectors can learn each individual's productivity? They would then have an incentive to
charge a firm an amount just sufficient to leave them indifferent to remaining in the informal sector, given
H, enforced by the threat of revealing their income to the tax authorities. The only substantive change is a
redistribution from informal firms to tax inspectors, leading in equilibrium to a fall in the amount F they
require in wages from the government. Given such a fall in the expense of imposing the costs H on
informal firms, the government may encourage such corruption.


                                                     11
government, the government does control the regulatory environment under which the
financial sector operates. Changes such as providing deposit insurance, or speeding the
clearing of interbank payments, presumably will shift up the distribution of the a j .

Surprisingly, the government does not necessarily have an incentive to adopt such
policies, even given the objective function we have assumed. Consider the welfare
effects of an increase in the values of a j in industries at the bottom end of the

distribution, sufficient to pull firms in these industries into the formal sector. They now
pay at least some taxes, in itself a welfare gain.12 By documenting their activity with a
bank, firms entering the formal sector should also now qualify for bank credit that they
would not previously have had access to. This credit comes at the expense of loans to
firms in industries already in the formal sector, who in this example face higher tax rates.
On net, tax revenue could well fall, with the drop in payments from high-taxed sectors
perhaps more than offsetting the taxes paid by firms newly entering the formal sector.
When the behavioral responses lead to a fall in tax revenue, efficiency falls as well, so
that such an improvement in the performance of the financial sector may not be an
attractive option to the government.


Of course, large enough improvements in the ai will necessarily be a welfare gain, since
the constraints in equation (2) all become less binding and eventually nonbinding. Policy
will change continuously with the relaxation of these constraints. In particular, as the
financial sector improves, to begin with we expect to see a drop in the size of the
informal sector, and with the broader tax base less extreme tax rates on the most capital-
intensive firms. With smaller intersectoral distortions, the need for distorting tariffs,
inflation, state ownership of firms or banks, and use of capital taxes, all drop.



One example of such a transition in policy, an example that led us to develop this model,
is the case of China during the 1990's, as described in Gordon and Li (2005a). At the
beginning of this decade, the national government was unable to collect much of any

12
 When firms just become willing to shift into the formal sector, by construction they are just indifferent.
But the government receives extra revenue, so that there is a gain in overall welfare, and in efficiency.


                                                     12
revenue from small and medium sized firms, so that its tax revenue came almost entirely
from taxes on larger state-owned firms.13 It's observed policies were very much
consistent with those forecast above, with tax rates that varied strongly by sector, controls
over the allocation of credit, and high tariff rates.14 In 1994, there were a series of
reforms that led to a sharp increase in the national government's ability to collect taxes
from small and medium-sized firms.15 With this successful attempt to broaden its tax
base, the national government shifted policy generally away from the policies forecast
above towards a set of more conventional policies, agreeing to cut tariffs through joining
the WTO, eliminating government control over lending practices at the banks, shifting
heavily away from reliance on sector-specific excise taxes and taxes on capital (corporate
income taxes) towards a broad-based VAT, and beginning the process of downsizing the
size of the SOE sector, and the role of the government in this sector.


Even when increasing the value provided by the financial sector does raise welfare,
however, it does not follow that subsidies to the financial sector, artificially raising the
values of the ai , raise welfare. Intuitively, a competitive banking sector will in
equilibrium pass along the value of any subsidies to its customers, so that the maximum
tax these customers will be willing to pay to make use of the banking sector goes up by
just the size of the subsidy. The extra tax payments are then just sufficient to cover the
cost of the subsidy.


More formally, assume that the costs to the bank of supplying services to firms in
industry j, per dollar of sales that must be intermediated, is x j , implying total costs of

x j p j (1 + τ j ) f j . Similarly, assume the gross benefits to firms in industry j from using

the banks are b j p j (1 + τ j ) f j . With a competitive banking sector, the price firms pay for

13
   In particular, local governments were responsible for monitoring and assessing taxes on small and
medium-sized firms, and were effective in hiding taxable activity from the national government.
14
   There was little use of inflation, however.
15
   An important part of this tax reform had the national government take over responsibility from local
governments for monitoring and assessing taxes on smaller firms. In China, the role of the financial sector
in tax enforcement was much more limited than in other developing countries, since each firm had a party
representative whose job in part was to monitor the taxable activity of the firm. The level of government to
which this party representative was responsible changed as of 1994.


                                                    13
banking services equals the cost of provision of these services, so that the net benefits to
firms equal (b j − x j ) p j (1 + τ j ) f j ≡ a j p j (1 + τ j ) f j . What if the government now

provides a subsidy to the provision of financial services to this industry, paying some
amount σ j p j (1 + τ j ) f j to the banks? With a competitive banking sector, this subsidy

will be passed along to the customers in the form of a lower price, so that the net benefits
to a firm from using the financial sector rise to (a j + σ j ) p j (1 + τ j ) f j . Following the

logic of equation (2), this figure now equals the maximum taxes that can be collected
from this industry. Subtracting off the costs of the subsidy, however, the maximum net
revenue from this industry remains equal to a j p j (1 + τ j ) f j . As long as all tax rates can

adjust, the same revenue on net is collected with the subsidy as without.


The same argument also implies that taxes on the financial sector crowd out other sources
of revenue one for one. Since it would be very difficult to design the tax structure on the
financial sector to replicate the flexibility the government has in choosing each of the
sales tax rates and the capital-income tax rate, taxes on the financial sector will normally
end up being less effective than taxes on each of the industries making use of the
financial sector.


        Political Economy model


There are a variety of modeling approaches taken within the political economy literature
to characterize the nature of the implicit objectives faced by the government when
choosing policies. The approach we take is inspired by the work of Grossman and
Helpman (1994), who assume that special interests that have solved their internal free-
rider problem can provide "contributions" to a party in power linked at the margin to the
degree to which the party aids that interest group. The result is that the government puts
more weight on the utility of that interest group than it otherwise would.


To explain more perverse policies in developing countries, the presumption is then that
these contributions distort policy more severely in developing than in developed


                                                  14
countries. Distortions are least costly in the Grossman-Helpman framework when either
no industries or all industries contribute, since in either case the weights remain
undistorted across industries. If we assume that most all industries in developed
countries actively lobby the government, then developing countries end up with worse
policies if a smaller fraction of industries are able to lobby effectively.


Solving the free-rider problem within an industry is easier when there are fewer firms in
the industry. We presume that capital-intensive industries have larger individual firms
and fewer firms in the industry as a whole, so that the subset of industries able to lobby
the government will largely represent the most capital-intensive sectors.


One issue, though, is how to capture the benefits going to an industry from any given
government policies, since in the above model the income of any individual simply
depends on the amounts of labor and capital they provide to the market, and not on which
industry they work for or invest in. In order to capture this, we instead assume that at the
date that policy is being set factors cannot change industries, even if the supply of factors
to their current industry can adjust in response to policy changes. In addition, for
simplicity we assume that individuals work and invest in the same industry.


As shown in Bernheim and Winston (1986), the equilibrium bribes in such a setting are
equivalent to those in which lobbying industries pay monetary bribes to officials
equivalent to the benefits they receive due to the policies adopted by the government,
relative to a given fallback position. The equilibrium bribe by industry j, denoted by B j ,

then satisfies: V j ( p1 (1 + τ 1 ), p 2 (1 + τ 2 ), r j , w j ;− B j ) + W j (G ) = U *j . The default utility

level, U *j , is determined from the constraint that the bribe must be sufficient to allow the

government and the other bribing industries to do as well as they could have done
collectively had this one industry not actively bribed the government – if not, the bribe
would not be accepted.




                                                      15
For simplicity, we assume that bribes are as valuable to officials as explicit but unspent
tax revenue. Certainly, both are cash that officials can use to finance perks if not private
consumption. The only difference is that oversight and possible punishment for
accepting under-the-table payments may be different than for using tax revenue for
personal advantage.16 To the extent bribes are less valuable to officials than extra tax
revenue, then equilibrium tax rates in lobbying industries will be higher than we find
below, and conversely.


If j ∈ L is the set of industries that actively lobby the government, then the resulting
objective function for the government is:

           maxτ 2 , s1 , s 2 , t K , G             (V j + W j ) +         (U *j ) + S       pj(f j −Cj)−G
                                           j∉L                      j∈L                 j



where we assume a composite individual working for each industry. Here, bribes show
up implicitly in government revenue through their effects on equilibrium consumption
among members of lobbying industries.


The resulting first-order conditions for s k equals

                                               ∂f j       ∂C j
(4)                         S'          pj            −             = VkI ( p k (1 + τ k ) f k )   for k ∉ L
                                    j          ∂s k       ∂s k

                                        ∂f j       ∂C j
and                            pj              −           =0        for k ∈ L.
                           j            ∂s k       ∂s k

where VkI denotes the marginal utility of income for the k'th individual. For nonbribing
industries, the government trades of the revenue it gets with the welfare loss to
individuals. Since we assume that S ' > VkI , in equilibrium the efficiency costs of the tax
must at the margin just offset the welfare gain from shifting a given amount of resources
to the government. Note that an increase in the sales tax rate on lobbying industries

16
  Grossman-Helpman (1994), in contrast, assume that bribes can only be spent on political campaigns,
reflecting current institutional constraints in the U.S. There are no similar constraints to our knowledge in
any developing country.


                                                                 16
matters only to the extent that it affects government revenue. No individual utilities
change, since consumer prices are unaffected, while the effects on utility of any changes
in factor prices in lobbying industries are fully offset through changes in the bribes.


The individuals' collective budget constraint equals
     p j (1 + τ j )C j +          Bj =       p j (1 − s j )(1 + τ j ) f j − t K K , implying that
 j                          j∈L          j

          ∂f j       ∂C j                                              ∂C jk          ∂K k                               ∂f
     pj          −          = δ k p k (1 + τ k ) f k +        p jτ j           +t K        + p k ( s k (1 + τ k ) − τ k ) k ,
 j        ∂s k       ∂s k                                 j            ∂s k           ∂s k                               ∂s k


where δ k = 1 for k ∉ L and δ k = 0 otherwise.


Substituting into equation (4), it is straightforward to show that


                       VkI              C C jk        K    Kk     s (1 + τ k ) − τ k f k
(6)         δ k (1 −       ) − p jτ j ε I jk    −t K ε *k        = k                  ε *,
                        S'    j              Ik       p k p k f k (1 − s k )(1 + τ k ) p k
                                                            *




where, ε YX represents the elasticity of X with respect to Y, where

p *k ≡ p k (1 + τ k )(1 − s k ) and where I k = p *k f k − t K K k . All three elasticities are positive
under any reasonable assumptions.


To begin with, equation (6) suggests that the optimal effective tax rate s k (1 + τ k ) − τ k

will be negative for industries actively bribing the government to the extent τ 2 > 0 and
t K > 0 . At the optimum, a marginal increase in the subsidy to production in a lobbying
industry should have no net effect on government revenue. While a marginal increase in
the subsidy is in itself a net revenue cost, since more output needs to be subsidized, the
extra production also generates extra revenue to the extent that the resulting increases in
investment and consumption are taxable. At the optimal tax rates, these effects should
exactly offset each other.




                                                              17
For firms not actively bribing the government, for whom δ k = 1 , optimal tax rates
presumably will be positive. If the three elasticities in equation (6) are the same among
these industries, if there are no differences in the marginal utility of income across these
industries, and if consumption patterns are the same for people in all industries, then the
effective tax rate will be lower in more capital-intensive industries if t K > 0 , in effect to
compensate for this other source of revenue from these industries.


The key forecasted difference in sales tax rates is then between industries that actively
bribe officials and other industries. The forecast of a lower (or negative) tax rate on
capital-intensive industries is one clear difference between the political economy model
and the Gordon-Li model.


What about the optimal tariff rate? Consider the welfare effects of an increase in τ m on

imports of goods produced by bribing industries, with a compensating increase in s m so

as to leave s m (1 + τ m ) − τ m consistent with equation (6). This combined change in tax
rates has no effects on the factor incomes of any individual, so does not help per se to
redistribute to individuals in bribing industries. It does raise the consumer price for good
m faced by all individuals, so helps aid those in lobbying industries to the extent that
individuals in these industries tend NOT to consume the output from their own industries.
As discussed in Saez (2002), such a tariff may also be justified on efficiency grounds if a
drop in consumption of good m leads to increases in factor supplies beyond what happens
simply due to income effects.


Neither of these justifications for a tariff would exist if the utility function is weakly
separable between consumption and factor supplies, e.g. U ( L, K , h(C1 , C 2 )) , and if the
utility function is the same for individuals in different industries. Even if these
assumptions are violated, there is no reason to expect that individuals working in favored
industries tend NOT to consumer output from these industries, or that factor supplies are
more responsive to the prices of goods produced by capital-intensive industries. The
model does not then help to explain the existence of tariffs protecting favored industries.


                                               18
To what degree would subsidies to capital ( t K < 0 ) be used to aid bribing (capital-
intensive) industries? Even better targeted would be a subsidy to capital invested in
bribing industries, implemented for example through subsidized loans restricted to these
industries.17 Note that a reduction in the output tax rate, sk , affecting bribing industries
is equivalent to a proportional subsidy to both capital and labor employed within this
industry. When could a further subsidy just to capital in the industry be chosen?


If all the individuals working in the industry collude together in bribing the government,
then the government receives the benefits accruing to both groups, so a capital subsidy
per se makes sense only if it has favorable efficiency effects. This could occur if the
supply elasticity of capital is less than that for labor. As noted by Judd (1987), while the
very short-run supply of capital is extremely inelastic, the long run supply in contrast
should be extremely elastic, suggesting if anything attempts to restrict taxes/subsidies to
labor whenever the government has a longer time perspective.


If only the capital owners in an industry bribe the government, then the government does
have an incentive to manipulate the returns to labor vs. capital in the industry. Natural
policies suggested by such an objective are subsidized loans to the industry or a tax
structure within the industry favoring capital over labor income.


If capital but not labor is highly mobile across industries, the model would instead
forecast a low uniform tax (or subsidy) rate on capital, a high tax rate on labor in the
disfavored industries, and no tariffs. Following equation (6), the labor income tax rate in
favored industries would have the opposite sign of the tax/subsidy rate on capital.


Whether capital is mobile or not, these results contrast sharply with the forecasts from the
Gordon-Li model, which forecasts capital taxes as a way to focus the tax burden on firms


17
  To induce banks to provide subsidized credit to particular customers, explicit subsidies to such loans, or
loan guarantees, would be one approach. State ownership of the banking sector, with the government
covering losses incurred on subsidized loans, is another.


                                                     19
that are most dependent on the financial sector, and heavier tax payments by capital-
intensive than by labor-intensive firms.


If the government for some reason could not provide the desired differential sales or labor
income tax rates in favored vs. disfavored industries, then tariffs can be a second-best
way of favoring certain industries. A tariff is second best since not only does it raise the
returns earned within that industry but it also distorts consumer choices in ways that in
general are not desired. In contrast to the Gordon-Li model, tariff protection would be
given to sectors facing the lowest rather than the highest tax rates.


Grossman-Helpman (1994) fully recognized that their model would imply output
subsidies for lobbying industries and no tariffs as long as the government can freely make
use of this full range of policy tools. They assumed, though, that output subsidies were
not available as an option to the government. The complication they note to justify this

assumption arises from implications for the default utility levels U *j . Each industry must

pay enough in bribes to ensure that the government plus other bribing industries together
are at least as well off as they would be if they refuse the bribe. If these groups are in a
position to aggressively exploit any given industry, then this industry will need to pay
them a lot in exchange for changing policies. Their opportunity to exploit any given
industry is less if policies are restricted to tariffs. They argue that this consideration
dominates if there are few other industries that are not lobbying, since benefits to a newly
lobbying industry then must come almost entirely from those who must be bribed. If the
group of other industries that are not lobbying is large, however, then this issue will be
second order relative to the gains from use of a more effective policy tool.


Among richer countries, where we presume that most industries actively lobby the
government, their argument suggests that policies will be restricted to tariffs.18 If the
fraction of industries that actively lobby the government is small in developing countries,

18
  Lobbying industries would need to make this decision collectively, however, and in an enforceable way,
since each industry on its own would prefer to be aided through output subsidies rather than tariff
protection. While we know of no such explicit restrictions on policy, it is true that excise taxes/subsidies
play much less of a role in richer countries than in poorer countries.


                                                     20
then even by their argument we would not expect to see any such restrictions on policy.
In fact, excise taxes are an important component of the tax systems in developing
countries. According to the political-economy model, this should not be surprising. But
given this, tariffs should not be used.


In the Grossman-Helpman model, the more industries that lobby the government the
lower is overall tax revenue. (Bribes of course do not show up in the reported revenue
figures.) If fewer industries actively bribe the government in developing countries, then
the size of government should be larger in developing countries, a forecast sharply
contrary to the forecast from the Gordon-Li model.


Another implication of the political-economy model is that as more industries actively
bribe the government, concern with redistribution shrinks. In particular, the government
has no ability left to affect the utility levels within bribing industries, since they are

implicitly set at the default levels U *j . Any redistribution is restricted to individuals in

nonbribing industries, yet the offsetting efficiency costs remain fully relevant. The larger
the number of individuals working in bribing industries, therefore, the less is the concern
with redistribution. If fewer industries are actively involved in bribery in developing
countries, then these countries should focus more on redistributive effects of the tax
structure, so should place more weight on such taxes as the personal income tax that are
particularly effective at shifting the tax burden from rich to poor. This forecast is
strongly contrary to that coming out of the Gordon-Li model, where taxes on labor
income should play little role in poorer countries.


Does the model make any forecasts regarding the extent of state ownership of firms?
One potential role for state ownership is to ensure that promised bribes are in fact paid,
making it easier for the government to change policy as promised. The importance of
this assurance must be traded off with any efficiency costs per se from state ownership.
The equilibrium bribes paid by an industry will be large when few under industries lobby,
since the industry can potentially gain substantially at the expense of nonlobbying
industries. This would be the setting where the benefits from ensuring such payments


                                               21
through state ownership are largest. The model therefore suggests a larger role for state
ownership in the poorest countries, where the fraction of industries that lobby is
presumably the smallest.


Within this political-economy model, there are no incentives per se to use inflation –
there is no motivation for use of cash beyond those in the standard model. Similarly,
there are no grounds for introducing red tape and other nontax forms of harassment. If
activity in unfavored sectors is to be penalized, better to do it through the tax structure
and collect revenue in the process.




2. Data on behavior of poorer vs. richer countries


We turn next to an analysis of available data on tax and related policies among a group of
125 countries for which we could obtain adequate data.19 In the Appendix, we list our
data sources and the definition of the variables used in this paper. In reporting data, we
have grouped these countries into four quartiles based on their GDP per capita in 1990
measured in constant 2000 U.S. dollar. Quartile 1 represents the richest countries, and
quartile 4 the poorest.


We focus first on the evidence regarding forecasts from the Gordon-Li (GL) and the
"political economy" (PE) models when they are the same, and then turn to forecasts that
conflict between the two models.


Throughout we treat skill/technology differences across countries as exogenous, driving
not only differences in GDP per capita but also the quality of the financial sector and the
ease with which firms within an industry can coordinate on lobbying. Certainly, the
types of policy differences we focus on can affect a country's long-run growth rate, and



19
   We would very much like to thank Andrei Shleifer for making available to us the data used in La Porta et
al (2002) and Friedrich Schneider for making available to us his estimates of the size of informal economy.


                                                    22
the utility provided from employing existing factor inputs, but these policy differences
should have little direct effect on factor supplies or on overall output.


       Similar forecasts in the two models


Table 1 provides information regarding several forecasts that are comparable in the two
models, even if the rationales are very different.


One forecast in common is that the tax structure in poorer countries will make more use
of taxes with differential rates by industry. In the Gordon-Li model, tax rates will be
higher on the capital-intensive industries, since they cannot so easily shift into the
informal sector. In the political economy model, tax rates will be lower for capital-
intensive industries, responding to their active lobbying efforts. So both models forecast
rate differences by industry, though the direction of the forecasted rate differences are
opposite.


The key tax whose rate easily varies by industry is nongeneral taxes on production and
sales, primarily consisting of excise taxes. Column 2 of Table 1 reports the fraction of
tax revenue coming from nongeneral production taxes. The data show little variation in
the use of excise taxes by income level, possibly because sin taxes and environmental
(e.g. gasoline) taxes play a more important role in richer countries, offsetting the role of
excise taxes both models focus on.


Unfortunately, at this point we have no data sufficient to test the conflicting forecasts
between the two theories regarding which industries face lower vs. higher tax rates.
While our understanding is that poorer countries rely heavily on revenue from capital-
intensive industries, particularly oil, mining, and other extractive industries, where tax
collection is particularly easy, we have not at this point found data to confirm this
impression.




                                              23
Both models plausibly forecast more use of taxes on capital income among poorer
countries. In the Gordon-Li model, this occurs in order to shift the tax burden onto the
firms that are least likely to shift into the informal sector in response. If capital is mobile
across sectors, then the political economy model trades off the desire to tax capital in
nonlobbying industries and to subsidize capital in lobbying industries. If the aggregate
size of the lobbying sectors is smaller in poorer countries, then capital-income taxes
should be higher in these countries. We presume that the corporate income tax represents
the main tax on income from capital and report the share of revenue coming from the
corporate income tax in column 3 of Table 2. This share shows a weak pattern of being
higher in poorer countries, but the evidence is not dramatic.


Both models also suggest that poorer countries could well use state-owned banks as a
mechanism to provide cheap credit to capital-intensive firms. In the Gordon-Li model,
this is done to redirect credit to sectors paying high tax rates. In the political-economy
model, this is done if capital owners in particular lobby the government. As seen in
column 4 in Table 1, the fraction of the ten largest banks owned by the government is
substantially higher in poorer than in richer countries, though state ownership of banks is
still nontrivial even in rich countries. No data are available on whether firms receiving
subsidized loans pay unusually low or unusually high tax rates.


Both models also forecast a larger role for state-owned firms among poorer countries. In
the Gordon-Li model, state ownership is used to offset the distortions created by the high
tax rates on these firms. In the political-economy model, this occurs to ensure that bribes
are paid, which would be particularly important when few firms actively lobby the
government, generating large potential benefits to these sectors.


       Contrasting forecasts in the two models


One clear difference in the forecasts from the two models regards the size of tax revenue
relative to GDP. In the Gordon-Li model, enforcement is more difficult in poorer
countries, due to a poorer quality financial sector, so that revenue is lower. In contrast, in



                                              24
the political economy model, tax revenue is higher in poorer countries given the
assumption that fewer industries actively lobby the government. The evidence is
reported in column 1 of Table 2. Here, we find that revenue as a fraction of GDP in the
richest quartile is double that in the poorest quartile, and a strongly increasing function of
per capita GDP, consistent with the GL but not the PE model.


The two models also have conflicting forecasts regarding the use of tariffs. In the
Gordon-Li model, tariffs would clearly be attractive if the country is a net importer of
capital-intensive goods.20 In the political economy model, tariffs would not be used
unless lobbying industries collectively manage to restrict any aid they receive to take the
form of tariff protection. The model forecasts that this restriction could well be imposed
in richer countries, where most industries lobby the government, but not in poorer
countries. The evidence on tariffs is reported in column 2 of Table 1. Tariffs are used far
more heavily in poorer countries, consistent with the GL but not the PE model.


Another forecast that differs across the two models regards the use of the personal
income tax or broad based taxes on consumption. In the Gordon-Li model, such taxes on
labor income (when earned or spent) should play little role, since this shifts the tax
burden onto the firms least tied to the financial sector. In contrast, in the political-
economy model, redistribution should matter more in poorer countries, where a smaller
fraction of the economy is actively involved in lobbying. The data on the fraction of tax
revenue collected by the personal income tax and general taxes on goods and services is
reported in column 3 of Table 2, and shows much more of a role for broad-based taxes in
richer countries, consistent with GL.


Another difference between the two models regards inflation. The Gordon-Li model
forecasts inflation as a way to tax the informal sector, representing the only sector that
relies heavily on cash transactions. The political economy model follows the
conventional optimal tax model in forecasting no use of an inflation tax. The size of


20
  In standard trade models, poor countries specialize in labor-intensive industries, so should be importers
of capital-intensive goods.


                                                     25
seignorage as a fraction of GDP is reported in column 4 of Table 2. Here we do find that
poorer countries rely far more heavily on inflation taxes than do richer countries,
consistent with GL.


A further difference regards the use of red tape to hinder activity in labor-intensive
sectors, and in the informal sector. Such policies fall out naturally in the Gordon-Li
model as ways to hinder activity in sectors that pay little or no taxes. In the political
economy model, regular income and sales taxes dominate use of red tape. In columns 5
and 6 of Table 2 we report data on two indicators of red tape: a) the cost to register a
new business, and b) the time required to start a business legally. Both types of costs are
clearly higher in poorer countries, consistent with GL.


The two models focus on very different attributes of an economy in making forecasts for
policy. In the Gordon-Li model, the driving force is a poorly functioning financial sector,
making it all too easy for firms to shift into the cash economy in order to avoid taxes. We
should then see poorer countries having much larger informal sectors, because of their
more poorly functioning financial sectors. In the political economy model, rather than
having the small firms that constitute the informal sector being de facto tax exempt, taxes
should fall primarily on these firms. Data on the size of the informal sector are reported
in column 7 of Table 2. The size of the informal sector as a fraction of GDP in the
poorest quartile is more than double that in the richest quartile, consistent with GL.


To test for evidence that the informal sector tends to be large when the financial sector
functions poorly, we ran a regression forecasting the size of the informal sector as a
function of one or another indicator of the quality of the financial sector, along with
log(per capita GDP), average literacy, and population density as control variables.
Results are reported in Table 3. A poorly functioning financial sector strongly predicts a
large informal sector, whereas the other control variables play little role.


In the political-economy model, the key driving force of course is political lobbying
pressure that leads governments to favor one sector over another. If politics is playing



                                              26
such a dominant role in the choice of tax policy, we would expect to see very different
tax policies chosen by governments that are classified as left-wing vs. right-wing. To
provide some evidence on this, we recalculate the figures on tax policy reported in Table
1, instead classifying countries into four quartiles based on their ideological orientation,
with quartile 1 being the most right wing and quartile 4 being the most left wing. Results
appear in Table 4. Here, we find that ideology has no obvious connection to tax policy,
except perhaps for a higher reliance on tariffs by the most left-wing governments.




3. Conclusions


Tax policies in practice differ dramatically between poorer and richer countries. Richer
countries rely primarily on broad-based income and consumption taxes, and make little
use of tariffs or seignorage as sources of revenue. Poorer countries, in contrast, make
much less use of broad-based taxes, relying instead on excise taxes, tariffs, and
seignorage. In the process, though, they collect much less revenue as a fraction of GDP
than is collected in richer countries. Corruption and red tape are also far more common
in poorer countries.


The question this paper focuses on is why these policy differences arise. We develop the
implications of two alternative models for such policy differences. One, a model initially
developed in Gordon-Li (2005), focuses on the tax enforcement problems that arise when
firms find it easy to shift into the cash economy, thereby avoiding leaving any paper trail
and making tax enforcement extremely difficult. The government is then left relying for
revenue on the remaining industries that cannot so easily shift into the cash economy to
evade tax. With such large differential tax rates, a wide range of other policies may make
sense as second-best means to lessen the resulting misallocations. Within this model, the
policies forecast are "third" best, handling as well as is feasible the informational
problems faced in collecting revenue.




                                             27
The second model assumes that the political pressures faced in poorer countries are very
different than in richer countries, leading to a very different set of policy choices. If
particular industries in poorer countries have been able to lobby the government
effectively for protection, then the chosen policies can be very different than when
political support for the government is more broad-based, at least across industries. If
such political pressures explain the perverse policies chosen in poorer countries, then
there are clear grounds for using international agencies to help induce countries to shift to
policies more in the interests of their population as a whole.


In this paper, we explore the implications of such a political-economy model in detail,
building on the framework developed in Grossman-Helpman (1994). While such a
model easily forecasts more favorable sales tax rates or income tax rates on factors
employed in favored industries, it does not so easily explain tariffs, seignorage or red
tape. Only if sales or income tax rates cannot vary by industry to the extent desired might
tariffs make sense.


The paper then reexamines the data to see to what degree each model is consistent with
the data. Some forecasts are naturally in common, while others are very different. Other
forecasts are very different. As discussed in the paper, the forecasts from the two models
differ sharply with regard to the relative use of tariffs, seignorage, capital-income taxes,
personal-income taxes, and the overall size of tax revenue in poorer vs. richer countries.
In each case, the forecasts from the Gordon-Li model are very much consistent with the
data, while those from the political-economy model are not.


The paper in addition examines data related to the key underpinnings of each model. In
the Gordon-Li model, a weak financial sector implies that little is lost by a firm from
shifting to the cash economy as a means of evading taxes. Countries with a poorly
functioning financial sector should then as a result have a large informal economy, and
with a large informal economy choose a "perverse" tax structure to deal with the resulting
pressures. We document both such relationships.




                                              28
In the political-economy model, tax policy should depend heavily on the nature of the
political pressures faced by the government. Left-wing governments represent ones that
face very different pressures than right-wing governments, so should choose very
different tax policies. We examine to what degree this is true, and find little difference in
tax policies across governments of different ideologies.


Unfortunately, some of the key differences are not at this point testable, e.g. the Gordon-
Li model forecasts that the highest tax rates will be paid by capital-intensive industries
(that find it hardest to shift to the cash economy), whereas in the political economy model
these industries should face the lowest tax rates (since they can most easily solve the
internal free-rider problems and lobby the government for support).


The data at this point are limited, so no tests are definitive. That the implications of the
two models for policy are so different implies that much is at stake in such tests. Within
the political-economy model, the key problem is differences in the political pressures
faced in poorer than in richer countries, and in particular the smaller fraction of industries
in poorer countries that are organized enough to lobby the government. Outside pressure
to adopt more conventional tax policies can potentially compensate as a way to aid the
population as a whole. In the Gordon-Li model, in contrast, the key problem is a weak
financial sector, making tax evasion easy. Reform efforts then need to focus on
improving the quality of the financial sector. Outside pressure to shift to more
conventional tax policies, without simultaneously improving the financial sector, will
likely cause more harm than good.


There certainly is a large body of empirical work at this point suggesting the importance
of financial sector reforms in economic growth. The Gordon-Li model provides a
different underpinning for the role financial reform plays, arguing that financial reform
improves not only the allocation of credit across firms but also induces a shift in
government policies more broadly to ones that create fewer distortions to market
allocations.




                                             29
                                     References




Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt and Ross Levine, (1999), "A New Database on
Financial Development and Structure," Policy Research Working Paper No. 2146,
Washington DC: World Bank.


Beck, Thorsten, George Clarke, Alberto Groff, Philip Keefer, and Patrick Walsh. 2001.
“New tools in comparative political economy: The Database of Political Institutions.”
15:1, pp. 165-176, World Bank Economic Review.


Diamond, Peter and James Mirrlees. 1971. "Optimal Taxation and Public Production,"
American Economic Review 61, pp. 8-27.


Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez de Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer.
2002. “The Regulation of Entry,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, February.


Friedman, Milton. 1969. "The Optimal Quantity of Money." In The Optimal Quantity
of Money and Other Essays, edited by Milton Friedman. Chicago: Aldine Publishing
Company.


Gordon, Roger and Wei Li. 2005. "Tax Structure in Developing Countries: Many
Puzzles and a Possible Explanation," NBER Working Paper No. 11267.


Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman. 1994. "Protection for Sale," American
Economic Review 84, pp. 833-50.


La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez de Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2002. "Government
Ownership of Banks," Journal of Finance, February.



                                           30
International Monetary Fund. 2004. Government Financial Statistics, CD-ROM (May).


International Monetary Fund. 2005. International Finance Statistics, IFS Online,
accessed between February and April 2005.


Judd, Kenneth. 1987. "The Welfare Cost of Factor Taxation in a Perfect-Foresight
Model," Journal of Political Economy 95, pp. 675-709.


Saez, Emmanuel. 2002. "The Desirability of Commodity Taxation under Non-linear
Income Taxation and Heterogeneous Tastes," Journal of Public Economics 83, pp. 217-
30.


Schneider, Friedrich and Dominik Enste. 2000. “Shadow economies: Size, causes, and
consequences,” Journal of Economic Literature 38/1, pp. 77-114.


Schneider, Friedrich. 2004. “The Size of Shadow Economies in 145 Countries from 1999
to 2003,” mimeo, Johannes Kepler University of Linz, Austria.


  World Bank. 2005. World Development Indicators, WDI Online, accessed March and
                                  April, 2005.




                                            31
                                     Table 1
                         Tests when Forecasts are Similar
Countries are classified by GDP per capita in 1990 into four quartiles with Quartile 1 the
richest and Quartile 4 the poorest. The number in each cell is the average of each listed
variable among countries in each income quartile.

             GDP per       Excise Taxes     Corporate Taxes      % Government     SOE
             capita in    (% of revenue)     (% of revenue,      Ownership of    Output
               1990                        1990-2001 average))    Banks, 1995   % of GDP
             (2000 $)
Quartile      20768           19.6                  9.5              24.2          0.1
  1
Quartile       3834           16.2                17.9               40.5          1,8
  2
Quartile       1451           19.5                14.2               47.0          1.5
  3
Quartile       436            20.3                14.2               67.2          8.4
  4




                                            32
                                     Table 2
                            Tests when Forecasts Differ
Countries are classified by GDP per capita in 1990 into four quartiles with Quartile 1 the
richest and Quartile 4 the poorest. The number in each cell is the average of each listed
variable among countries in each income quartile.

              Tax       Tariff     Personal      Seignorage      Cost to       Time to      Informal
            Revenue    Revenue      Income            (% of     Register a     Start a      Economy
             (% of       (% of     plus Sales         GDP,      Business      Business       (% of
             GDP,      revenue)      Taxes       1990-2001        (% of      (days, 2001-    GDP,
             1990 –    1990=2001   (% of tax         average)   GNI per      02 average)    1990/91)
             2001       average    revenue,                      capita,
            average)               1990-2001                     2001-02
                                   average)                     average)
Quartile     26.6         6.0        50.0              0.5        0.11           32          13.5
  1
Quartile     21.4        17.7        37.0              1.7        0.21           57          26.9
  2
Quartile     17.5        22.3        32.7              2.1        0.50           63          34.2
  3
Quartile     13.3        28.8        30.2              2.3        1.97           66          28.8
  4




                                                33
                                        Table 3
                  Factors Affecting Size of Informal Economy

Columns (1) and (2) show estimates of coefficients and their standard errors resulting
from ordinary least squares regressions on the cross-section of countries. The dependent
variable is the size of informal economy in 2001. Numbers in parentheses are standard
errors.   *** indicates 1% level of significance, while * indicates 10% level of
significance.

                                           (1)                         (2)
 Overhead costs                           2.12
                                      (0.059)***
 Interest rate spread                                                  1.28
                                                                    (0.52)***
 Log(GDP per capita)                     -0.021                       -0.020
                                       (0.014)*                      (0.016)
 Adult literacy rate                     -0.122                       -0.063
                                        (0.093)                      (0.095)
 Log(population density)                 -0.002                       -0.004
                                         (0.01)                       (0.01)
 Number of observations                    64                           64
 Adjusted R2                             0.261                        0.181




                                          34
                                    Table 4
                    Tests for Role of Ideology in Tax Policy

Countries are classified into four quartiles by the average ideological orientation of the
chief executive’s party in the period 1980 to 1989 with Quartile 1 the most right wing and
Quartile 4 the most left wing. The number in each cell is the average of each listed
variable among countries in each income quartile.


                  GDP per      Tax Revenue          Tariff     Income taxes   Income Taxes
                   capital     (% of GDP)          Revenue        (% of          + VAT
                    1990                          (% of GDP)    revenue)         (% of
                  (2000 $)                                                      revenue)
  Quartile 1        6956           20.0             15.8          31.9           45.6
  Quartile 2       10778           22.3             13.6          36.2           48.9
  Quartile 3        8465           23.9             11.3          31.7           48.3
  Quartile 4        2556           17.7             26.3          30.5           46.1




                                             35
                                     Appendix
                            Description of the variables

 Variable name
                                             Description and source

                                                     Taxation

Tax revenue (% of   Tax revenue (GFS line 11) as a proportion of GDP, average for the period
GDP)                1990 to 2001. Source: Authors’ calculation based on IMF (2004),
                    Government Finance Statistics (May 2004 CD-ROM).


Tariff revenue (%   Taxes on international trade and transactions (GFS line 115) as a
of GDP)             proportion of GDP, average for the period 1990 to 2001. Source: Authors’
                    calculation based on IMF (2004), Government Finance Statistics (May
                    2004 CD-ROM),


Income taxes (%     Sum of personal and corporate income taxes (GFS line 1111 and 1112) as
of revenue)         a proportion of tax revenue (GFS line 11), average for the period 1990 to
                    2001. Source: Authors’ calculation based on IMF (2004), Government
                    Finance Statistics (May 2004 CD-ROM).


VAT (% of           Value-added taxes (GFS line 11411) as a proportion of tax revenue (line
revenue)            11), average for the period 1990 to 2001.


Corporate income    Corporate income taxes (GFS line 1112) as a proportion of tax revenue
taxes (% of         (GFS line 11), average for the period 1990 to 2001. Source: Authors’
revenue)            calculation based on IMF (2004), Government Finance Statistics (May
                    2004 CD-ROM).


Seignorage (% of    Seignorage is measured as the increase in reserve money (IFS line 14).
revenue)            Source: Authors’ calculation based IFS On-Line published by the
                    International Monetary Fund, accessed between February and April 2005.


                                               Regulation of Entry




                                              36
Cost to Register a   The cost of obtaining legal status to operate a firm as a share of per capita
Business             GNI, average for 2001 and 2002. It includes all identifiable official
(% of GNI per        expenses. Source: World Development Indicators 2005 On-Line Edition,
capita)
                     accessed in March and April, 2005. For data methodology, see Djankov,
                     La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer (2002).


Time to Start a      The time it takes to obtain legal status to operate a firm, in business days,
Business             average for 2001 and 2002. Source: World Development Indicators 2005
(days)               On-Line Edition, accessed in March and April, 2005. For data
                     methodology, see Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer
                     (2002).




                                                  Informal economy


Size of informal     Measured as the size of shadow economy estimated by Schneider (2004),
economy (% of        using methodology documented in Schneider and Enste (2000). Estimates
GDP)                 for 1990-91 and 2001-02 are used in this paper.


                                                Government ownership


Government           Share of the assets of the top 10 banks in a given country owned by the
ownership of         government of that country in 1995. Source: La Porta, Lopez-De-Silanes
banks in 1995        and Shleifer (2002)


SOE output (% of     SOE value added of all non-financial SOEs as a proportion of GDP of the
GDP)                 economy at market prices, average for the period 1978 to 1981. Source:
                     The World Bank (1995), La Porta, Lopez-De-Silanes and Shleifer (2002).


                                            Quality of the financial sector


Overhead costs,      Accounting value of a bank's overhead costs as a share of its total assets,
1980-89              average for the period 1980 to 1989. Source: Beck, Demirgüç-Kunt and



                                                37
                       Levine (1999), updated data published March 14, 2005.


Interest rate          Accounting value of bank's net interest revenue as a share of its interest-
spread, 1980-89        bearing (total earning) assets, average for the period 1980 to 1989.
                       Source: Beck, Demirgüç-Kunt and Levine (1999), updated data published
                       March 14, 2005.


                                                              Ideology


Right wing             Average of the ideological orientation of the chief executive’s party for the
ideology, 1980-89      period 1980 to 1989. The ideological orientation is coded as 1 for right, 0
                       for center, and -1 for left.


                                                           Other variables


GDP per capita,        GDP per capita in 2000 constant dollar, converted using market or official
1990                   exchange rate. Source: World Development Indicators 2005 On-Line
                       Edition, published by the World Bank, accessed in March and April, 2005.


Adult literacy rate,   Percent of people ages 15 and above who are literate, average for the
1980-89                period 1980 to 1989. Source: World Development Indicators 2005 On-
                       Line Edition, published by the World Bank, accessed in March and April,
                       2005.


Population             Number of people per square kilometer, average for the period 1980 to
density, 1980-89       1989. Source: World Development Indicators 2005 On-Line Edition,
                       published by the World Bank, accessed in March and April, 2005.




                                                      38
