                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      TAX REFORM AND ENVIRONMENTAL TAXATION

                                           Gilbert E. Metcalf

                                         Working Paper 11665
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11665


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2005




Portions of this research were financed by Redefining Progress, Inc. I thank Mark Glickman and Kevin
Hassett for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Gilbert E. Metcalf. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Tax Reform and Environmental Taxation
Gilbert E. Metcalf
NBER Working Paper No. 11665
September 2005
JEL No. H2, Q4, Q5

                                            ABSTRACT



I measure the industry impacts of an environmental tax reform where a carbon tax is used to finance

full or partial corporate tax integration. I find that the industry impacts of such a reform are likely

to be modest (in the sense of impacts on returns on equity).



Gilbert E. Metcalf
Tufts University
Department of Economics
Medford, MA 02155
and NBER
gmetcalf@tufts.edu
I.         Introduction

           In recent years environmental policy makers have shown a preference for cap and

trade programs over taxes to bring about reduced levels of pollution. The success of the

cap and trade program for SO2 emissions under the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments

explains part of this shift in policy preferences.1 But part of the preference for cap and

trade programs has undoubtedly resulted from a general distaste in Washington for new

taxes. Policy makers and environmental advocates have argued that cap and trade

programs avoid the political stigma suffered by taxes and are more likely to be enacted

by Congress. The Bush Administration's Clear Skies proposal, for example, relies on a

cap and trade system to reduce emissions of sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxides, and mercury

from electric utility generators.2

           Offsetting the political advantages of cap and trade programs relative to taxes are

some practical advantages of environmental taxes. First, pollution taxes provide a

measure of certainty to regulated firms. A carbon tax of $20 per metric ton of carbon, for

example, ensures firms subject to the tax that they will pay no more than $20 per ton to

emit carbon. A cap and trade program has no such assurance. The price paid for

emissions under a cap and trade program depends on the market price of permits, a price

that could fluctuate depending on economic conditions. Permit prices, according to a

EPA website ranged from roughly $130 per metric ton to around $220 in 2003.3

           Second, pollution taxes raise revenue for the federal budget while cap and trade

programs - so far - do not. These revenues could help finance some of the tax reform

initiatives currently under discussion by President Bush's Advisory Panel on Federal Tax

Reform (Gleckman (2005)). While nothing precludes the federal government from

1
    Ellerman et al. (2000) provides an overview of the SO2 trading program.
2
    See the discussion of cap and trade programs in Chapter 9 of Council of Economic Advisors (2004).
G. Metcalf                                                                                    page 2
                                                                                  September 29, 2005

selling emissions permits, the custom established under the Clean Air Act SO2 and NOx

trading programs is to give the permits to firms in the regulated industries. In theory, tax

based solutions and permit trading solutions can reach the same social optimum in the

absence of uncertainty over marginal benefit and costs of abatement. But since tax

revenue generated by Pigouvian taxes can be used to offset reductions from other

sources, fundamental tax reform proposals could, in theory, be improved under some

conditions if environmental taxes were included in the mix.4

        The United States collects little in the way of revenue from environmental charges

(including taxes) and the little that is collected is done so in an inefficient manner.5

Considering environmental taxes at all levels (federal, state, and local), environmental

taxes in the United States comprised 3.3 percent of total tax revenues in 2001.6 By

contrast, OECD countries as a whole collected 4.9 percent of taxes through

environmental taxes. Denmark's environmental tax share, for example, was 10 percent in

2002; Germany's was 7.1 percent; the United Kingdom's was 7.5 percent. No country's

environmental tax share in 2001 was lower than the United States' share.

        Moreover, there is good evidence that existing levels of environmental taxation in

the United States fall well short of their optimal levels. Parry and Small (forthcoming)

note that the average level of taxation of gasoline in the United States is roughly $.40 per

gallon while the optimal rate (taking into account pollution and congestion effects) is

$1.01 per gallon. While there is widespread agreement that carbon emissions are

3
  See the EPA's website http://www.epa.gov/airmarkets/trading/so2market/alprices.html.
4
  Cap and trade programs in which permits are handed out for free are equivalent to tax programs in which
the tax revenues are rebated lump-sum (see Fullerton and Metcalf (2001) for a discussion of this point).
Green tax reforms in which the environmental revenues are used to reduce distortionary taxes rather than
returned lump sum in general have lower welfare costs (see, for example, Bovenberg and Goulder (1996)).
This is an example of what Goulder (1995) calls a "weak double-dividend."
5
  See Fullerton (1996) for an overview of environmental tax policy and the high costs of collection.
Francis (1999) notes the decreased use of some environmental taxes in the 1990s.
G. Metcalf                                                                                        page 3
                                                                                      September 29, 2005

environmentally detrimental, estimates of social marginal damages are imprecise. An

IPCC literature review by Pearce et al. (1996) found estimates ranging from $5 to $125

per metric ton of carbon with most estimates below $25 per metric ton. For discount

rates between 3 and 5 percent, Tol (1999) found more precise estimates in the range of $9

to $23 per metric ton. Below I show that a carbon at the upper end of Tol's range would

finance complete corporate tax integration.

         In this paper, I identify the impact on industry of implementing a carbon tax to

pay for full or partial corporate tax integration. I begin with a discussion of corporate tax

reform and the link to a carbon tax. I then discuss my modeling approach and provide

industry level impacts of a tax reform where a carbon tax finances corporate tax

integration. In the conclusion, I consider various possible extensions to this study.

II.      Background

         The idea of a carbon tax combined with a reduction in existing taxes has been

extensively studied. See, for example, Bovenberg and Goulder (1996) who consider cuts

in the personal income tax financed by a carbon tax. The focus on a carbon tax is a

natural one given that carbon emissions are mandated in the Kyoto Protocol to be reduced

in the United States by 7 percent from 1990 levels in the years 2008-20127. While the

United States has declined to ratify the Kyoto Protocol, policy makers continue to discuss

possible policy responses to rising greenhouse gas emissions.

         Emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2) in 1990 totaled 1,347 million metric tons of

carbon and increased to 1,601 million metric tons in 2003, according to the most recent

6
   The source for these and subsequent tax share numbers is the OECD Economic Instruments Database.
7
  The Kyoto Protocol actually mandates reductions in six "greenhouse gases:" carbon dioxide, methane,
nitrous oxide, hydrofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons, and sulphur hexafluoride. Carbon dioxide is by far
the most significant of the six gases and I limit discussion to this gas. The text of the Kyoto Protocol along
with explanatory documents can be found at http://www.unfccc.de.
G. Metcalf                                                                                         page 4
                                                                                       September 29, 2005

report on greenhouse gas emissions from the Energy Information Administration (2004).

While CO2 emissions per dollar of GDP have tended to fall in the 1990s, emissions are

19 percent above 1990 levels and 27 percent above the target for emissions set in the

Protocol. Thus a substantial effort would be required if the U.S. were to attempt to meet

the target.

         A carbon tax is an obvious policy tool to help achieve the goals set forth in the

target. A natural question is what to do with the carbon tax revenue. Research by a

number of economists has indicated that reducing the tax on capital income financed by

environmental tax revenues would provide the greatest efficiency gains relative to other

uses of the tax revenue.8 Corporate tax integration is a way to reduce the tax on capital

income.

         Corporate tax integration is an effort to subject all income to a single income tax.

The United States, like many countries, has a personal income tax and a corporate income

tax and treats these two taxes as separate and distinct. Thus, income earned in the

corporate sector can be subject to a tax first through the corporate income tax and then

through the personal income tax. Such a system leads to a number of tax induced

behaviors which can have significant efficiency impacts:


•        Payout Behavior: the corporate income tax affects the decision to pay out after-tax
profits in the form of dividends or to retain earnings within the corporation.
•        Financing Behavior: the corporate income tax influences the decision to finance
new investments with equity or debt.
•       Corporate Organization: the corporate income tax affects the decision to organize
businesses as corporations or partnerships.


8
  Bovenberg and Goulder (2002) cite a number of studies in their Table 4 that conduct a welfare assessment
of environmental tax reforms. Most of the studies use revenues to cut the personal income tax but one
study using the Jorgenson-Wilcoxen model uses revenues to cut capital income taxes. The welfare gains in
the studies cited are highest for this policy reform. This is consistent with findings of Ballard et al. (1985b)
and others that the marginal welfare cost of capital income taxes are higher than for personal income taxes.
G. Metcalf                                                                                         page 5
                                                                                       September 29, 2005

A 1992 Treasury study on tax integration estimated annual efficiency losses from the

current tax system (relative to an integrated system) ranging from $2.5 to $25 billion (in

1991 dollars).

         Table 1 below provides some insight for these distortions. It shows the amount of

tax paid on a dollar of earnings from an investment for different financing,

organizational, and payout assumptions given tax rates in effect in 2005.


                       Table 1. Tax Rates on Marginal Profits
                                      General Tax Rate        Current Tax Rate
        Corporate Dividends              tc + (1-tc)td             44.8%
         Corporate Interest                    ti                  35.0%
     Corporate Retained Earnings         tc + (1-tc)tg             37.6%
       Non-Corporate Payouts                   ti                  35.0%

The second column gives the general formula for the total amount of taxes paid on a

dollar of pre-tax profits. There are four relevant tax rates: the corporate rate (tc), the

personal tax rate on dividends (td), or interest income (ti), and the accrual equivalent tax

rate on capital gains (tg)9. To give a sense of the differences in taxation, I provide

numerical results using a tax rate of 35 percent for the corporate tax and tax on interest

income, 15 percent for the personal tax, and 5 percent for capital gains.

         The table illustrates the various distortions. First, there is a bias against paying

out dividends. Profits paid out as dividends are taxed at a rate of nearly 45 percent while

retained earnings (leading to capital gains) are only taxed at 37.6 percent. Second, there

is a bias against equity financing: a dollar of profits paid out in dividends incurs roughly

1 1/4 times the level of taxes on income paid out as interest. Third, there is a bias against



9
  This simplifies the analysis somewhat as I ignore various complicating factors including the alternative
minimum tax, as well as the tax treatment of foreigners and tax exempt organizations. The accrual
equivalent tax rate on capital gains accounts for the fact that capital gains are only taxed upon realization.
Moreover, basis step-up at death further reduces the effective tax on capital gains.
G. Metcalf                                                                                       page 6
                                                                                     September 29, 2005

the corporate organizational form. Corporate profits are taxed more heavily than non-

corporate profits10.

         According to McLure (1979), interest in integrating the corporate and personal

income tax systems increased in the 1960s and early 1970s for three reasons. First, there

was widespread concern about the low rate of capital formation and it was thought that

reducing the taxation of dividend income might encourage increased investment.

Second, a number of European countries provided some form of dividend tax relief.

Finally, a Canadian Royal Commission on Taxation report in 1967 argued that complete

integration might in fact be feasible and not simply a conceptual idea.

         Interest in tax integration was overshadowed in the 1980s by broad based income

tax reform that culminated in the Tax Reform Act of 1986 (TRA86). Rather than

fundamentally changing the tax system, TRA86 engaged in base broadening and rate

lowering and the top marginal tax rate on personal income fell from 50 to 28 percent

while the top corporate tax rate fell from 46 to 34 percent.

         Let us next turn to the mechanics of tax integration. I'll look at two proposals in

particular11. First, I'll consider full integration where corporate income is allocated to

individual shareholders and subject to tax at the personal level. Second, I'll consider

dividend tax exclusion at the personal level12.




10
   With these numbers, the bias goes away if all corporate after-tax profits are retained.
11
   This section draws in part on an excellent analysis of tax integration written by the U.S. Department of
the Treasury (1992) (also summarized in Hubbard (1993)).
12
   McLure (1979) argues against this scheme and proposes instead a dividend deduction at the corporate
level (similar to the interest deduction). The advantage of McLure's approach is that corporate income is
taxed at the shareholder's tax rate rather than the corporate tax rate. It also eliminates the distortion
between debt and equity financing (if basis adjustment for dividends paid is made). The 1992 Treasury
report considered but rejected this approach on the grounds of cost and implementability.
G. Metcalf                                                                           page 7
                                                                         September 29, 2005

1.     Shareholder Allocation Prototype

       The Shareholder Allocation Prototype (SAP) comes close to a "pass-through"

(complete) integration plan that achieves all the goals of a textbook integration of the two

income taxes. The SAP approach retains a corporate income tax but passes all corporate

income, taxes, and credits through to shareholders. In effect, the corporate income tax

serves as a withholding tax.

       In brief, the SAP preserves the corporate income tax as a "withholding" tax and

allocates corporate income and taxes to shareholders. To see how the SAP works,

consider the following simple example. A corporation has $100 of taxable income, pays

$35 in corporate taxes, and has $65 in after-tax profits which it can either distribute to

shareholders (as a dividend) or keep as retained earnings. The purpose of the SAP is to

tax the shareholder on the $100 of taxable income at the shareholder's tax rate rather than

to tax income distributed as dividends or retained (and thus leading to capital gains).

Let's assume for the moment that the entire $65 of after-tax profits is paid out as a

dividend. The first important characteristic of the SAP is that dividend income is not

taxable at the personal level (since the goal of the SAP is to tax corporate income, not

corporate distributions). Rather than taxing dividend income, the SAP subjects the entire

$100 of corporate income to taxation at the personal level. Just as a worker receives a W-

2 form from an employer detailing wages paid and taxes withheld, a shareholder would

receive a "corporate W-2" detailing income earned and taxes withheld. In this example,

the shareholder would report $100 of taxable income on his personal income tax and

receive a tax credit for the $35 of taxes paid at the corporate level. For a taxpayer in the

40 percent personal income tax bracket, the gross tax liability on the corporate income is

$40 and the net tax liability (net of corporate tax payments) is $5. The shareholder has
G. Metcalf                                                                                      page 8
                                                                                    September 29, 2005

$60 in after-tax income available for consumption or saving – the $65 dividend less the

$5 personal tax liability. His corporate income has been subjected to a 40% tax.

         Next, assume that the corporation retains the entire $65 in after-tax profits. Under

the assumption that equity markets are efficient, the retention of $65 should increase

share value by $65. Assuming efficient markets, the shareholder's income has gone up

by $65 (the increase in value of the shares). As in the case of distributed profits, the

shareholder pays a tax on the $100 of corporate income and receives a tax credit for the

$35 in taxes paid at the corporate level. In addition, the cost basis for the stock is

increased by the amount of retained earnings so that no tax liability will be incurred on

the capital gains due to these retained earnings.

         To see how this works, imagine the shareholder bought one share of stock in this

corporation on Monday for $1,000. On Tuesday, the corporation earns $100 per share

and pays taxes of $35 per share and retains $65. In an efficient market, the value of the

stock will increase from $1,000 to $1,065. On Wednesday, the shareholder sells his share

for $1,065. His selling price for purposes of calculating taxable capital gains is $1,065.

His cost basis, however, is increased from $1,000 to $1,065 since $65 has been added to

retained earnings. Thus, the taxable capital gain is $1,065 – 1,065 = $0. The shareholder

has received $65 in capital gains upon sale and is subject to a net personal income tax

liability of $5 (as in the dividend case above) and so has $60 in after-tax income. The

corporate income again has been subjected to a tax of 40 percent13.




13
    A simpler approach would be to simply eliminate the tax on capital gains at the personal level. There
are a number of problems with this approach. For example, imagine that Bill Gates suddenly announces a
special licensing arrangement with Apple Computer and, as a result, the value of Apple Computer stock
increases by 15 percent. These capital gains are income that will not be subject to tax at the corporate or
personal level if capital gains are no longer taxed at the personal level. Thus, the basis adjustment
described in the text is a preferable method of handling retained earnings under the SAP.
G. Metcalf                                                                           page 9
                                                                         September 29, 2005

        Table 2 shows the marginal tax on a dollar of profits under the SAP. It shows

that the various distortions discussed above are eliminated under the SAP.


               Table 2. Tax Rates on Marginal Profits Under SAP
                                    General Tax Rate       Current Tax Rate
       Corporate Dividends                 tp                   35.0%
        Corporate Interest                 tp                   35.0%
    Corporate Retained Earnings            tp                   35.0%
      Non-Corporate Payouts                tp                   35.0%


       The shareholder allocation plan is considerably more complicated to administer

than the dividend exclusion plan discussed below. Reporting and auditing burdens for

corporations are likely to be significant. For example, the Treasury plan would not pass

through corporate losses to shareholders but rather carry them forward at the corporate

level. This is in keeping with general tax policy. In addition, change of stock ownership

during a year complicates allocation of income and taxes to individuals. Since taxable

income and tax liabilities are only measured once during the year, allocating income and

share basis to shareholders must be done on a retrospective basis (and could in fact

require taxpayers to file amended returns).

       The 1992 Treasury study estimated that a fully phased in SAP would cost $36.8

billion annually at 1991 income levels. This estimate has three major components. First,

corporate income is taxed at the top personal tax rate rather than the corporate tax rate.

Before any other adjustments, this costs $33 billion in lost tax revenue. Second, the

change in basis reduces taxes of capital gains due to retained earnings. I make a rough

estimate $11.2 billion in lost tax revenue as a result of this change. Finally, tax

integration is likely to lead to a shift from debt to equity finance as the tax disadvantage

towards equity finance is reduced. An economic analysis in the 1992 Treasury report
G. Metcalf                                                                          page 10
                                                                         September 29, 2005

estimates that corporate leverage falls somewhere between 1 and 7% when there is lump

sum replacement of the lost tax revenues. The shift from debt to equity finance reduces

interest deductions on the corporate income tax and so raises revenue to offset some of

the loss on the personal tax side. I estimate this raises about $7.4 billion in taxes.

Combining these three components yields the $36.8 billion 1991 revenue loss. Applying

this methodology to 2003 data, I obtain a rough estimate of the annual revenue loss from

adoption of the SAP of $36.7 billion at 2003 income levels.

       The complexity of the SAP as well as the revenue loss entailed suggests that a

more modest and simple integration approach might be more appropriate. Thus, I next

consider the dividend exclusion approach.

2.     Dividend Exclusion Prototype

       The Dividend Exclusion Prototype (DEP) is a simpler form of corporate tax

integration that achieves partial integration of the two income taxes. Specifically, it

excludes dividend income from taxation at the personal level. Thus, corporate profits

paid out in dividends are only subject to the corporate income tax. The major advantage

of the DEP is its simplicity and ease of implementation. Its simplicity led the Department

of the Treasury to prefer this approach to any form of dividend imputation credit scheme

(U.S. Department of the Treasury (1992)).

       Table 3 shows the marginal tax on a dollar of profits under the DEP. Given the

convergence of the top corporate and personal income tax rates in 2003, the DEP comes

close to full integration of the tax system.
G. Metcalf                                                                                   page 11
                                                                                  September 29, 2005

                Table 3. Tax Rates on Marginal Profits Under DEP
                                     General Tax Rate       Current Tax Rate
        Corporate Dividends                  tc                  35.0%
         Corporate Interest                  tp                  35.0%
     Corporate Retained Earnings       tc + (1-tc)tg             37.6%
       Non-Corporate Payouts                 tp                  35.0%

        Let us now turn to an estimate of the revenue loss under the DEP. As a rough

guide to the revenue cost of excluding dividends from taxable income in the personal

income tax, I can use an estimate of the average marginal income tax rate on dividend

income constructed from the NBER's TAXSIM tax calculator (Feenberg (2000)). This

average tax rate in 2003, the year in which I do my analysis, was 17.6 percent and an

estimate of reported dividends in 2003 is $104.6 billion.14

        Excluding dividends from taxable income would lead to a revenue loss of $18.4

billion for that year (.176x$104.6). A few adjustments to this calculation are required to

obtain a more accurate measure. First, as noted above, tax integration is likely to lead to

a shift from debt to equity finance as the tax disadvantage towards equity finance is

reduced. Second, there are a number of smaller changes including a reallocation of

physical capital from the household, non-corporate and state/local government sectors to

the corporate sector, as well as changes in the equilibrium interest rate and dividend

payout rates. Taking these considerations into account, I estimate that the revenue loss

falls to $23.0 billion per year.

I will consider the following two DEP proposals:

1)      exclusion of all dividends from personal income tax financed by a carbon tax.
        Based on the calculation above, this would require a carbon tax of $23 billion per
        year.




14
  Dividends reported on the personal income tax are not available for 2003. I grossed up reported
dividends from 2002 by the growth in dividends in NIPA from 2002 to 2003.
G. Metcalf                                                                          page 12
                                                                         September 29, 2005

          It is worth pausing to consider which industries benefit the most from tax

integration. There are no data available on distribution of corporate equity holdings by

industry across equity owners. I will assume that households hold equities by industry in

proportion to dividend payouts by industry. Table 4 below shows the top 10 industries in

terms of net corporate dividend payments. These ten industries account for over half of

dividend payments in 2003 and are likely to be the greatest beneficiaries of tax

integration.

                 Table 4. Top 10 Corporate Dividend Paying Industries
                                    Industry                 $billions
                 Management of companies and enterprises           37.9
                 Retail trade                                      32.9
                 Construction                                      22.3
                 Chemical products                                 22.2
                 Wholesale trade                                   21.7
                 Miscellaneous professional, scientific, and
                 technical services                                17.2
                 Food and beverage and tobacco products            13.5
                 Broadcasting and telecommunications               13.0
                 Utilities                                         11.4
                 Ambulatory health care services                    9.9
                  Source: NIPA Data for 2003

          Conversely, I can identify those industries that are impacted most heavily by a

carbon tax. Given the significant impact on these industries, I consider a second policy

option:

2)        exclusion of 100% of dividends from personal income tax from industries most
          heavily affected by a carbon tax combined with 50 percent exclusion for all other
          industries.

III.      Modeling Approach and Analysis

          A number of economists have studied the economic consequences arising from

corporate tax integration. The most common approach is to utilize a computable general

equilibrium (CGE) model. Such models have been used by Ballard et al. (1985a),

Fullerton et al. (1981) and U.S. Department of the Treasury (1992) to analyze the impact
G. Metcalf                                                                           page 13
                                                                          September 29, 2005

of corporate tax integration. CGE models are typically large, complex structural models

of an economy derived from fundamental economic theory. Their strengths are their

logical consistency as well as their usefulness for policy and counterfactual analysis.

Their very complexity, however, makes them difficult to evaluate from the outside and

often deeply embedded assumptions and modeling approaches play an important role in

driving results in ways that are not obvious to the casual observer.

       Rather than employ a CGE model, I undertake an analysis that utilizes behavioral

response estimates from CGE modeling as well as other empirical analyses. I focus on

three major changes: shifts in the allocation of capital, changes in the sources of funding

for capital projects, and changes in uses of funds from capital projects.

       The first critical behavioral response arising from corporate tax integration is a

shift in the allocation of capital. Integrating the corporate and personal income tax will

reduce the effective tax rate on corporate capital. This in turn leads to a shift in capital

from the non-corporate to the corporate sector. In particular, capital flows from the

household, government, and non-corporate sector to the corporate sector. This will lead

to an increase in corporate taxes and a decrease in personal taxes as taxable profits shift

from the non-corporate sector (as well as the nontaxable sectors) to the corporate sector.

       The second critical behavioral response is a change in corporate leverage

structure. Corporate tax integration removes (or reduces) the advantage to debt financing

(relative to equity financing). Thus I expect less debt financing and more equity

financing. I calculate the change based on empirical estimates of the impact of taxes on

financing structure from Graham (1999). Shifts from debt to equity financing affect tax

collections in three ways: 1) they reduce corporate interest deductions and so increase

corporate tax collections, 2) they reduce interest income taxable at the personal level, and
G. Metcalf                                                                            page 14
                                                                           September 29, 2005

3), they increase retained earnings (to the extent that equity related profits are retained

rather than distributed. These retained earnings will be taxed at the personal level upon

realization of the capital gains associated with the earnings.

        The third critical behavioral response is a change in dividend payout behavior.

Chetty and Saez (2004) document that corporations responded to the decrease in dividend

taxation in 2003 by increasing dividend payouts both by existing firms and by firms that

hitherto had not paid dividends. It will turn out changes in dividend payout behavior

have little impact on the revenue estimates. After tax integration, payout behavior only

affects tax collections to the extent that capital gains are taxed. As discussed below, on

an accrual basis, capital gains are taxed quite lightly and so changes in their tax treatment

have only a minimal impact on tax collections.

Shareholder Allocation Prototype

        I begin with an analysis of the Shareholder Allocation Prototype (SAP). As noted

above, the SAP treats corporate income in a similar fashion to partnership income. The

corporate income tax continues to operate in its present fashion but it should now be

properly viewed as a withholding tax. Corporate income and corporate tax payments are

attributed to individual shareholders who report the income on the personal income tax

and take credits for any taxes paid at the corporate level.

        I first note the assumptions that I make about the three types of behavioral

changes I expect after tax reform. First, there is the shift in capital from the non-

corporate to the corporate sector. Based on the analysis in the Treasury study, I would

predict a shift in capital (as a fraction to total capital) towards the corporate sector of 2.8

percentage points (see column 3 in table). As Table 5 below demonstrates, this implies

an increase in corporate capital of 10.8 percent (column 4).
G. Metcalf                                                                            page 15
                                                                           September 29, 2005

                           Table 5. Capital Stock Distribution
                                                                               Percentage
                  Capital Stock                           Shift in Total       Change in
      Sector
                   2003 levels          Share             Capital Stock       Capital Stock
                       (1)               (2)                    (3)                (4)
   Corporate         9,032              26.0%                 2.8%               10.8%
 Non-corporate       4,217              12.2%                -0.3%               -2.5%
  Government         6,493              18.7%                -0.1%               -0.5%
   Household         14,951             43.1%                -2.4%               -5.6%
     Total           34,693             100%
 Source: NIPA and Authors' calculations

       What impact this shift will have on taxable income in the corporate sector is

unclear. One thought might be that taxable profits increase at the same rate as does the

capital stock (assuming constant returns to scale in production and a scaling up of all

other inputs in production at the same rate as capital). This overstates the growth in

taxable profits for two reasons. First, a change in relative prices (decrease in cost of

capital) will lead to an increase in the use of the favored factor greater than any increase

in other factors. On this basis alone, the growth in output would be likely to be

something on the order of 1/4 to 1/3 the growth in capital. Second, this view ignores the

impact of the decline in the housing sector on production in the economy. Demand for

durable goods, construction, and other industry outputs would fall as capital shifts out of

residential housing. Because of these two considerations, I do the following. First, I

report detailed industry impacts assuming no change in corporate and non-corporate

output. Then, I show how the aggregate revenue estimates are affected by changes in

corporate and non-corporate output. The distribution across sectors of price changes is

not appreciably affected by changes in output and so our understanding of the relative

industry impacts is not affected.

       The second behavioral response is a change in the source of funds for corporate

investment. To calculate this change, I use results from Graham (1999). Graham
G. Metcalf                                                                                   page 16
                                                                                  September 29, 2005

regresses the debt to value ratio on a number of variables including the tax preference for

debt variable, P = (1 − τ p ) − (1 − τ c )(1 − τ e ) , where τp is the tax rate on interest income, τc

is the corporate tax rate and τe is the tax rate on equity. The estimated change in the debt

to value ratio will be β(P1-P0) where β is the estimated coefficient on the debt tax

preference variable in Graham's regression, and P1-P0 is the change in the value of this

variable following tax integration.

        The tax rate on equity is a weighted average of the tax rate on dividend income

and the accrual equivalent tax rate on capital gains (weighted by the dividend payout

ratio). Following Graham (1999), Gordon and Mackie-Mason (1990), and Feldstein et al.

(1983), I reduce the statutory rate on capital gains by 75 percent to convert to an accrual

equivalent. This is a conventional assumption based on half the taxes being foregone

through deferral and half again from basis step-up at death. I assume an accrual

equivalent tax rate on capital gains of 5 percent.15 The pre-tax reform tax on equity

equals (.62)(.176) + (.38)(.05) = .128 where the dividend payout ratio for 2003 was 62

percent and the average marginal tax on dividends is 17.6 percent. Thus the debt

preference variable (P0) equals 8.31 percent. The Shareholder Allocation Prototype

drives the tax preference variable to zero (P1 = 0). Based on Graham's preferred

regression and coefficient estimate of 0.070, this reduces the leverage ratio by .58

percentage points.

        Finally, I assume a 4.3 percent increase in the dividend payout ratio based on the

1992 Treasury study. It turns out that this parameter has little impact on the results.

Since dividends are no longer taxed at the personal level and the accrual equivalent tax


15
  The top tax rate on capital gains in 2003 was 20 percent prior to May 6 and 15 percent after May 5. My
results are insensitive to using 5 percent, 3.75 percent, or a weighted average of the two rates.
G. Metcalf                                                                          page 17
                                                                         September 29, 2005

rate on capital gains is only 5 percent, the change in tax collections is minor relative to

other changes.

        I begin by reporting summary results on aggregate changes in taxation resulting

from the SAP.

                           Table 6. SAP Revenue Losses ($billions)
                                         Change in
                             Corporate Tax        Personal Tax                   Total
     Domestic                     2.1                 -33.2                     -31.0
 Rest of the World                0.0                  -5.7                      -5.7
       Total                      2.1                 -38.9                     -36.7
Source: Author's calculations



The row labeled "Rest of the World" represents tax revenues on earnings from foreign

corporations owned by domestic taxpayers. The SAP loses $5.7 billion in personal

income taxes that do not benefit owners of domestic firms. See Appendix Table A1 for a

detailed breakdown of the revenue losses.

        I next turn to the analysis of carbon taxes and the overall impact of the tax reform

on industry prices. To finance corporate tax integration, I impose a carbon tax designed

to raise $36.7 billion in 2003. Carbon emissions that would be potentially subject to a

carbon tax totaled 1,574.3 million metric tons of carbon in 2003 (Energy Information

Administration (2004)). Assuming no change in emissions, a carbon tax of $23.31 per

metric ton of carbon would be necessary to raise $36.7 billion. Carbon emissions break

down as follows:


                             Table 7. Carbon Emissions in 2003
    Fuel Source             Emissions (mmtc)  Fraction of Total            Revenue ($bill)
       Coal                        571.3             36.3%                     $13.3
    Natural Gas                    321.6             20.4%                      $7.5
     Petroleum                     681.4             43.3%                     $15.9
       Total                      1574.3            100.0%                     $36.7
G. Metcalf                                                                         page 18
                                                                        September 29, 2005

       I now have all the information to determine the direct impact of the tax reform.

All I need to do is offset the tax reductions in Appendix Table 1 with tax increases of

$13.3 billion for the coal mining industry and $23.4 billion for the oil and gas extraction

industries. This approach, however, ignores the indirect impacts of the taxes as prices

change in the economy. I turn to that analysis now.

       The conventional view of the incidence of carbon taxes is that they will be passed

forward in the form of higher product prices to consumers. The input-output analysis

makes that assumption and translates the intermediate goods taxes into higher industry

prices as energy intensive inputs (now more expensive) are used in the production of

downstream goods. Corporate tax integration, by reducing the double taxation of capital

income should increase the income of owners of all capital (corporate and non-

corporate). This result was first shown by Harberger (1962) and this incidence

assumption is frequently used (see, for example, Pechman (1985)). It is possible that in

the context of a package reform where corporate tax integration is combined with a

carbon tax, the entire package of taxes is passed forward in changes in prices of industry

products. This follows as the higher prices of goods (due to the carbon tax) put domestic

goods at a competitive disadvantage relative to imported goods. This competitive force

makes it difficult for owners of capital to appropriate the gains from corporate tax

reductions.

       If this argument is correct, then the price changes I report below can be viewed as

a measure of the industry incidence impact of the tax reform. Alternatively, it may be

that the conventional story continues to hold and that the carbon tax is passed forward

into higher prices while the corporate tax integration tax reductions accrue to owners of

capital (are passed backward). Rather than attempt to determine the ultimate incidence of
G. Metcalf                                                                          page 19
                                                                         September 29, 2005

this complex reform, I take a different tack. I report a statistic that I call the Breakeven

Incidence Share (BIS). The BIS represents what fraction of the carbon tax must be

shifted back to shareholders to offset the gains from corporate tax integration. For

example, if an industry experiences a price increase of 4 percent due to the carbon tax

and the equivalent of a 0.4 percent decrease due to corporate tax integration, then the BIS

is 10 percent. In other words, so long as no more than 10 percent of the carbon tax is

shifted back to capital owners, the benefits of corporate tax integration exceed the costs

of the carbon tax from the perspective of capital owners.

       First I show the price impacts resulting from corporate tax integration. As noted

above, these are the price impacts under the assumption that the tax reductions are passed

forward to consumers. I are not arguing that this in fact will happen; this allows us to

present the tax changes in a way that allows comparison with the carbon tax price

changes.
G. Metcalf                                                                         page 20
                                                                        September 29, 2005

                          Table 8. Price Changes Due to SAP
                         Greatest Declines in Price Due to SAP
                                                            Price
                                    Industry
                                                           Change
                     Management of companies and
                     enterprises                            -2.42%
                     Petroleum and coal products            -1.10%
                     Chemical products                      -0.96%
                     Food and beverage and tobacco
                     products                               -0.86%
                     Apparel and leather and allied
                     products                               -0.73%
                         Smallest Declines in Price Due to SAP
                                                            Price
                                    Industry
                                                           Change
                     Computer systems design and related
                     services                               -0.18%
                     Government                             -0.18%
                     Warehousing and storage                -0.19%
                     Information and data processing
                     services                               -0.19%
                     Legal services                         -0.20%


Not surprisingly, three of the five industries with the greatest price declines are included

in the list of top corporate dividend paying industries (Table 4). Interestingly, the

Petroleum and Coal Products industry, which I would expect to be heavily impacted by

the carbon tax, benefits disproportionately from corporate tax integration. The dispersion

of price changes is moderate and in all cases negative. The price changes arising from

the SAP are of a comparable magnitude to the dispersion of price changes due to the

carbon tax (except for three industries) as the next table shows:
G. Metcalf                                                                          page 21
                                                                         September 29, 2005

                      Table 9. Price Changes Due to Carbon Tax
                       Greatest Increases in Price Due to Carbon
                                           Tax
                                                            Price
                                    Industry
                                                           Change
                     Petroleum and coal products             7.34%
                     Coal mining                             6.81%
                     Utilities                               5.08%
                     Mining, except coal, oil and gas        1.77%
                     Primary metals                          1.46%
                       Smallest Increases in Price Due to Carbon
                                           Tax
                                                            Price
                                    Industry
                                                           Change
                     Computer systems design and related
                     services                                0.06%
                     Legal services                          0.06%
                     Performing arts, spectator sports,
                     museums, and related activities         0.08%
                     Motion picture and sound recording
                     industries                              0.09%
                     Ambulatory health care services         0.09%


Petroleum refining, coal mining, and utilities suffer very large price increases relative to

other industries (and relative to the price decreases from SAP). Combining the two price

changes, I can see that the rankings are largely driven by the carbon tax increases:
G. Metcalf                                                                          page 22
                                                                         September 29, 2005

                     Table 10. Total Changes in Prices Due to Tax
                                         Reform
                               Greatest Increases in Price
                                                            Price
                                   Industry
                                                           Change
                     Coal mining                             6.40%
                     Petroleum and coal products             6.20%
                     Utilities                               4.43%
                     Mining, except coal, oil and gas        1.18%
                     Primary metals                          1.07%
                               Greatest Decreases in Price
                                                            Price
                                   Industry
                                                           Change
                     Management of companies and
                     enterprises                            -2.30%
                     Retail trade                           -0.55%
                     Apparel and leather and allied
                     products                               -0.52%
                     Food and beverage and tobacco
                     products                               -0.51%
                     Chemical products                      -0.49%


Complete results for all sectors are presented in the appendix. Of the 58 sectors

analyzed, only 14 have a positive net price change while 44 have a negative price change.

Once I get past the top three industries, the price changes range from -2.30 to 1.18

percent, a relatively moderate range of net price changes.

       Comparing these two price changes is only appropriate if the reduction in capital

income taxation is passed forward to consumers in the form of lower prices (or if the

carbon tax is passed back to capital owners in the form of lower returns). I next report

my measure of the required amount of pass-back in the carbon tax possible before equity

holders are adversely affected by this reform. I report it for the ten industries with the

highest net price increase.
G. Metcalf                                                                                      page 23
                                                                                     September 29, 2005

                    Table 11. Breakeven Incidence Shares
                                     Carbon
              Industry                          SAP      Sum                             BIS
                                       Tax
Coal mining                             6.81% -0.38%      6.40%                          6%
Petroleum and coal products             7.34% -1.10%      6.20%                         15%
Utilities                               5.08% -0.63%      4.43%                         12%
Mining, except coal, oil and gas        1.77% -0.59%      1.18%                         33%
Primary metals                          1.46% -0.38%      1.07%                         26%
Pipeline transportation                 1.09% -0.54%      0.54%                         50%
Air transportation                      0.83% -0.35%      0.48%                         42%
Waste management and remediation
services                                0.76% -0.46%      0.29%                         61%
Government                              0.41% -0.18%      0.23%                         44%
Truck transportation                    0.47% -0.33%      0.14%                         70%


So long as less than 6 percent of the carbon tax is passed back to equity holders in the

coal mining industry, returns to shareholders will not fall following this green tax

reform16. The column labeled "Sum" provides the consumer price increases under full

forward passing of both taxes.

         Another way to present the information in the BIS is to report which industries are

harmed under various amounts of backward shifting of the carbon tax. The next table

reports this.




16
   This abstracts from any redistribution of returns between corporate and non-corporate capital. The
standard Harberger assumption is that the benefits of corporate tax reduction accrue to all owners of capital,
not simply owners of corporate capital.
G. Metcalf                                                                          page 24
                                                                         September 29, 2005

                      Table 12. Backward Shifting of Carbon Tax
                                and Impacted Industries
                                      10 percent shift
                     Coal mining
                                      20 percent shift
                     Coal mining, Utilities, Petroleum refining and
                     related products
                                      30 percent shift
                     Coal mining, Utilities, Petroleum refining and
                     related products, Primary Metal Industries
                                      40 percent shift
                     Coal mining, Utilities, Petroleum refining and
                     related products, Primary Metal Industries,
                     Other Mining
                                      50 percent shift
                     Coal mining, Utilities, Petroleum refining and
                     related products, Primary Metal Industries,
                     Other Mining, Air transportation, Government


       Summing up, the SAP financed by a carbon tax blunts to a modest degree the

price increases that arise from the latter tax. If the carbon tax is fully passed forward to

consumers, then the tax reform benefits the owners of equity in nearly all industry

sectors. This is worth emphasizing. The standard incidence view is that a carbon tax

would be passed forward to consumers in the form of higher product prices while capital

tax reductions would be passed back to owners of capital. If this view is correct, business

(or, more precisely, the equity holders) would generally benefit from corporate tax

integration financed by a modest carbon tax.

        The SAP above is estimated to cost nearly $37 billion a year. That is based on

no growth in corporate profits (and corporate taxes - other than changes resulting from

changes in financial policy). If production were Cobb-Douglas with a capital output

elasticity of .25, then a 10.8 percent increase in capital would bring about a 2.7 percent

increase in output. The decrease in capital use in other sectors would have a spill-over

effect on the corporate sector as described above. Rather than try to estimate the growth
G. Metcalf                                                                                       page 25
                                                                                      September 29, 2005

in taxable corporate profits, I present some revenue estimates for different growth

assumptions17.

                                 Table 13. SAP Revenue Estimates
                                  Change in           Change in
  Growth Rate of                                                                       Change in Total
                               Corporate Income    Personal Income
 Corporate Profits                                                                         Taxes
                                     Tax                 Tax
            0.0%                      2.1               -38.9                                 -36.7
            1.0%                      5.0               -39.1                                 -34.1
            2.0%                      7.9               -39.3                                 -31.4
            3.0%                     10.7               -39.5                                 -28.8


As the growth rate of corporate profits increases, so do corporate income tax collections.

This is offset by a slight decrease in personal income tax collections as corporate income

is now taxed at a lower average rate and non-corporate income falls. Income from the

non-corporate sector also falls a bit as capital shifts from the non-corporate to the

corporate sector.

           The good news is that growth in corporate revenues arising from the shift in

capital reduces the need for a substantial carbon tax, perhaps by as much as 20 to 25

percent based on the growth rates in Table 13. While a carbon tax raising only $30 to

$35 billion a year would not bring about the reductions in carbon use called for in the

Kyoto Protocol, a carbon tax of this magnitude would have considerably less of an

impact on the economy and would allow for learning about the efficiency and

distributional impacts of a carbon tax if it were decided in the future to increase reliance

on this tax to effect a substantial reduction in carbon emissions.

Dividend Exclusion Prototype

           The next analysis that I consider is the dividend exclusion prototype (DEP)

discussed above. Put simply, dividends are no longer taxable at the personal level. My


17
     I assume a similar growth rate for non-corporate output based on the change in non-corporate capital.
G. Metcalf                                                                          page 26
                                                                         September 29, 2005

assumptions about financial behavior are the same as in the previous section. Again, note

that the pre-tax reform tax on equity equals (.62)(.176) + (.38)(.05) = .128 where the

dividend payout ratio for 2003 was 62 percent and the average marginal tax on dividends

is 17.6 percent. Excluding dividends from taxable income at the personal level reduces

the tax on equity from 12.8 percent to 1.9 percent and the debt preference variable from

8.31 percent to 1.24 percent. Based on Graham's preferred regression, this reduces the

leverage ratio by 0.49 percentage points.

        Table 14 presents summary results on the changes in taxation resulting from the

DEP.

                          Table 14. DEP Revenue Losses ($billions)
                                         Change in
                             Corporate Tax        Personal Tax                   Total
     Domestic                      1.8                -17.9                     -16.1
 Rest of the World                 0.0                 -4.0                      -4.0
       Total                       1.8                -21.9                     -20.1
Source: Author's calculations




        First I show the price impacts resulting from corporate tax integration. Table 15

lists the five industries with the lowest price declines and the five with the highest price

declines (complete results are in Appendix Table A3). The price changes are relatively

modest.
G. Metcalf                                                                        page 27
                                                                       September 29, 2005

                       Table 15. Corporate Tax Integration: DEP
                                    Industry                  DEP
                     Least Benefit from Corporate Tax Integration
                 Computer and electronic products             -0.06%
                 Government                                   -0.07%
                 Warehousing and storage                      -0.08%
                 Educational services                         -0.08%
                 Other transportation and support activities  -0.09%
                   Greatest Benefit from Corporate Tax Integration
                 Management of companies and enterprises      -0.66%
                 Electrical equipment, appliances, and
                 components                                   -0.48%
                 Chemical products                            -0.40%
                 Petroleum and coal products                  -0.31%
                 Paper products                               -0.28%

The benefits from corporate tax integration are fairly evenly distributed across industry

groups. In contrast, the costs of the carbon tax are highly concentrated as the following

table shows.


                         Table 16. Carbon Tax Price Increases
                                                                        Carbon
                                    Industry
                                                                         Tax
                                Highest Price Increases
         Petroleum and coal products                                       4.02%
         Coal mining                                                       3.62%
         Utilities                                                         2.74%
         Mining, except coal, oil and gas                                  0.95%
         Primary metals                                                    0.78%
                                Lowest Price Increases
         Legal services                                                    0.03%
         Computer systems design and related services                      0.03%
         Performing arts, spectator sports, museums, and related
         activities                                                        0.04%
         Broadcasting and telecommunications                               0.05%
         Wholesale trade                                                   0.05%

Three industries face price increases of more than 2.7 percent while the remainder face

price increases of one percent or less.
G. Metcalf                                                                         page 28
                                                                        September 29, 2005

       I next turn to the combined effects of the overall tax reform. Table 17 shows the

five industries with the largest gains and losses from the tax reform expressed as a

percentage change in price.


               Table 17. Direct and Indirect Effects of Green Tax Reform
                          Industry              Carbon     DEP      Sum
                                                 Tax
                                 Highest Price Increases
             Petroleum and coal products          4.02% -0.31%       3.70%
             Coal mining                          3.62% -0.14%       3.47%
             Utilities                            2.74% -0.22%       2.51%
             Mining, except coal, oil and gas     0.95% -0.27%       0.68%
             Primary metals                       0.78% -0.15%       0.63%
                                 Highest Price Decreases
             Management of companies and
             enterprises                          0.06% -0.66% -0.60%
             Electrical equipment, appliances,
             and components                       0.16% -0.48% -0.32%
             Retail trade                         0.06% -0.22% -0.16%
             Broadcasting and
             telecommunications                   0.05% -0.19% -0.14%
             Apparel and leather and allied
             products                             0.11% -0.25% -0.14%


A list of price changes for all industries in included in the appendix. Of the 58 sectors

analyzed, 20 pay more in carbon taxes than they receive in tax reductions, 1 is unaffected,

and 37 benefit from the tax reform. What is striking, however, is that once I get past the

top three industries, the price changes are quite modest, not exceeding 1 percent in

absolute value.

       I once again report the BIS statistic for the industries with the highest net price

increase.
G. Metcalf                                                                         page 29
                                                                        September 29, 2005

                    Table 18. Breakeven Incidence Shares
                                     Carbon
              Industry                          DEP      Sum               BIS
                                       Tax
Petroleum and coal products             4.02% -0.31%      3.70%             8%
Coal mining                             3.62% -0.14%      3.47%             4%
Utilities                               2.74% -0.22%      2.51%             8%
Mining, except coal, oil and gas        0.95% -0.27%      0.68%            28%
Primary metals                          0.78% -0.15%      0.63%            19%
Pipeline transportation                 0.60% -0.20%      0.40%            33%
Air transportation                      0.45% -0.10%      0.36%            22%
Nonmetallic mineral products            0.40% -0.17%      0.23%            43%
Waste management and remediation
services                                0.41% -0.24%      0.17%            59%
Government                              0.22% -0.07%      0.16%            32%


The BIS threshold for the top three industries is lower under the DEP than the SAP plan

raising the likelihood that equity holders would be adversely affected by the DEP relative

to the SAP.

       I can reduce the impact on the top three carbon impacted industries somewhat by

giving preferential dividend exclusion treatment to these industries relative to the

remaining sectors. For example, the following table illustrates the price impacts from

excluding all dividends from personal income taxation for the petroleum refining, coal

mining, and utility industries while excluding 50 percent of dividends for remaining

industries.
G. Metcalf                                                                                  page 30
                                                                                 September 29, 2005

              Table 19. Direct and Indirect Effects of Green Tax Reform:
                Preferential Treatment for Heavily Impacted Industries
                   Industry               Carbon      DEP      Sum      BIS
                                            Tax
                                 Highest Price Increases
      Petroleum and coal products            1.98% -0.24%       1.74% 12%
      Coal mining                            1.76% -0.10%       1.66%    6%
      Utilities                              1.34% -0.19%       1.15% 14%
      Mining, except coal, oil and gas       0.46% -0.14%       0.32% 30%
      Primary metals                         0.38% -0.08%       0.30% 21%
                                Highest Price Decreases
      Management of companies and
      enterprises                            0.03% -0.34% -0.31%          *
      Electrical equipment, appliances,
      and components                         0.08% -0.24% -0.16%          *
      Retail trade                           0.03% -0.11% -0.08%          *
      Apparel and leather and allied
      products                               0.06% -0.13% -0.07%          *
      Wood products                          0.06% -0.13% -0.07%          *
      In the BIS column, an asterix indicates that more than 100% backward shifting of the tax
      would be required for the reform to harm equity owners.

While this preferential treatment reduces the price impact for these three industries (and

raises the BIS), they still face sharply higher prices relative to other sectors. Moreover,

the amount required to be raised by a carbon tax is reduced from $20.1 billion to $9.9

billion. The cost of reducing the interindustry impacts is a reduced need for carbon tax

revenues and impetus for reductions in carbon use.

       Finally, returning to the first DEP scenario (excluding all dividends from personal

income taxation), I report alternative revenue estimates assuming different growth rates

for corporate profits.

                            Table 20. DEP Revenue Estimates
                             Change in          Change in
 Growth Rate of                                                                   Change in Total
                          Corporate Income   Personal Income
Corporate Profits                                                                     Taxes
                                Tax                 Tax
        0.0%                    1.8                -21.9                                  -20.1
        1.0%                    4.3                -22.1                                  -17.9
        2.0%                    6.7                -22.3                                  -15.6
        3.0%                    9.2                -22.5                                  -13.3
G. Metcalf                                                                           page 31
                                                                          September 29, 2005

Tax revenues fall by one-third when corporate profits rise by 3 percent relative to the no

growth scenario.

IV.    Conclusion

       The United States lags behind other developed countries in its use of

environmental taxes as a revenue source. In this paper I consider how a carbon tax could

be used to finance reductions in capital income taxation through corporate tax integration.

I note that a carbon tax used to finance corporate tax integration could have beneficial

efficiency effects. Moreover, the industry impacts are likely to be modest (in the sense of

returns to shareholders). Put differently, there is little need to provide substantial

additional relief to particular industry sectors in the economy to hold them harmless in

the reform.

       I close with three additional comments about a carbon tax linked to corporate tax

integration. First, the revenue required of a carbon tax to offset revenue losses from tax

integration is relatively modest and the carbon tax would certainly fall short of levels

required to bring about significant reductions in carbon emissions. This proposal could

be viewed as a first step towards a serious carbon policy whereby the U.S. gains

experience with this new tax before committing to more substantial levels of carbon

reduction.

       Second, a carbon tax could lead to a shift away from domestic production of

carbon intensive commodities towards foreign production and importation of those

commodities. Any significant carbon tax would need to address this possibility by

imposing some sort of levy on the embodied carbon in imported goods. One simple,

albeit imperfect, way to do this would be to use domestic input-output tables to estimate
G. Metcalf                                                                         page 32
                                                                        September 29, 2005

the carbon content embodied in commodities and apply these estimates to imported

goods. Further research on this issue would be useful.

       Third, my focus in this paper on industry level distribution of taxes is somewhat

unusual and is of interest more from a political economy perspective than a traditional tax

incidence perspective. My focus is dictated by my interest in linking a carbon tax with a

tax which would increase economic efficiency. Reductions in capital income taxation are

generally held to be more efficient than other types of tax reductions. Corporate tax

integration has the added benefit of combining reductions in capital income taxation with

an equalizing of tax treatment across various forms of capital. This focus on efficiency

comes at the cost of a likely reduction in overall progressivity in the tax code under this

proposed reform. Whether policy makers should emphasize progressivity or efficiency in

crafting a green tax reform with a carbon tax is beyond the scope of this analysis. What I

have argued in this paper, however, is that a carbon tax provides additional flexibility to

policy makers as they strive to balance the various goals of efficiency, distribution, and

simplicity in tax administration while addressing growing fiscal budgetary pressures and

mounting environmental concerns.
G. Metcalf                                                                                  page 33
                                                                                 September 29, 2005

                                Appendix A. Input-Output Analysis

           The input-output accounts trace through the production of commodities by

industries and the use of those commodities by other industries. Taken together, one can

trace the use of inputs produced by one industry and used by all other industries. Various

adding up identities along with assumptions about production and trade allow the

accounts to be manipulated to trace through the impact of price changes in one industry

on the products of all other industries in the economy. A brief description of the use of

the input-output accounts follows18.

           Tracing price changes through the economy on the basis of input-output accounts

dates back to work by Leontief (documented in Leontief (1986)). The model makes a

number of important assumptions the most important of which are 1) goods are produced

and sold in a perfectly competitive environment such that all factor price increases are

passed forward to consumers, 2) domestic and foreign goods are sufficiently different

that the price of domestic goods can adjust following changes in factor prices19, and 3)

input coefficients aij (the amount of industry i used in the production of industry j) are

constant. Thus input substitution is not allowed as factor prices change. This last

assumption means that price responses are only approximate as they don't allow for

product mix changes as relative prices change. In effect, the input-output accounts can be

used to trace first order price effects through the economy.

           Two sets of equations define the basic input-output accounts. The first set relates

the demand for goods from an industry to the value of output from that industry:


18
     This discussion is based on Metcalf (1999).


19
     Fullerton (1996) terms this the Armington assumption following work by Armington (1969).
G. Metcalf                                                                           page 34
                                                                          September 29, 2005


                          x11p1 + x12p1 + ... + x1Np1 + d1p1 = x1p1
(B1)                      x21p2 + x22p2 + ... + x2Np2 + d2p2 = x2p2
                                               .
                                               .
                                               .
                         xN1pN + xN2pN + ... + xNNpN + dNpN = xNpN

where xij is the quantity of the output from industry i used by industry j, pi is the unit

price of product i, di is the final demand for output i, and xi is the total output of industry

i. These N equations simply say that the value of output from each industry must equal

the sum of the value of output used by other industries (intermediate inputs) plus final

demand. Without loss of generality, I can choose units for each of the goods so that all

prices equal 1. This will be convenient as the expenditure data in the input-output

accounts can then be used to measure quantities prior to any taxes that I will impose.


        The second set of equations relates the value of all inputs and value added to the

value of output:
                            x11p1 + x21p2 + ... + xN1pN + v1 = x1p1
(B2)                        x12p1 + x22p2 + ... + xN2pN + v2 = x2p2
                                                .
                                                .
                                                .
                           x1Np1 + x2Np2 + ... + xNNpN + vN = xNpN


where vi is value added in industry i. Define aij = xij/xj, the input of product i as a fraction

of the total output of industry j. The system (B2) can be rewritten as


                             (1-a11)p1 - a21p2 - ... - aN1pN = v1/x1
(B3)                        -a12p1 + (1-a22)p2 - ... - aN2pN = v2/x2
                                                .
                                                .
                                                .
                           -a1Np1 - a2Np2 - ... + (1-aNN)pN = vN/xN


These equations can be expressed in matrix notation as

(B3')                                    (I - A')PI = V
G. Metcalf                                                                          page 35
                                                                         September 29, 2005

where I is an NxN identity matrix, A is an NxN matrix with elements aij, PI is an Nx1

vector of industry prices, pi, and V is the Nx1 vector whose ith element is vi/xi. Assuming

that (I-A') is non-singular, this system can be solved for the price vector:


(B4)                                   PI = (I-A')-1V.


With the unit convention chosen above, PI will be a vector of ones. However, I can add

taxes to the system in which case the price vector will now differ from a vector of ones as

intermediate goods taxes get transmitted through the system. Specifically, let tij be a unit

tax on the use of product i by industry j. In this case, the value of goods used in

production (grossed up by their tax) plus value added now equals the value of output:



                x11p1(1+t11) + x21p2(1+t21) + ... + xN1pN(1+tN1) + v1 = x1p1
(B5)             x12p1(1+t12) + x22p2(1+t22) + ... + xN2pN(1+tN2) + v2 = x2p2
                                               .
                                               .
                                               .
               x1Np1(1+t1N) + x2Np2(1+t2N) + ... + xNNpN(1+tNN) + vN = xNpN


This set of equations can be manipulated in a similar fashion to the equations above to

solve for the price vector:


(B6)                                    PI = (I - B')V


where B is an NxN matrix with elements (1+tij)aij.

       I regrouped industries in the input-output accounts into 50 industry groupings.

Tax rates are computed as the ratio of required tax revenue from the industry divided by

the value of output from that industry. Imagine that a carbon tax is designed to collect

$20 billion on coal. The tax rate applied to the coal industry then equals
G. Metcalf                                                                         page 36
                                                                        September 29, 2005

                                                    20
                                         t 4. =   N
                                                         x 4j
                                                  j =1

where the tax is designed to collect $20 billion from the coal industry (industry 4). This

tax is applied to all variables in the fourth equation of B5. Other industry level taxes are

computed in a similar fashion. Some taxes only apply to the output of certain industries

used by certain other industries. The treatment of industry 5, crude oil and natural gas,

provides an example. The crude oil and natural gas industries are combined into one

industry by the input-output accounts. Natural gas, however, is predominantly used by

the utilities industries (industry 36) while crude oil goes to the petroleum refining

industry (industry 17). Thus, I allocate the tax on natural gas to output from the crude oil

and natural gas industry (industry 5) used by the utilities (industry 36) while the carbon

tax on petroleum is allocated to the use of industry 5 by the petroleum refining industry

(industry 17).
G. Metcalf                                                                 page 37
                                                                September 29, 2005




                        Table A1. SAP Tax Revenue Changes
                                                               Personal
                                                   Corporate   Income     Total
                       Industry                      Tax         Tax      Taxes
  Farms                                                0.008     -0.120   -0.112
  Forestry, fishing, and related activities            0.006     -0.056   -0.049
  Oil and gas extraction                               0.003     -0.357   -0.354
  Coal mining                                          0.001     -0.023   -0.022
  Mining, except coal, oil and gas                     0.002     -0.085   -0.083
  Support activities for mining                        0.002     -0.051   -0.049
  Utilities                                            0.036     -1.488   -1.452
  Construction                                         0.009     -1.920   -1.912
  Food and beverage and tobacco products               0.012     -2.363   -2.352
  Textile mills and textile product mills              0.002     -0.107   -0.105
  Apparel and leather and allied products              0.002     -0.191   -0.190
  Wood products                                        0.001     -0.187   -0.187
  Paper products                                       0.005     -0.428   -0.423
  Printing and related support activities              0.005     -0.306   -0.301
  Petroleum and coal products                          0.002     -1.486   -1.484
  Chemical products                                    0.012     -2.188   -2.176
  Plastics and rubber products                         0.006     -0.326   -0.321
  Nonmetallic mineral products                         0.001     -0.296   -0.296
  Primary metals                                       0.001     -0.085   -0.084
  Fabricated metal products                            0.002     -0.719   -0.717
  Machinery                                            0.002     -0.511   -0.509
  Computer and electronic products                     0.003      0.334    0.337
  Electrical equipment, appliances, and
  components                                           0.001     -0.329   -0.328
  Motor vehicles, bodies and trailers, and parts       0.003     -0.189   -0.186
  Other transportation equipment                       0.001     -0.419   -0.418
  Furniture and related products                       0.001     -0.151   -0.150
  Miscellaneous manufacturing                          0.001     -0.380   -0.379
  Wholesale trade                                      0.014     -2.950   -2.936
  Retail trade                                         0.019     -4.566   -4.547
  Air transportation                                   0.002     -0.110   -0.108
  Rail transportation                                  0.001     -0.076   -0.075
  Water transportation                                 0.000     -0.040   -0.040
  Truck transportation                                 0.004     -0.144   -0.140
  Transit and ground passenger transportation          0.001     -0.019   -0.018
  Pipeline transportation                              0.000     -0.053   -0.053
  Other transportation and support activities          0.003     -0.285   -0.282
  Warehousing and storage                              0.001     -0.029   -0.028
  Publishing industries (includes software)            0.014     -0.400   -0.386
G. Metcalf                                                              page 38
                                                             September 29, 2005

  Motion picture and sound recording industries     0.004     -0.039   -0.035
  Broadcasting and telecommunications               0.020     -1.105   -1.085
  Information and data processing services          0.006     -0.004    0.002
  Finance, insurance, real estate, rental, and
  leasing                                           1.898    -13.907 -12.009
  Legal services                                    0.001     -0.220 -0.220
  Miscellaneous professional, scientific, and
  technical services                                 0.001    -1.101   -1.100
  Computer systems design and related services       0.000    -0.145   -0.145
  Management of companies and enterprises           -0.005    -6.819   -6.823
  Administrative and support services                0.005    -0.459   -0.455
  Waste management and remediation services          0.000    -0.113   -0.113
  Educational services                               0.001    -0.081   -0.080
  Ambulatory health care services                    0.003    -0.820   -0.817
  Hospitals and nursing and residential care
  facilities                                        0.003     -0.350   -0.347
  Social assistance                                 0.001     -0.154   -0.153
  Performing arts, spectator sports, museums, and
  related activities                                0.003     -0.098   -0.096
  Amusements, gambling, and recreation
  industries                                        0.003     -0.097   -0.095
  Accommodation                                     0.004     -0.175   -0.171
  Food services and drinking places                 0.011     -0.401   -0.389
  Other services, except government                 0.003     -0.301   -0.298
  Source: Author's calculations.
G. Metcalf                                                            page 39
                                                           September 29, 2005



              Table A2. Price Changes from Carbon Tax/SAP Reform
                                               Carbon           Total
                    Industry                    Tax     SAP     Taxes    BIS
Farms                                            0.52% -0.39%    0.13%   75%
Forestry, fishing, and related activities        0.16% -0.26%   -0.10%     *
Oil and gas extraction                           0.22% -0.52%   -0.31%     *
Coal mining                                      6.81% -0.38%    6.40%    6%
Mining, except coal, oil and gas                 1.77% -0.59%    1.18%   33%
Support activities for mining                    0.44% -0.63%   -0.20%     *
Utilities                                        5.08% -0.63%    4.43%   12%
Construction                                     0.29% -0.45%   -0.16%     *
Food and beverage and tobacco products           0.35% -0.86%   -0.51%     *
Textile mills and textile product mills          0.43% -0.65%   -0.22%     *
Apparel and leather and allied products          0.21% -0.73%   -0.52%     *
Wood products                                    0.22% -0.51%   -0.29%     *
Paper products                                   0.61% -0.72%   -0.11%     *
Printing and related support activities          0.25% -0.67%   -0.42%     *
Petroleum and coal products                      7.34% -1.10%    6.20%   15%
Chemical products                                0.47% -0.96%   -0.49%     *
Plastics and rubber products                     0.37% -0.64%   -0.28%     *
Nonmetallic mineral products                     0.74% -0.66%    0.08%   89%
Primary metals                                   1.46% -0.38%    1.07%   26%
Fabricated metal products                        0.40% -0.61%   -0.21%     *
Machinery                                        0.30% -0.58%   -0.28%     *
Computer and electronic products                 0.16% -0.23%   -0.07%     *
Electrical equipment, appliances, and
components                                       0.29% -0.65%   -0.36%    *
Motor vehicles, bodies and trailers, and parts   0.28% -0.38%   -0.09%    *
Other transportation equipment                   0.23% -0.60%   -0.37%    *
Furniture and related products                   0.23% -0.57%   -0.34%    *
Miscellaneous manufacturing                      0.23% -0.63%   -0.40%    *
Wholesale trade                                  0.09% -0.48%   -0.39%    *
Retail trade                                     0.12% -0.66%   -0.55%    *
Air transportation                               0.83% -0.35%    0.48%   42%
Rail transportation                              0.28% -0.38%   -0.11%    *
Water transportation                             0.39% -0.49%   -0.10%    *
Truck transportation                             0.47% -0.33%    0.14%   70%
Transit and ground passenger transportation      0.38% -0.29%    0.09%   76%
Pipeline transportation                          1.09% -0.54%    0.54%   50%
Other transportation and support activities      0.29% -0.40%   -0.12%    *
Warehousing and storage                          0.27% -0.19%    0.08%   70%
Publishing industries (includes software)        0.12% -0.42%   -0.30%    *
Motion picture and sound recording industries    0.09% -0.22%   -0.13%    *
Broadcasting and telecommunications              0.10% -0.40%   -0.30%    *
G. Metcalf                                                                                  page 40
                                                                                 September 29, 2005

Information and data processing services                      0.10%       -0.19%       -0.09%       *
Finance, insurance, real estate, rental, and
leasing                                                       0.12%       -0.51%       -0.40%       *
Legal services                                                0.06%       -0.20%       -0.15%       *
Miscellaneous professional, scientific, and
technical services                                            0.11%       -0.32%       -0.21%  *
Computer systems design and related services                  0.06%       -0.18%       -0.12%  *
Management of companies and enterprises                       0.12%       -2.42%       -2.30%  *
Administrative and support services                           0.15%       -0.30%       -0.15%  *
Waste management and remediation services                     0.76%       -0.46%        0.29% 61%
Educational services                                          0.11%       -0.24%       -0.13%  *
Ambulatory health care services                               0.09%       -0.30%       -0.21%  *
Hospitals and nursing and residential care
facilities                                                    0.16%       -0.30%       -0.14%       *
Social assistance                                             0.19%       -0.37%       -0.18%       *
Performing arts, spectator sports, museums,
and related activities                                        0.08%       -0.27%       -0.20%       *
Amusements, gambling, and recreation
industries                                                    0.16%       -0.29%       -0.13%  *
Accommodation                                                 0.16%       -0.36%       -0.21%  *
Food services and drinking places                             0.24%       -0.38%       -0.14%  *
Other services, except government                             0.16%       -0.27%       -0.11%  *
Government                                                    0.41%       -0.18%        0.23% 44%
Source: Author's calculations. The Breakeven Incidence Share (BIS) reports the maximum fraction of
carbon tax that can be passed back to equity owners before the returns to shareholders falls. An asterix
means that more than 100% backward shifting of the tax would be required for the reform to harm equity
owners.
G. Metcalf                                                          page 41
                                                         September 29, 2005



              Table A3. Price Changes from Carbon Tax/DEP Reform
                                               Carbon
                   Industry                            DEP     Sum     BIS
                                                Tax
Farms                                            0.28% -0.17%   0.12% 61%
Forestry, fishing, and related activities        0.09% -0.17%  -0.08%   *
Oil and gas extraction                           0.12% -0.17%  -0.06%   *
Coal mining                                      3.62% -0.14%   3.47% 4%
Mining, except coal, oil and gas                 0.95% -0.27%   0.68% 28%
Support activities for mining                    0.24% -0.21%   0.03% 88%
Utilities                                        2.74% -0.22%   2.51% 8%
Construction                                     0.16% -0.20%  -0.04%   *
Food and beverage and tobacco products           0.19% -0.27%  -0.08%   *
Textile mills and textile product mills          0.23% -0.23%   0.00% 100%
Apparel and leather and allied products          0.11% -0.25%  -0.14%   *
Wood products                                    0.12% -0.25%  -0.13%   *
Paper products                                   0.33% -0.28%   0.05% 85%
Printing and related support activities          0.13% -0.23%  -0.10%   *
Petroleum and coal products                      4.02% -0.31%   3.70% 8%
Chemical products                                0.26% -0.40%  -0.14%   *
Plastics and rubber products                     0.20% -0.24%  -0.04%   *
Nonmetallic mineral products                     0.40% -0.17%   0.23% 43%
Primary metals                                   0.78% -0.15%   0.63% 19%
Fabricated metal products                        0.21% -0.23%  -0.01%   *
Machinery                                        0.16% -0.18%  -0.02%   *
Computer and electronic products                 0.09% -0.06%   0.03% 67%
Electrical equipment, appliances, and
components                                       0.16% -0.48%  -0.32%   *
Motor vehicles, bodies and trailers, and parts   0.15% -0.20%  -0.05%   *
Other transportation equipment                   0.13% -0.16%  -0.03%   *
Furniture and related products                   0.13% -0.19%  -0.06%   *
Miscellaneous manufacturing                      0.12% -0.26%  -0.14%   *
Wholesale trade                                  0.05% -0.16%  -0.12%   *
Retail trade                                     0.06% -0.22%  -0.16%   *
Air transportation                               0.45% -0.10%   0.36% 22%
Rail transportation                              0.15% -0.13%   0.02% 87%
Water transportation                             0.21% -0.15%   0.07% 71%
Truck transportation                             0.26% -0.11%   0.14% 42%
Transit and ground passenger transportation      0.21% -0.12%   0.08% 57%
Pipeline transportation                          0.60% -0.20%   0.40% 33%
Other transportation and support activities      0.16% -0.09%   0.06% 56%
Warehousing and storage                          0.15% -0.08%   0.07% 53%
Publishing industries (includes software)        0.07% -0.12%  -0.06%   *
Motion picture and sound recording
industries                                       0.05% -0.09%  -0.04%   *
G. Metcalf                                                                                    page 42
                                                                                   September 29, 2005

Broadcasting and telecommunications                           0.05%       -0.19%        -0.14%        *
Information and data processing services                      0.06%       -0.09%        -0.04%        *
Finance, insurance, real estate, rental, and
leasing                                                       0.06%       -0.12%        -0.05%        *
Legal services                                                0.03%       -0.11%        -0.08%        *
Miscellaneous professional, scientific, and
technical services                                            0.06%       -0.17%        -0.11%        *
Computer systems design and related
services                                                      0.03%       -0.10%        -0.07%       *
Management of companies and enterprises                       0.06%       -0.66%        -0.60%       *
Administrative and support services                           0.08%       -0.12%        -0.04%       *
Waste management and remediation services                     0.41%       -0.24%         0.17%      59%
Educational services                                          0.06%       -0.08%        -0.02%       *
Ambulatory health care services                               0.05%       -0.14%        -0.09%       *
Hospitals and nursing and residential care
facilities                                                    0.09%       -0.10%        -0.01%        *
Social assistance                                             0.10%       -0.15%        -0.04%        *
Performing arts, spectator sports, museums,
and related activities                                        0.04%       -0.17%        -0.13%        *
Amusements, gambling, and recreation
industries                                                    0.09%       -0.14%        -0.06%       *
Accommodation                                                 0.08%       -0.15%        -0.07%       *
Food services and drinking places                             0.13%       -0.14%        -0.01%       *
Other services, except government                             0.09%       -0.11%        -0.02%       *
Government                                                    0.22%       -0.07%         0.16%      32%
Source: Author's calculations. The Breakeven Incidence Share (BIS) reports the maximum fraction of
carbon tax that can be passed back to equity owners before the returns to shareholders falls. An asterix
indicates that more than 100% backward shifting of the tax would be required for the reform to harm
equity owners.
G. Metcalf                                                                     page 43
                                                                    September 29, 2005

                                      References

Armington, Paul. "A Theory of Demand for Products Distinguished by Place of
Production." International Monetary Fund Staff Papers, 1969, 16, pp. 159-76.

Ballard, Charles L.; Fullerton, Don; Shoven, John B. and Whalley, John. A General
Equilibrium Model for Tax Policy Analysis. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1985a.

Ballard, Charles L.; Shoven, John B. and Whalley, John. "General Equilibrium
Computations of the Marginal Welfare Costs of Taxes in the United States." American
Economic Review, 1985b, 75(1), pp. 128-38.

Bovenberg, A. Lans and Goulder, Lawrence H. "Optimal Environmental Taxation in
the Presence of Other Taxes: General Equilibrium Analyses." American Economic
Review, 1996, 86, pp. 985-1000.

Bovenberg, A. Lans and Goulder, Lawrence H. "Environmental Tax Policy," A. J.
Auerbach and M. Feldstein ed., Handbook of Public Economics. Vol III, Amsterdam:
Elsevier Press, 2002, 1471-545.

Chetty, Raj and Saez, Emmanuel. "Dividend Taxes and Corporate Behavior: Evidence
from the 2003 Dividend Tax Cut." NBER Working Paper No. 10841, October 2004,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Council of Economic Advisors. Economic Report of the President. Washington, DC:
U.S. Government Printing Office, 2004.

Ellerman, A.Denny; Joskow, Paul L.; Schmalensee, Richard; Montero, Juan-Pablo
and Bailey, Elizabeth M. Markets for Clean Air: The U.S. Acid Rain Program.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000.

Energy Information Administration. "Emissions of Greenhouse Gases in the United
States 2003." DOE/EIA-0573(2003), December 2004, U.S. Department of Energy,
Washington, DC.

Feenberg, Daniel. "U.S. Federal Average Marginal Income Tax Rates," NBER,
www.nber.org/~taxsim/mrates/mrates2.html,

Feldstein, Martin; Dicks-Mireaux, Louis and Poterba, James. "The Effective Tax
Rate and the Pretax Rate of Return." Journal of Public Economics, 1983, 21, pp. 129-58.

Francis, Brian. "Federal Excise Taxes, Including the Slow Death of Expired Taxes."
Statistics of Income Bulletin, 1999, (Summer), pp. 185-89.

Fullerton, Don. "Why Have Separate Environmental Taxes?," J. M. Poterba ed., Tax
Policy and the Economy. Volume 10. Cambridge: MIT Press for the National Bureau of
Economic Research, 1996, 33-70.
G. Metcalf                                                                   page 44
                                                                  September 29, 2005


Fullerton, Don; King, A. Thomas; Shoven, John B. and Whalley, John. "Corporate
Tax Integration in the United States: A General Equilibrium Approach." American
Economic Review, 1981, 71(5), pp. 677-91.

Fullerton, Don and Metcalf, Gilbert E. "Environmental Controls, Scarcity Rents, and
Pre-Existing Distortions." Journal of Public Economics, 2001, 80(2), pp. 249-67.

Gleckman, Howard. "Three Roads to Tax Reform," Business Week Online,
http://www.businessweek.com/bwdaily/dnflash/jul2005/nf20050721_2905_db038.htm,
July 21, 2005.

Gordon, Roger H. and Mackie-Mason, Jeffrey K. "Effects of the Tax Reform Act of
1986 on Corporate Financial Policy and Organizational Form," J. Slemrod ed., Do Taxes
Matter? Cambridge: MIT Press, 1990, 91-131.

Goulder, Lawrence H. "Environmental Taxation and the 'Double Dividend': A Reader's
Guide." International Tax and Public Finance, 1995, 2, pp. 157- 83.

Graham, John R. "Do Personal Taxes Affect Corporate Financing Decisions?" Journal
of Public Economics, 1999, 73(2), pp. 147-85.

Harberger, Arnold C. "The Incidence of the Corporation Income Tax." Journal of
Political Economy, 1962, 70(3), pp. 215-40.

Hubbard, R. Glenn. "Corporate Tax Integration: A View from the Treasury
Department." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 1993, 7, pp. 115-32.

Leontief, Wassily. Input-Output Economics. New York: Oxford University Press, 1986.

McLure, Charles E., Jr. Must Corporate Income Be Taxed Twice. Washington, DC: The
Brookings Institution, 1979.

Metcalf, Gilbert E. "A Distributional Analysis of Green Tax Reforms." National Tax
Journal, 1999, 52(4), pp. 655-81.

Parry, Ian W. H. and Small, Kenneth A. "Does Britain or the United States Have the
Right Gasoline Tax?" American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Pearce, D.; Cline, W. R.; Achanta, A.N.; Fankhauser, S.; Pachauri, R.K.; Tol, R. S.
J. and Velinga, P. "The Social Costs of Climate Change: Greenhouse Damage and the
Benefits of Control," J. P. Bruce, H. Lee and E. F. Haites ed., Climate Change 1995:
Economic and Social Dimensions - Contributions of Working Group III to the Second
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1996.

Pechman, J. Who Paid the Taxes: 1966-85? Washington DC: Brookings, 1985.
G. Metcalf                                                                  page 45
                                                                 September 29, 2005

Tol, Richard S.J. "The Marginal Costs of Greenhouse Gas Emissions." The Energy
Journal, 1999, 20(1), pp. 61-81.

U.S. Department of the Treasury. Integration of the Individual and Corporate Tax
Systems: Taxing Business Income Once. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
Office, 1992.
