                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      WILL CHINA EAT OUR LUNCH OR TAKE US OUT
                       TO DINNER? SIMULATING THE TRANSITION
                       PATHS OF THE U.S., EU, JAPAN, AND CHINA

                                               Hans Fehr
                                             Sabine Jokisch
                                          Laurence J. Kotlikoff

                                         Working Paper 11668
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11668


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2005




We thank Charles Horioka, Bernd Ra.elhuschen, and Reinhold Schnabel for providing key data. Research
support by the U.S. Social Security Administration, Boston University, the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft, and the Universitatsbund Wuerzburg is gratefully acknowledged. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

©2005 by Hans Fehr, Sabine Jokisch and Laurence J. Kotlikoff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Will China Eat Our Lunch or Take Us Out to Dinner? Simulating the Transition Paths of the
U.S., EU, Japan, and China
Hans Fehr, Sabine Jokisch and Laurence J. Kotlikoff
NBER Working Paper No. 11668
September 2005
JEL No. E2, E4, H2, H3, H5, H6, J1

                                           ABSTRACT



This paper develops a dynamic, life-cycle, general equilibrium model to study the interdependent
demographic, fiscal, and economic transition paths of China, Japan, the U.S., and the EU. Each of
these countries/regions is entering a period of rapid and significant aging requiring major fiscal
adjustments.

In previous studies that excluded China we predicted that tax hikes needed to pay benefits along the
developed world's demographic transition would lead to capital shortage, reducing real wages per
unit of human capital. Adding China to the model dramatically alters this prediction. Even though
China is aging rapidly, its saving behavior, growth rate, and fiscal policies are very different from
those of developed countries. If this continues to be the case, the model's long run looks much
brighter.

China eventually becomes the world's saver and, thereby, the developed world's savoir with respect
to its long-run supply of capital and long-run general equilibrium prospects. And, rather than seeing
the real wage per unit of human capital fall, the West and Japan see it rise by one fifth by 2030 and
by three fifths by 2100. These wage increases are over and above those associated with technical
progress.



Hans Fehr                        Sabine Jokisch                    Laurence J. Kotlikoff
University of Wuerzburg          Zentrum für Europäische           Department of Economics
Institute of Economics           Wirtschaftsforschung              Boston University
Sanderring 2                     L7.1                              270 Bay State Road
D-97070 Wuerzburg                D-68161 Mannheim                  Boston, MA 02215
GERMANY                          GERMANY                           and NBER
hans.fehr@mail.uni-              jokisch@zew.de                    kotlikoff@bu.edu
wuerzburg.de
                                             Abstract

     This paper develops a dynamic, life-cycle, general equilibrium model to study the interde-
pendent demographic, ﬁscal, and economic transition paths of China, Japan, the U.S.,and the
EU. Each of these countries/regions is entering a period of rapid and signiﬁcant aging that will
require major ﬁscal adjustments. But the aging of these societies may be a cloud with a silver
lining coming, in this case, in the form of capital deepening that will raise real wages.

     In a previous model that excluded China we predicted that tax hikes needed to pay beneﬁts
along the developed world’s demographic transition would lead to a major capital shortage, re-
ducing real wages per unit of human capital over time by one ﬁfth. A recalibration of our original
model that treats government purchases of capital goods as investment rather than current con-
sumption suggests this concern was overstated. With government investment included, we ﬁnd
much less crowding out over the course of the century and only a 4 percent long-run decline in
real wages.

     Adding China to the model further alters, indeed, dramatically alters, the model’s predic-
tions. Even though China is aging rapidly, its saving behavior, growth rate, and ﬁscal policies are
currently very diﬀerent from those of developed countries. If successive cohorts of Chinese con-
tinue to save like current cohorts, if the Chinese government can restrain growth in expenditures,
and if Chinese technology and education levels ultimately catch up with those of the West and
Japan, the model’s long run looks much brighter. China eventually becomes the world’s saver and,
thereby, the developed world’s savoir with respect to its long-run supply of capital and long-run
general equilibrium prospects. And, rather than seeing the real wage per unit of human capital
fall, the West and Japan see it rise by one ﬁfth percent by 2030 and by three ﬁfths by 2100. These
wage increases are over and above those associated with technical progress, which we model as
increasing the human capital endowments of successive cohorts.

     Even if the Chinese saving behavior (captured by its time preference rate) gradually ap-
proaches that of Americans, developed world real wages per unit of human capital are roughly 17
percent higher in 2030 and 4 percent higher at the end of the century. Without China they’d be
only 2 percent higher in 2030 and, as mentioned, 4 percent lower at Century’s end.


                                                 1
     What’s more, the major short-run outﬂow of the developed world’s capital to China predicted
by our model does not come at the cost of lower wages in the developed world. The reason
is that the knowledge that their future wages will be higher (thanks to China’s future capital
accumulation) leads our model’s workers to cut back on their current labor supply. So the short-
run outﬂow of capital to China is met with a commensurate short-run reduction in developed
world labor supply, leaving the short-run ratio of physical capital to human capital, on which
wages positively depend, actually somewhat higher than would otherwise be the case.

     Our model does not capture the endogenous determination of skill premiums studied by
Heckman and Taber (1996). Doing so could well show that trade with China, at least in the short
run, explains much of the relative decline in the wages of low-skilled workers in the developed
world. Hence, we don’t mean to suggest here that all US, EU, and Japanese workers are being
helped by trade with China, but rather that trade with China is, on average, raising the wages of
developed world workers and will continue to do so.

     The notion that China, India, and other developing countries will alleviate the developed
world’s demographic problems has been stressed by Siegel (2005). Our paper, although it includes
only one developing country – China – supports Siegel’s optimistic long-term macroeconomic view.
On the other hand, our ﬁndings about the developed world’s ﬁscal condition are quite troubling.
Even under the most favorable macroeconomic scenario, tax rates will rise dramatically over
time in the developed world to pay baby boomers their government-promised pension and health
beneﬁts. As Argentina has so recently shown, countries can grow quite well for years even with
unsustainable ﬁscal policies. But if they wait too long to address those policies, the ﬁnancial
markets will do it for them, with often quite ruinous consequences.




                                               2
I. Introduction

     This paper develops a dynamic, life-cycle, general equilibrium model to study the interde-
pendent demographic, ﬁscal, and economic transition paths of China, Japan, the U.S., and the
EU. Each of these countries/regions is entering a period of rapid and signiﬁcant aging that will
require major ﬁscal adjustments. Understanding how national aging and the ﬁscal reaction to na-
tional aging will aﬀect the macro economies of these regions is important. If the macroeconomic
response is favorable, governments can do less and take more time to deal with what’s coming. If
the opposite is true, governments must do more and do it more quickly.

     Our past research (Fehr, Jokisch, and Kotlikoﬀ (2004a,b, 2005) suggested an unfavorable
macroeconomic response to national aging arising from a growing shortage of physical capital
relative to human capital. This long-term capital shortage suﬃced to reduce the model’s real wage
per unit of human capital by 20 percent over the course of the century. The model’s predicted
major decline in capital per unit of human capital connects to the model’s predicted major rise
in payroll and income tax rates. These tax hikes, in turn, reﬂect the need to pay pension and
health care beneﬁts to increasingly older populations. As originally stressed by Feldstein (1974),
raising taxes on workers to make transfers to the elderly reduces the amount of capital workers
individually and collectively can and will accumulate.

     But our earlier studies, with their dismal forecasts that the interaction of aging and huge
ﬁscal commitments to the elderly will undermine the macro economies of the developed world,
omitted two issues. Both of these issues are taken up here, and both militate against a severe
capital shortage.

     The ﬁrst is government investment. In our prior studies we treated all government purchases
as current consumption. There is some logic for doing so, since many so-called government in-
vestment goods (e.g., tanks, oﬃce buildings to house bureaucrats, space vehicles) may make little
or no contribution to the nation’s output and productivity and, indeed, may do the opposite. On
the other hand,the lion’s share of government investment, be it in constructing roads, erecting
schools, building research labs, does seem to be productive.

     Treating what governments call investment as investment in the model doesn’t entirely elim-

                                                3
inate the predicted long-term capital shortage, but it does signiﬁcantly mitigate it. Compared
with its 2004 value, the model’s real wage per unit of human capital in 2100 is reduced by only 4
percent rather than by 20 percent.

     The second omission is China. As everyone knows, China is already a major producer of
world output. Its GDP now equals roughly one ninth of U.S. output. China is also absorbing
Western and Japanese technology at a rapid clip. This acquisition of technology, in combination
with improved education, holds the prospect for ongoing real income growth in China. But, given
China’s exceptionally high saving rate, more income growth in China means more Chinese saving
that can be invested in the developed world as well as in China.

     The potential for China and other developing countries to bail out the developed world, at
least in terms of its capital needs, has recently been advanced by Jeremy Siegel (2005). But China
has a long way to go if it is to play such a role. China’s per capita income and wealth levels are
currently only a small fraction - probably less than 15 percent - of the developed world’s levels.
Of course, China has lots of capitas - its population is 2.6 times the combined populations of the
U.S., Japan, and the EU. Still, China’s current total holdings of wealth appear to be less than one
quarter and could be easily be less than one tenth of total wealth holdings across the four regions.

     Moreover, Chinese saving behavior may change. It’s certainly far from what one would expect
to see. One would think that having low current income, but the prospect of much higher future
income, would lead the Chinese to spend most of what they now produce. But, if oﬃcial statistics
are to be believed, nothing could be further from the truth. According to OECD (2002) data, the
Chinese private sector appears to be saving 40.0 percent of private available output, deﬁned as
net national income minus government purchases of goods and services. This extraordinarily high
Chinese private-sector saving rate explains why the Chinese are currently exporting more capital
to the rest of the world than they are importing. Based on European Commission (2005) data,
the comparable private-sector saving rates in the U.S., Japan, and EU are only 4.0 percent, 11.5
percent, and 11.1 percent, respectively.

     China is also remarkable when it comes to aging. Like the developed world, China is getting
older. But it’s projected over the next half century to age much more rapidly than the U.S.,


                                                 4
Japan, or the EU. This doesn’t mean that China will end up older than these regions. It just
means it will make the transformation from a relatively young to a very old society much more
rapidly than its trading partners in the developed world.

     As Table 1 details, only 6.8 percent of today’s Chinese are 65 and older compared with 17.2
percent in Japan, 16.4 percent in the EU, and 12.3 percent in the U.S. In 2050, 23.6 percent of the
Chinese population will be 65 plus. This is larger than the 20.6 percent elderly share projected
for the U.S., but smaller than the 28.6 and 35.9 percent shares projected in the EU and Japan,
respectively. So the rapidity of China’s aging doesn’t reﬂect where it will end up, but where it is
starting.

     The fact that China, like Japan and the West,is aging and faces signiﬁcant ﬁscal obligations
associated with that process suggests that China’s inclusion in our model would make little diﬀer-
ence to the model’s unpleasant prediction of a looming capital shortage. But because of China’s
much higher rates of growth and saving and because its population is so large, adding China can,
as documented below, transform a capital shortage into a capital glut. Whether or not this occurs
depends on how China’s ﬁscal policy and saving behavior evolve. If, over the course of the next
50 years, China adopts ﬁscal arrangements and saving propensities that are similar to those of
developing nations, China will make only a modest contribution to the world’s supply of capital,
leaving real wages per unit of human capital at the end of this century only about 4 percent higher
than they are today. If, on the other hand, China limits growth in public expenditures and the
Chinese people continue to eschew consumption, China will save enough for its own capital needs
as well as those of the developed world, leaving real wages per unit of human capital at the end
of this century roughly 60 percent above the current level.

     The usefulness of these ﬁndings depends, of course, on the realism of our model. Our life-
cycle model’s features are a mouthful. The model includes age-, region-, and year-speciﬁc fertility
and mortality rates, lifespan uncertainty, age-, region-, and year-speciﬁc pension, disability, health
care, and other government transfer policies, region- and year-speciﬁc government purchases of
goods and services, region-speciﬁc levels of debt, high, middle, and low earners within each cohort
in each region, region-speciﬁc personal wage income, capital income, corporate income, and pay-


                                                  5
roll taxes, international capital mobility, technological change, quadratic costs of adjusting each
region’s capital stock, age-speciﬁc inheritances, age-speciﬁc and unintended bequests, intertem-
porally separable CES utility functions in consumption and leisure, region-speciﬁc Cobb-Douglas
production functions, the presence of children’s utility in parents’ utility functions when the chil-
dren are young, exogenously speciﬁed age-, earnings class-, region-, and year-speciﬁc immigration,
and region- and cohort-speciﬁc time preference rates.

     As with our other three regions, to accommodate Chinese saving behavior, we’ve set the
Chinese time preference rate to match the current observed saving rate for China. And we’ve
calibrated the multifactor productivity coeﬃcient in the Chinese production function to match
the current observed Chinese relative wage. The big questions with respect to China’s calibration,
however, are not how to treat current saving preferences and technology, but rather how to model
future saving preferences and technology.

     Consider ﬁrst the issue of technology. It seems reasonable to believe that the level of Chinese
technology will converge to that of the West. The unknown is the rate of convergence. In this
study we assume that the Chinese multi-factor productivity coeﬃcient rises gradually, reaching
the U.S., Japanese, and EU rates by mid century. But we also consider slower and faster rates of
technological convergence.

     Now consider modelling future Chinese saving behavior. Here we examine two alternative
assumptions. The ﬁrst is that the Chinese time preference rate remains ﬁxed through time at the
very low rate needed to calibrate the current Chinese saving rate. The second is that successive
cohorts of Chinese gradually adopt Western saving behavior such that the Chinese born in 2050
and thereafter have the same time preference rate as Americans in 2004.

II. Our Model and Its Predecessors

     The development of dynamic life-cycle simulation models was stimulated by Feldstein’s
(1974) article contending that government pension systems lower national saving. Early dynamic
analysis of government pension programs and other policies include Kotlikoﬀ (1979), Summers
(1981), Auerbach and Kotlikoﬀ (1983, 1987), and Seidman (1986). More recent papers have con-
sidered the importance of land, earnings uncertainty, political economy considerations, liquidity

                                                 6
constraints, diﬀerent options for funding Social Security, and human capital decisions. These
studies include Hubbard and Judd (1987), Imrohoroglu, Imrohoroglu, and Joines (1995, 1999),
Kotlikoﬀ (1996), Huang, Imrohoroglu, and Sargent (1997), Huggett and Ventura (1998), Cooley
and Soares (1999a, 1999b), De Nardi, Imrohoroglu, and Sargent (1999), Kotlikoﬀ, Smetters and
Walliser (1998a, 1998b, 1999, and 2002), Raﬀelhüschen (1989, 1993), Heckman, Lochner, and
Taber (1998), Bohn (2001), Smetters and Walliser (2004), Nishiyama and Smetters (2004), and
Fehr and Habermann (2005).

     This model, like our previous ones, builds on Auerbach-Kotlikoﬀ’s (1987) overlapping gen-
eration (OLG) model. Auerbach and Kotlikoﬀ also simulated demographic transitions, but their
model assumed that all agents gave birth at a ﬁxed age, died and bequeathed at a ﬁxed age,
and received inheritances at a ﬁxed age. Kotlikoﬀ, Smetters, and Walliser (2001) advanced the
Auerbach-Kotlikoﬀ model by incorporating age-speciﬁc fertility and inheritance, lifespan exten-
sion, intragenerational earnings heterogeneity, and additional ﬁscal institutions. Fehr, Jokisch,
and Kotlikoﬀ (2004a,b, 2005) included lifespan uncertainty as well as bequests arising from in-
complete annuitization. They also introduced multiple regions with international capital mobility
and immigration.

     As in Kotlikoﬀ, Smetters, and Walliser (2001), our model features monozygotic reproduction
with agents in their child-bearing years giving birth each year to fractions of children. This means
of ﬁnessing marriage and family formation permits us to incorporate changes through time in age-
speciﬁc fertility rates and to closely line up our model’s age-speciﬁc population shares to those
forecast for the four regions.

     We assume that agents care about their children’s utility when they are young and, as a con-
sequence, make consumption expenditures on behalf of their children (pay for their consumption),
but only when the children are young. We also assume that agents die with realistic mortal-
ity probabilities starting at age 68. Agents fully appreciate the uncertainty of their longevities
and maximize, at any point in time, their expected remaining lifetime utilities. The inclusion of
lifespan uncertainty permits a realistic modelling of bequests and inheritances.

     We generate bequests by assuming that agents fail to annuitize their assets in old age. Hence,


                                                 7
when they die, they leave undesired bequests to their children. Since agents die at diﬀerent ages
and have children of diﬀerent ages, their heirs also inherit at diﬀerent ages. Agents who were born
when their parents were young receive inheritances later in their life than do their younger siblings.
Finally, uninsurable lifespan uncertainty leads agents to gradually reduce their consumption in
old age.

     Our model also includes capital adjustment costs. As is well known, these costs can drive
temporary wedges between the marginal products of capital in diﬀerent regions and lead the
market values of capital assets to temporarily diﬀer from their replacement costs. Thus inclusion
of adjustment costs in the model generates what amounts to regional stock markets and permits
us to explore how population aging aﬀects world stock prices through time.

     A ﬁnal, but very important, feature of our framework is its intra-cohort disaggregation. As
in Kotlikoﬀ, Smetters and Walliser (2001), we consider three income classes within each generation
each with its own earnings ability. Immigrants are also split into these income classes permitting
us to simulate the arrival of immigrants with diﬀerent stocks of human and physical capital.

     The following sections present the general structure of our model. A more detailed descrip-
tion of the three-country model is provided in Fehr, et al. (2003).

1. Demographics

     Each region is populated by households who live at most to age 90. Consequently, there
are 91 generations with surviving members at any point in time. The individual life cycle of a
representative agent is described in Figure 1. Between ages 0 and 20 our agents are children who
earn no money and are supported by their parents. At age 21 our agents leave their parents and
go to work. Between ages 23 and 45 our agents give birth to fractions of children at the beginning
of each year, i.e. the ﬁrst (fraction of) children are born when the agents are 23 and the last
are born when they are age 45. An agent’s ﬁrst-born children (fractions of children) leave home
when the parents are age 43, while the last-born leave when the agents are age 66. Our agents
die between ages 68 and 90. The probability of death is 1 at age 91. Children always outlive
their parents, meaning that parents always outlive grandparents. To see this note that if a parent
reaches age 90, his or her oldest children will be 67. These are children who were born when the

                                                  8
parent was age 23.

         In each year new immigrants in each skill and age group arrive with the same number and
age distribution of children and the same level of assets as natives of the identical skill and age.
Since the demographic structure has the same general form in all four regions, it suﬃces to discuss
a representative region and omit region indices.

         To specify the current and future demographic structure of each region we start with year-
20001 age-speciﬁc population [N (a, 2000)] and age-speciﬁc net-immigration [N M (a, 2000)] counts.

         In constructing existing as well as future age-population counts, we have to link each initial
cohort between the ages of 1 and 68 to those of their parents who are still alive. The reason is
that children receive bequests from their parents, and the levels and timing of these inheritances
depend on the ages of their parents. This linkage is achieved by applying past fertility rates to
each cohort under age 69 in year 2000. If, for example, 15 percent of the parents of newborns in
1980 were 25 years old, then 15 percent of the 20-year-old’s in year 2000 are assigned to parents
age 45.

         In addition, each cohort is split into three income classes k. Speciﬁcally, we assume that 35
percent of each cohort belong to the lowest income class, 10 percent to the top income class, and
the remaining 55 percent to the middle income class. We denote the population vector for year t
as N (a, t, s, k) where a = 1, . . . , s = 23, . . . , 45, k = 1, 2, 3. The term s references the age of the
parent at the time of birth of agents age a in 2000.

         To determine the evolution of the population in each region over time, we applied region-,
age-, and year-speciﬁc mortality and fertility rates to the cohorts alive in year 2000 as well as to
their children as they reach their ages of fertility and mortality. In the baseline path the exogenous
current and future mortality and fertility rates follow the medium variant of the United Nations
population projection (UNPD, 2003 for the U.S., EU and Japan; UNPD, 2005 for China).

         According to this projection, mortality rates will decline in all three regions over time.
Consider the Japanese, whose 2000 life expectancy equaled 81.6. According to oﬃcial projections,
   1
       Although the economic model starts in year 2004, we chose year 2000 as the initial year for the population
projections due to data availability.


                                                         9
Japan’s life expectancy in 2050 will reach 88.1. The Japanese, who now have a 4.5 year higher life
expectancy than Americans and a 3.0 higher life expectancy than EU citizens, will continue to
maintain their longevity lead through time. Indeed, projected 2050 U.S. life expectancy doesn’t
even exceed current Japanese life expectancy! In China life expectancy is now a full 10 years lower
than life expectancy in Japan. And this 10 year gap is projected to continue for the next half
decade.

     Table 1 shows our agent’s life expectancies at birth in the baseline path, which is kept
constant after year 2050. The respective numbers are higher than the actual values, since our
model’s agents don’t die prior to age 68. However, the model’s life expectancies conditional on
reaching age 60 are close to those reported by the UNPD (2005).

     Total fertility rates currently equal 2.1, 1.3, 1.6 and 1.5 in the U.S., Japan, China, and the
EU, respectively. Nevertheless the United Nations expects fertility rates in all three regions to
converge to 1.85 children by 2050. This path of fertility rates is also shown in Table 1. In the
baseline path, we assume annual net immigration of 1 million per year in the U.S., 450,000 in the
EU, and 54,000 in Japan. Net immigration into China is negative. The number of net emigrants
is ﬁxed at its current value of 390,000 people per year. Given the population age structure in year
2000 as well as projected future fertility, mortality, and net immigration rates, we compute the
population vector N (a, t, s, k) for the years t between 2001 and 2050. After year 2050, fertility
rates are endogenously adjusted in order to achieve zero population growth and a stable population
age structure. Since net immigration is positive in the U.S., the EU, and Japan, the population-
stabilizing post-2050 fertility rates are below 2.0. Equivalently, the fertility rates in China are set
above 2.0 after 2050 due to net emigration.

     Table 1 also shows projected changes over time in total populations and population age
structures. Due to high fertility and net immigration rates, the U.S. population is projected to
increase from 275 million in 2000 to 442 million in 2100. In Europe, the population falls over the
century from 375 to 340 million, and in Japan, the population falls from 126 million to 85 million.
The Chinese population decreases by even more – from 1.3 billion to 1.2 billion.

     As one would expect, the population share of those 65 and older increases in all four regions.


                                                  10
There are, however, big diﬀerences in the aging process across the four regions. First, in the U.S.
and China the absolute decrease of the shares of the young population through 2050 are almost
the same as for the working age population. In contrast, the EU and Japan experience much
larger absolute declines in the share of the population that is of working age. Second, the share of
elderly increases to a much larger extent in Japan and China compared to the U.S. and the EU.

     Table 1 indicates that our model’s demographic machinery does a remarkably good job
matching oﬃcial projections for the four regions both with respect to the absolute number and
age compositions of their respective populations. We now describe this machinery in more detail.

     The total number of children of an agent age a in income class k in year t is recorded by the
following function
                               m
                                    N (j, t, a − j, k)
                KID(a, t, k) =     45                       23 ≤ a ≤ 65, k = 1, 2, 3,             (1)
                               j=u   s=23 N (a, t, s, k)


where u = max(0; a − 45) and m = min(20, a − 23). Recall that agents younger than 23 have
no children and those over 65 have only adult children, i.e. KID(a, t, k) = 0 for 0 ≤ a ≤ 22 and
66 ≤ a ≤ 90. Agents between these ages have children. Take, for example, a 30 year-old agent.
Such an agent has children who were born in the years (a − j) since she/he was 23. In year t,
these children are between age 0 ≤ j ≤ 7. The KID-function (1) sums the total number of kids of
the respective parent-income class generation and divides it by the total number of parents of age
a in year t who belong to income class k. This function takes into account that the family’s age
structure will change over time due to changing fertility. This approach permits the distribution
of births by the ages of parents to change over time – an important improvement relative to the
birthing process stipulated in Kotlikoﬀ, Smetters and Walliser (2001).

2. The Household Sector

     As previously mentioned, we do not distinguish between natives and immigrants once the
immigrants have joined the native earnings- and age-speciﬁc cohorts. The model’s preference
structure is represented by a time-separable, nested, CES utility function. Remaining lifetime
utility U (j, t, s, k) of a generation of age j at time t whose parents were age s at time of birth and


                                                  11
who belongs to income class k takes the form

                                    U (j, t, s, k) = V (j, t, s, k) + H(j, t, s, k),                           (2)

where V (j, t, s, k) records the agent’s utility from her/his own goods and leisure consumption
and H(j, t, s, k) denotes the agent’s utility from the consumption of her/his children. The two
sub-utility functions are deﬁned as follows:
                                     90      a−j                                                         1
                         1                1                                                          1− γ
                                                                          1− ρ1                  1− ρ1 1− ρ1
       V (j, t, s, k) =         1                  P (a, i) c(a, i, s, k)       + α(a, i, s, k)               (3)
                        1−      γ   a=j
                                          1+θ
                                    90      a−j
                          1                1                                                1
       H(j, t, s, k) =          1                  P (a, i)KID(a, i, k)cK (a, i, s, k)1− γ ,                   (4)
                         1−     γ   a=j
                                          1+θ

where c(a, i, s, k) and (a, i, s, k) denote consumption and leisure, respectively, and i is deﬁned as
i = t + a − j. The children’s consumption of income class k parents who are age a in period i
and whose parents were age s at the time of their birth is deﬁned as cK (a, i, s, k). Note that the
number of children is independent of the grandparent’s age at the time of the birth of the parents.

     Since lifespan is uncertain, the utility of consumption in future periods is weighted by the
survival probability of reaching age a in year i
                                                    
                                                    a
                                       P (a, i) =         [1 − d(u, u − a + i)],                               (5)
                                                    u=j

which is determined by multiplying the conditional survival probabilities from year t (when the
agent’s age is j) up to year i. Note that d(j, t) is the mortality probability of an agent age j in year
t. The parameters θ, ρ, α and γ represent the “pure” rate of time preference, the intratemporal
elasticity of substitution between consumption and leisure at each age a, the leisure preference
parameter, and the intertemporal elasticity of substitution between consumption and leisure in
diﬀerent years, respectively.

     In maximizing utility, agents choose their demand for leisure subject to the constraint that
leisure in each period not exceed 1, which is the time endowment. The determination of the
shadow values of these leisure constraints, when these constraints are binding, is included as part
of the maximization. To ensure that agents retire by a designated maximum retirement age, we
set the net wage at that age and thereafter to zero.

                                                            12
      Given the asset endowment a(j, t, s, k) of the agent in year t, maximization of (2) is subject
to a lifetime budget constraint deﬁned by the sequence:
                         
  a(j + 1, t + 1, s, k) = a(j, t, s, k) + I(j, t, s, k) (1 + r(t)) + w(t)E(a, k)[h(a, t) − (a, t, s, k)]

                                            − T (j, t, s, k) − c(j, t, s, k) − KID(j, t, k)cK (j, t, s, k), (6)

where r(t) is the pre-tax return on savings and I(j, t, s, k) denotes the inheritance the agent
receives in year t. When the parents die between age 68 and 90, their remaining assets are split
between their children. Consequently, inheritances of agents who are age j in year t and whose
parents were age s at their birth are deﬁned by:
                                                d(j + s)Ā(j + s, t, k)
                               I(j, t, s, k) = 45                          .                               (7)
                                                u=23 N (j + s − u, t, u, k)

      The numerator deﬁnes the aggregate assets of income class k parents who die in year t at
age j + s. The denominator deﬁnes these parents’ total number of children who are between ages
j +s−45 and j +s−23 in year t. The receipt of inheritances requires us to distinguish members of
each cohort according to the ages of their parents at birth. The parents’ ages at death determine
when the children receive their inheritances. While the oldest children (born when their parents
are age 23) receive their inheritances between ages 45 and 67, the youngest children (born when
their parents are age 45) receive their inheritances earlier in life, between ages 23 and 45.

      As in Altig et al. (2001) and Kotlikoﬀ, Smetters and Walliser (2001), we assume that
technical progress causes the time endowment h(·) of each successive generation to grow at the
rate λ, i.e.
                                       h(a, i) = (1 + λ)h(a, i − 1).                                        (8)

      The proposition here is not that time, per se, expands for successive generations, but rather
that each successive generation is more eﬀective in using time to either preform work or enjoy
leisure. Treating technical change in this manner is essential to ensure that the economy achieves
a long-run steady state. The assumption of labor-augmenting technical change would not, for
example, be compatible with a long-run steady state given the nature of the model’s preferences.
And having the economy achieve a long-run steady state provides, in eﬀect, the terminal conditions
needed by our algorithm to solve for the model’s equilibrium transition path.

                                                     13
       Gross labor income of the agent in year t is derived as the product of her/his labor supply
and her/his wage rate. The latter is the product of the gross wage rate w(t) in period t and the
age- and class-speciﬁc earnings ability.

                                              2
  E(a, k) = ξ(k)e4.47+0.033(a−20)−0.00067(a−20) (1 + λ)a−21      with

                                                                    ξ(1) = 0.2, ξ(2) = 1.0, ξ(3) = 5.0 (9)

The middle-income class proﬁle is taken from Auerbach and Kotlikoﬀ (1987). The shift parameters
ξ(k) are then applied to derive income class-speciﬁc proﬁles. Moreover, since technological change
is an important determinant of secular growth over the life cycle, we multiply the age-speciﬁc
longitudinal earnings ability proﬁle by the term involving λ. Hence, the longitudinal age-wage
proﬁle is steeper the greater is the rate of technological change.

       The net taxes T (j, t, s, k) of an agent in year t consist of consumption, capital income,
and progressive wage taxes as well as social security contributions net of pension and disability
beneﬁts received. Due to our assumed ceiling on payroll tax contributions, pension, disability
insurance, and health-care average and marginal payroll tax rates diﬀer across agents. Each
agent’s pension beneﬁts depend on her/his pre-retirement earnings history, while health care and
disability transfers are provided on a per capita basis to all eligible age groups.

       Given individual consumption, leisure, and asset levels of all agents, we can compute ag-
gregate variables. For example, the aggregate value of assets A(t + 1) in period t is computed
from
                                    
                                    3 
                                      90 
                                         45
                       A(t + 1) =                   a(a + 1, t + 1, s, k)N (a, t, s, k)              (10)
                                    k=1 a=21 s=23

                                                             Ā(a+1,t+1,k)

Since households die at the beginning of each period, we have to aggregate across all agents who
lived in the previous period in order to compute Ā(a+1, t+1, k), which we need for the calculation
of bequests, see (7). If we aggregate across agents who live in period t + 1, i.e.,

                                    
                                    3 
                                      90 
                                         45
                       A(t + 1) =                   a(a, t + 1, s, k)N (a, t + 1, s, k)              (11)
                                    k=1 a=21 s=23

assets of the arriving immigrants of period t + 1 are included.

                                                      14
      Finally, aggregate labor supply of agents in year t, L(t), is computed from the individual
labor supplies, i.e.

                                
                                3 
                                  90 
                                     45
                       L(t) =                   E(a, k) [h(a, t) − (a, t, s, k)] N (a, t, s, k).   (12)
                                k=1 a=21 s=23



3. The Production Sector

      The economy is populated by a large number of identical ﬁrms, the total number of which
is normalized to unity. Aggregate output (net of depreciation) is produced using Cobb-Douglas
production technology, i.e.
                                       F (K(t), L(t)) = φK(t)ε L(t)1−ε                              (13)

where K(t) is aggregate capital in period t, ε is capital’s share in production, and φ is a technology
parameter. Since we posit convex capital adjustment cost, the ﬁrms’ marketable output in year
t, Y (t), is given by the diﬀerence between gross output and adjustment costs, i.e.

                                Y (t) = F (K(t), L(t)) − 0.5 ψ ∆K(t)2 /K(t)                         (14)

where ∆K(t) measures investment in year t. The term ψ is the adjustment cost coeﬃcient. Larger
values of ψ imply higher marginal costs of new capital goods for a given rate of investment. The
installation technology is linear homogeneous and shows increasing marginal cost of investment
(or, symmetrically, disinvestment): faster adjustment requires a greater than proportional rise in
adjustment costs.

      Corporate taxes, T k (t), are given by

                                T k (t) = τ k (t)[Y (t) − w(t)L(t) − (t)∆K(t)]                      (15)

where τ k (t) and (t) deﬁne the corporate tax rate and the immediate write-oﬀ share of investment
expenditures, respectively. Since adjustment costs are fully, and investment expenditures are
partly, deductible from the tax base, arbitrage between new and existing capital implies that the
latter has a price per unit of

                          q(t + 1) = 1 − (t)τ k (t) + [1 − τ k (t)]ψ ∆K(t)/K(t).                    (16)

                                                           15
     Similarly, the arbitrage condition arising from proﬁt maximization requires identical returns
to ﬁnancial and real investments:

              r(t)q(t) = [1 − τ k (t)]{FK(t) + 0.5 ψ (∆K(t)/K(t))2 } + q(t + 1) − q(t).          (17)

The left side gives the return on a ﬁnancial investment of amount q(t), while the return on one
unit of real capital investment is the net return to capital (which includes the marginal product
of capital FK(t) plus the reduction in marginal adjustment costs) and capital gains.

4. The Government Sector

     The consolidated government issues new debt ∆B(t) and collects corporate taxes and net-
taxes from households in order to ﬁnance general government expenditures G(t) as well as interest
payments on its debt:
                               
                               3 
                                 90 
                                    45
                        k
             ∆B(t) + T (t) +                   T (a, t, s, k)N (a, t, s, k) = G(t) + r(t)B(t).   (18)
                               k=1 a=21 s=23

With respect to public debt, we assume that the government maintains an exogenously ﬁxed ratio
of debt to output. The progressivity of the wage tax system is modelled as in Auerbach and
Kotlikoﬀ (1987). Speciﬁcally, marginal wage tax rates rise linearly with the tax base.

     P Y (t) deﬁnes the aggregate payroll tax base, which diﬀers from total labor earnings due to
the ceiling on taxable wages. This ceiling is ﬁxed at 250, 200, 168, and 300 percent of average
income in the U.S., EU, Japan, and China, respectively. Aggregate average social security payroll
tax rates τ̂ p , τ̂ h and τ̂ d are computed each period from the relevant budget constraint for the
program and region in question, i.e.

            τ̂ p (t)P Y (t) = P B(t) τ̂ h (t)P Y (t) = HB(t) and τ̂ d (t)P Y (t) = DB(t),        (19)

where P B(t), HB(t) and DB(t) are total outlays of the pension, health care, and disability sys-
tems, respectively. For China we assume that disability insurance is part of the state pension
system. Hence, we do not calculate separate disability insurance payroll tax rates for this country.

     Due to contribution ceilings, individual pension, disability and health insurance payroll tax
rates can diﬀer from the payroll tax rate. Above the contribution ceiling, marginal social security

                                                    16
contributions are zero and average social security contributions fall with the agent’s income. To
accommodate this non-convexity of the budget constraint, we assume that the highest earnings
class in each region pays pension and, in the EU, Japan and China, health insurance payroll taxes,
up to the relevant ceilings, but faces no pension and no health care payroll taxes at the margin.
The other earnings classes are assumed to face the full statutory tax rate on all earnings. The
disability payroll taxes in the U.S., the EU and Japan are modelled in an equivalent manner.
However, since there is no ceiling on U.S. Medicare taxes, all earnings groups are assumed to face
the health insurance payroll tax at the margin.

     If a k-income class agent,whose parents were s years old at his birth, retires in year z at the
exogenously set retirement age ā(z), her/his pension beneﬁts P en(a, i, s, k) in years i ≥ z when
he is age a ≥ ā(z) depend linearly on her/his average earnings during his working time W̄ (z, s, k):

                               P en(a, i, s, k) = ω0 + ω1 × W̄ (z, s, k).                       (20)

The region-speciﬁc parameters ω0 , ω1 in the U.S., the EU and Japan were chosen in order to
approximate replacement rates relative to individual lifetime earnings as reported in Whitehouse
(2002). In China, we assumed a pension-replacement rate of 50 percent of average pre-retirement
earnings. There is little reliable data to assess the accuracy of this replacement rate assumption.
But the assumption seems reasonable given the Chinese government’s recent decision to recognize
the unfunded liabilities of state-owned enterprize.

     General government expenditures G(t) consist of government purchases of goods and services,
including educational expenditures and health outlays. Over the transition, general government
purchases of goods and services are held ﬁxed as a percent of national income. Age-speciﬁc
education and disability outlays are held ﬁxed per capita over the transition with an adjustment for
technological change. Age-speciﬁc health outlays are also held ﬁxed per capita, but are assumed
to grow at twice the rate of technological change during the ﬁrst 25 years of the transition.
Afterwards, the age-speciﬁc levels of these outlays grow at the same rate as technological change.
Note that while the outlays of the health care systems are treated as government expenditures,
disability beneﬁts are modelled as direct transfers to the households. The government’s budget
(18) is balanced each year by adjusting the intercept in our linear equation determining the average

                                                  17
wage tax rate.

5. World Equilibrium

     Up to now we’ve described the model for the representative economy. The four regions of
the model are, however, connected through the world capital market. A condition of this market
is that the value of aggregate world assets equals the market value of the world-wide capital stock
plus the value of all outstanding government bonds; i.e.,
                     
          A(t, x) =         q(t, x)K(t, x) + B(t, x) ,        with W = {U.S., EU, Japan, China}.   (21)
    x∈W               x∈W



6. Solving the Model

     To simulate the model we need, of course, to specify preference, technology, and policy pa-
rameters. Table 2 reports these values, which, in the case of preference and technology parameters,
are mostly taken from Kotlikoﬀ, Smetters and Walliser (2001).

     The multi-factor technology coeﬃcient in the U.S. Cobb-Douglas function was set to generate
a U.S. marginal product of labor of 1.0 in the initial year 2004. For the EU and Japan we simply
adopted this technology level. For China the technology level was set to achieve a 2004 real wage
equal to 15 percent of the U.S. level. During the transition we gradually adjust China’s technology
level such that it reaches the developed world level in 2050.

     The time-preference rates in the four regions were set to match the model’s 2004 ratios
of private consumption to national income to the region-speciﬁc values reported in European
Commission (2005). The U.S., EU, and Japanese time-preferences rates are held ﬁxed through tim.
But in line with our baseline assumption that the Chinese public will eventually adopt American
spending habits, we gradually raise the time preference rate of successive Chinese cohorts so that
the cohorts that reach adulthood (age 21) in 2030 and thereafter have the time-invariant U.S.
time preference rate.

     The model’s debt levels in the four regions were chosen to accord with real government
interest payments reported in European Commission (2005) for the year 2004. The maximum
ages of retirement are taken from Bloendal and Scarpetta (1999) for the U.S. and the EU, from

                                                         18
Whitehouse (2002) for Japan and from OECD (2002) for China. We set the consumption tax rate,
personal capital income tax rate, corporate income tax rate, and expensing rate for the U.S., the
EU, and Japan in line with the structure of indirect and direct tax revenues reported in European
Commission (2005). We use OECD (2002) data to determine China’s consumption tax rate, but
assume China has no personal capital income or corporate income taxes. It may well be that such
taxes exist in China, but we have no reliable information to understand their magnitudes.

     Our wage tax systems are assumed to be progressive, with the parameters of these tax
systems in each region set so as to generate what seem to be realistic average and marginal tax
rates, which are reported below.

     In calibrating health expenditures in our model, we apply the Japanese age-speciﬁc govern-
ment healthcare expenditure proﬁle for Japan as well as China. In the case of the EU, we use
the German proﬁle. For the U.S., the Medicare program applies only to households 65 and older.
We assume uniform Medicare expenditures by age. We make the same uniform age-distribution
assumption with respect to the disability insurance systems in the U.S., the EU, and Japan, which
we assume applies only to those older than 20 and younger than 65.

     In the case of the U.S., EU, and Japan, total social insurance outlays for pensions, disability,
and health, measured as a share of national income, are set to accord with the values of these
totals reported in European Commission (2005). But we determined the composition of these
expenditures as between the three types of beneﬁts using data reported in Docteur and Oxley
(2003), European Commission (2003), and OECD (2001) and invoking the assumption for the
EU and Japan that their ratios of disability expenditures to pension expenditures is the same as
prevails in the U.S. Note that our baseline path assumes a gradual 20 percent cut in Japanese
pension replacement rates through 2017, which was recently legislated by the Japanese govern-
ment. For China our division of social insurance outlays is restricted to pensions plus disability
payments, on the one hand, and health expenditures, on the other. Calibration here is based on
OECD (2002).

     We use the German age-speciﬁc education proﬁle for all regions in the model and rescale
it to get realistic education outlays in year 2004 in each region (see below). In addition to these


                                                19
parameter values, our model requires an initial distribution of assets by age and income class for
each region. These proﬁles are region-speciﬁc.2

         To run our model as an open world economy, we also need to specify total world assets and
how these assets are distributed across regions. The model’s level of total world assets was set
to generate a capital-output ratio of 3.0 in our model in the absence of China. Our additional
assumption that per capita wealth in China equals 10 percent of per capital wealth in the developed
countries suﬃced to pin down the capital-output ratio in the four-region model, namely 2.3.

         In our simulations with adjustment costs, we also need to specify, for 2004, the base year,
the shares of wealth in each country owned by citizens of each region. The reason is that the
endogenous determination of capital prices in each region will diﬀerentially aﬀect wealth holdings of
each region’s nationals depending on where they hold their wealth. The data needed to determine
the region-speciﬁc allocation of each region’s wealth holdings are not available. Consequently, we
make the following, admittedly crude, assumption. We assume that each U.S., EU, Japanese, and
Chinese nationals own 70 percent of the capital installed in their region and that the remaining
30 percent is owned equally by foreigners from the other three regions. In the case of the U.S.,
for example, we assume that the Japanese, European Unioners, and Chinese each own 10 percent
of the U.S. capital stock, where these holdings include government claims.

         The initial (year 2004) world capital stock, the allocation of this capital stock across regions,
the regional ratios of government debt to national income, and the international, intergenerational,
and intragenerational distributions of assets constitute the initial conditions needed to solve for
the perfect foresight general equilibrium transition path of the economy. The algorithm we use to
solve the model employs Gauss-Seidel iteration.

         Speciﬁcally, our algorithm starts with initial guesses for capital stocks and labor supplies
in each region for the post-2004 years of the transition. Next we compute from equation (16)
the path of the q’s – the region-speciﬁc market prices of capital. The path for the world interest
   2
       The proﬁle of Japanese average net wealth by age was provided by Charles Horioka, while the European age-
speciﬁc average wealth proﬁles was adjusted from German data provided by Reinhold Schnabel. We calculated a
U.S. age-wealth proﬁle using the 1998 Survey of Consumer Finances. For China, we adopted the Japanese age-net
wealth proﬁle.


                                                        20
rate is derived from the arbitrage condition (17) for the U.S. Next, region-speciﬁc wage rates are
computed for each year by setting them equal to their respective marginal products of labor.

     The initial region-speciﬁc capital values, our working value of q in 2004, and 2004 initial
region-speciﬁc debt levels suﬃces to determine total worldwide wealth in 2004 using the world
capital market equilibrium condition (21). These aggregate values are then distributed to the
agents of each region based on the initial 2004 region-speciﬁc wealth shares and region-speciﬁc
age-asset proﬁles.

     Given these initial individual asset holdings, our initial guesses of tax rates/tax function
parameters, as well as the derived time paths of wage and interest rates, we calculate household
consumption, saving, and labor supply decisions. The ﬁrst-order conditions and lifetime budget
constraints determining these decisions are fairly complex and certainly do not omit of closed form
solutions. Part of this complexity arises because of the progressive nature of our assumed wage tax
structures, which means that marginal tax rates are themselves endogenous and need to be deter-
mined jointly with life-cycle consumption, saving, and labor supply decisions. This is done using
Gauss-Seidel iteration. We refer to this as “inter-loop” convergence. As indicated momentarily,
we also use Gauss-Seidel iteration to determine the time path of the economy’s macroeconomic
variables. We refer to this iteration on macro variables as “outer-loop” convergence.

     The next step in our overall solution algorithm uses the annual revenues and Social Security
beneﬁt payments implied by these household decisions to update annual tax rates/tax parameters.
We also update the model’s region-speciﬁc time paths of government debt. These updates are
based on equations (18) and (19).

     Aggregating individual labor supplies in each year provides new time paths of aggregate
region-speciﬁc labor supplies. Determining new time paths of capital stocks in each region is a
bit more involved. First, we use year-2004 wealth holdings plus agent-speciﬁc saving decisions to
determine agent-speciﬁc asset holdings in each year during the transition. Second, we aggregate
agent-speciﬁc assets at each date to determine a time-path of aggregate world-wide asset holdings.
Third, use (17) to substitute out for ∆K(t)/K – the percentage change in capital – in (16). Finally,
we equate the interest rates in Japan, the EU, and China to that in the U.S. using the modiﬁed


                                                21
versions of (16). Given our working values of the q’s, this provides us with three equations in a
given year to solve for the four region-speciﬁc capital stocks. The fourth equation comes from
the worldwide capital market condition, which, given our working values of q’s and debt, provides
another equation in the four unknown region-speciﬁc capital stocks.

     The new values for the aggregate supplies of capital and labor in each region in each year
are then weighted with the initial guesses of these variables to form new guesses of their time
paths. The algorithm then iterates until the region-speciﬁc time paths of capital stocks and labor
supplies converge to a ﬁxed point.

     We give our economy 300 years to reach to a steady state. In fact, our model reaches a steady
state to many decimal places decades prior to year 300. It also converges very tightly around
the equilibrium transition path. However, when we include capital adjustment costs ﬁnding the
equilibrium transition path is very time consuming even on today’s most powerful desktop PCs.
Doing so requires ﬁnding the path with no such costs, which can be done relatively quickly, and
then using the region-speciﬁc capital and labor supply equilibrium paths from that simulation
as the initial guesses for a run with very small adjustment costs. We then use the results of
the small adjustment costs simulation as initial guesses for a simulation with somewhat higher
adjustment costs and proceed in this manner until we’ve solved the model with our desired level
of adjustment costs. Given the time required for these calculations, we assumed no adjustment
costs in all but one simulation presented below. The simulation with adjustment costs is of the
base case transition. The results indicate that inclusion of reasonable adjustment costs make little
diﬀerence to the results.

III. Initial Equilibrium and the World Economy’s Baseline Transition Path

     Table 3 reports key macroeconomic variables in 2004 in the four regions. Note that there
is a fairly close accordance between actual and computed values of private consumption and gov-
ernment purchases measured as a share of national income. The one exception is EU government
purchases. The oﬃcial data seem too low given the reported ratio of tax revenues to national
income. In our calibration, we chose to benchmark government purchases based on the ratio of
tax revenues to national income.

                                                22
        The reported ratios of educational expenditure to national income are very close to actual
levels3 . In the case of pension, health, and disability, expenditures, we closely match the shares
of national income received in the form of social contributions in the U.S., the EU and Japan as
reported in European Commission (2005). In China, the level of health expenditures measured
as a share of national income was set in accord with WHO (2004, 136). The resulting social
security payroll tax rates come close to observed levels. Concerning the overall structure of tax
revenues, the assumed tax rates on capital income, corporate income, and consumption as well as
the expensing fractions (see Table 2) yield a realistic pattern4 .

        The baseline simulation ignores adjustment costs. Hence, capital prices do not change during
the transition. However, due to the diﬀerences in the expensing fractions for the corporate tax,
capital prices deviate from one in the EU and Japan. Thus the capital price is 0.964 in the EU
and 0.936 in Japan throughout the transition, while it is 1.000 in the U.S. and China. Finally,
the model’s year-2004 capital-output ratios seem reasonable not only relative to U.S. Commerce
Department ﬁgures, but also in terms of the year-2004 marginal product of capital, which equals
9.8 percent.

        Next we turn to the simulation results for the baseline transition. The transition paths for
the four regions are reported in the upper panels of Tables 4 to 7 for the U.S., the EU, Japan, and
China. Note that region-speciﬁc ratios of national income, the capital stock, the supply of labor,
and the pre-tax wage rate are all expressed relative to the U.S. values in year 2004.

        Although the four economies are aging, the baseline path shows a steady increase in eﬀective
labor supply in the U.S., the EU and Japan. This may seem surprising especially for Japan and
the EU where the population and work force decline over time (see Table 1). The explanation
lies in our assumption that each successive cohort has a higher eﬀective time endowment, which
admits greater eﬀective labor supply by each successive cohort. Thus, the future decrease in the
actual labor force is oﬀset in the EU, Japan, and China and the growth in the actual number of
workers in the U.S. is augmented. However, eﬀective labor supply grows at much diﬀerent rates in
the regions. In Japan it increases over the century by 41 percent. In the EU it more than doubles
  3
      See OECD (2003a, 178; 2003b, 71, 77).
  4
      Actual values are calculated from European Commission (2005) and OECD (2003c).


                                                     23
over the same period. And in the U.S. it increases over the century by a factor of almost four.

     The evolution of eﬀective labor supply in China is particularly interesting. During the next
two decades eﬀective labor supply increases, then it declines until mid century when it begins to
increase again. This complex pattern reﬂects major changes in substitution and income eﬀects
over the transition, the demographic changes themselves, as well as the ongoing technological
change. By the end of the century, China’s eﬀective labor supply is larger, but only 18 percent
larger, than it is today.

     Due to the dramatic aging of populations,social security tax rates increase through 2050
by 5.5 percentage points in the U.S., by 12.8 percentage points in the EU, by 13.8 percentage
points in Japan, and by 7.8 percentage points in China. Over the century the respective increases
are 11.4 percentage points in the U.S. and the EU, 10.7 percentage points in Japan and 16.6
percentage points in China. These changes constitute very major percentage payroll tax hikes
given the base-year values. In the U.S. and China, for example, the model is predicting more than
a 100 percent rise in payroll tax rates.

     Despite the rising payroll tax burden, capital stocks rise dramatically in all regions over the
course of the century. The capital stock increases by a factor of 4.7 in the U.S., by a factor of 2.5
in the EU, by a factor of 1.7 in Japan and by a factor of 9.6 in China. In China this development is
due to high investment rates associated with high private saving and the assumed rapid catch-up
in the country’s level of technology. The other regions also beneﬁt from the economic boom in
China. As the development of the current accounts suggests, initially capital mainly ﬂows from
the three developed regions to China. However, in subsequent decades the asset holdings of the
U.S., the EU, and Japan in China decline and capital starts to ﬂow from China to all three of
these regions. After 2050, this is reversed again so that capital ﬂows from the U.S., EU, and Japan
back to China. This reversal is expected; it reﬂects the repatriation of Chinese foreign capital
earnings back to China.

     The diﬀerences across the four regions in the growth of eﬀective labor supply and capital stock
and, in the case of China, in the evolution of the multifactor productivity coeﬃcient materially
aﬀects overall economic growth. In the U.S. output grows by a factor of 4.1 over the next 100


                                                 24
years. It grows by a factor of 2.2 in the EU, 1.4 in Japan and 8.5 in China. The larger increase in
capital compared to labor supply leads to an increase in the pre-tax wage rate in the developed
economies of almost 16 percent through the middle of the century. In China wages rise by more
than 700 percent thanks, primarily, to the gradual increase in China’s technology level. After
2050, however, growth in labor supply exceeds growth in capital stocks in all regions so that the
wage rate starts to decline. At the end of the century real wages per unit of human capital in the
developed economies are still above 2004 levels, but only 4 percent higher.

     As one would expect, the world-wide capital deepening in the ﬁrst half of the century and
capital-shallowing in the second half has a major impact on the world interest rate. Between 2004
and 2030 the world interest rate declines by 370 basis points – from .098 to .061. This is followed
by an increase to a 2100 level of .087 percent. Wage tax rates follow a similar pattern – declining
in the ﬁrst half of the century and rising in the second half.

     This interesting pattern in the evolution of factor prices reﬂects China’s ongoing rapid growth
and its assumed gradual change in saving behavior. During the ﬁrst half of the century, China
makes a major contribution to world-wide capital formation. In the second half of the century,
more and more of its cohorts have adopted U.S. preferences with respect to spending and the
Chinese saving engine starts to sputter and fail.

     To understand better the role of China in worldwide capital formation, let’s consider what
would happen were the developed world forced to evolve without the ability to import capital
from China.

IV. The World Economy’s Baseline Transition Path Excluding China

     Table 8 reports baseline transition paths for the developed economies if we calibrate the
model as above, but simply exclude China. Doing so has dramatic eﬀects. Capital stocks in all
three regions in the initial years of the transition are much higher compared to the four-country
case since more capital now remains in the developed world. For example, in 2010 the capital
stock index in the U.S. is 1.60 compared with 1.02 in the 4-country simulation (see Table 4). In
both simulations, the capital stock is measured relative to the U.S. value in 2004 in the 4-country
simulation.

                                                 25
     Interestingly, even though the developed world has more capital to work with initially, real
wages are actually lower in 2010 than in the transition with China. The reason is that labor supply
is initially also much higher in the developed world in the no-China simulation. Presumably this
reﬂects the income eﬀect of having lower real wages in the medium term when China is no longer
serving as the developed world’s saving machine.

     With China out of the picture, the developed regions’ capital stocks increase much less
rapidly over time. This puts a signiﬁcant damper on output growth. During the ﬁrst half of the
century, capital growth is somewhat larger than labor supply growth. Thus wage rates increase
by approximately 2 percent and the world interest rate decreases by about 30 basis points. In
the second half of the century, however, all three regions experience a capital shortage due to the
high tax burden. As a consequence, wage rates decline. Indeed, the 2100 wage per unit of human
capital is 4 percent below its 2004 level, and the interest rate is 100 basis points above its base
year value. The lower level of real wages in the no-China transition leads to higher average wage
and payroll tax rates, both of which limit capital accumulation.

     The current accounts show that capital ﬂows primarily to the U.S. during the coming decades
due to its younger population and higher population growth rate. After 2050, capital ﬂows to the
EU and increasingly to Japan as the Europeans and Japanese repatriate their U.S.-earned income.

     As indicated in the introduction, the no-China developed world transition path shows a
relatively modest capital shortage compared to our previous ﬁndings reported in Fehr, Jokisch
and Kotlikoﬀ (2004a,b; 2005). The main reason, again, is that we are now calibrating the model
to include government investment. In addition, we’ve switched to using European Commission
(2005) data for our measures of social contributions received. This lowers, somewhat, initial
payroll tax rates as well as subsequent payroll tax hikes.

V. Adjustment Costs

     Table 9 repeats the base-case simulation, but includes capital adjustment costs. A compar-
ison of this table with the ﬁrst panels in Tables 4 through 7 shows that adjustment costs make
very little diﬀerence to the four-region dynamic equilibrium. The initial levels and times paths of
regional stock prices per unit of physical capital (the ratio of market value to replacement cost)

                                                26
are, however, interesting.

     In 2004, EU stock prices are 5.1 percent lower than US stock prices. Japanese stock prices
are 12.6 percent lower, and Chinese stock prices are 16.1 percent higher. The model predicts
increases in stock values in all four regions for the next 10 to 20 years, depending on the region,
followed by a long term decline in stock values. The U.S. stock market value is 1.000 in 2004, hits
1.062 in 2020, and falls to .917 in 2100. The EU’s 2004 stock market value is .949. It’s .979 in
2020 and then gradually falls to .882 in 2100. Japan’s 2004 stock market value is .874. In 2020
it’s .938, but then falls to .851 by Century’s end. And China’s stock market value starts at 1.161,
reaches 1.196 in 2020 and declines to .914 in 2100.

VI. Examining China’s Saving and Absorption of Technology

     This section returns to the four region model without adjustment costs and examines the
importance of our assumptions about the evolution of Chinese saving behavior and the rate at
which China absorbs developed-world technology. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst consider keeping the time
preference rate of successive Chinese cohorts at same the level calibrated for all Chinese cohorts
for 2004 in the base case transition. Next we assume the technology coeﬃcient in the Chinese
Cobb-Douglas production function rises only to half, rather than 100 percent, of the U.S. level by
2050 and remains at that value thereafter.

1. Constant Time Preference Rate in China

     The second simulation reported in Tables 4 through 7 from permanently maintains the
Chinese time preference rate at its year-2004 level. Doing so has dramatic consequences. In
particular, the 2100 world stock of capital is 5.9 times higher than in the base case! China not
only becomes the world’s saver. It also becomes the world’s investor, sending huge ﬂows of capital
to the developed world over the course of the Century. By 2100, the capital stocks in the U.S.,
the EU, and Japan are 5.6, 5.6, and 5.8 times their initial values, respectively.

     This huge impetus to capital formation has a major impact on economic growth in all four
regions, leaving world output roughly 50 percent higher in 2100 than it would otherwise have
been. This is true notwithstanding a basically unchanged supply of labor in the four regions. The

                                                 27
rough constancy of labor supply reﬂects competing income and substitution eﬀects arising from
roughly 55 percent higher long-run (year 2100) levels of the real wage per unit of human capital.
The long-run capital glut also leads to a very major decline in the world real interest rates – from
9.8 percent in 2004 to 2.3 percent in 2100.

     The long-run rise in real wages has a major eﬀect on long-run payroll tax rates, although
it does very little to payroll tax rates over the next three decades. Year-2100 payroll tax rates
are now 16.4 percent instead of 23.0 percent in the U.S., 26.1 percent instead of 36.7 percent in
the EU, 22.7 percent instead of 32.8 percent in Japan, and 26.0 percent instead of 27.7 percent
in China. Higher output growth immediately translates into increased government expenditures.
This explains the higher wage tax rates in the medium and long run.

2. Slower Technology Growth in China

     Our next simulation, reported in the third panels of tables 4 through 7, assumes that the
multi-factor technology coeﬃcient in the Chinese production function rises by 2050 to only 50,
rather than 100 percent of the U.S. level and remains ﬁxed at half the U.S. level thereafter. As
a comparison with the base case shows, slower Chinese technological growth means much lower
capital demand, output, and real wage levels in China. Indeed, in 2100 the Chinese capital stock
and output levels are just over half of their base-case values. And the Chinese real wage is only
39 percent of what it would otherwise have been.

     In contrast to what happens to China’s capital stock, China’s labor supply is signiﬁcantly
higher along the entire transition path. This reﬂects the income eﬀects (relative to the base case)
experienced by the Chinese in receiving lower real wages as well as smaller inheritances. These
income eﬀects matter to labor supply from the get go. Indeed, the immediate increase in labor
supply explains why Chinese output and capital stock levels are initially higher than they are in
the base case.

     The rise in China’s labor supply doesn’t suﬃce to oﬀset the lower path of wages with respect
to determining the Chinese payroll tax base. Consequently, social security payroll tax rates are
markedly higher during this transition.


                                                28
         The most interesting thing about this simulation of slower Chinese technological progress is
what happens to the economies of the developed world. The answer, surprisingly, is very little.
Although China saves much less than in the base case, it also demands signiﬁcantly less capital.
Consequently, the U.S., the EU, and Japan end up with essentially the same capital stocks, wage
rates, and tax rates over time that they enjoy in the base case.

         The welfare eﬀects of this simulation are given in Table 9. The numbers show the change in
welfare measured as an equivalent variation and expressed as a percentage of remaining lifetime
resources for cohorts born between 1920 and 2030. As expected from the macroeconomic devel-
opment, middle-aged and future cohorts in China experience large welfare losses due to reduced
wages and increased payroll tax rates during their lifetimes. The welfare changes for developed
world cohorts are, in contrast, quite small.

VII. Population Policies

         In this section we analyze three diﬀerent population scenarios. The ﬁrst scenario keeps
fertility rates ﬁxed at their initial levels. The second scenario considers increases in life expectancy
relative to the base case. The third scenario doubles rates of immigration in all four regions.5

1. Fixed Fertility Rates in All Regions

         The fourth panels in Tables 4 through 7 show the impacts of keeping the initial fertility rate
of 2.11 births per woman in the U.S., 1.46 births in the EU, 1.28 births in Japan and 1.62 births
in China ﬁxed through 2050.6

         The higher short-term U.S. fertility rate increases that country’s total population as well
as its eﬀective labor supply. The latter variable is ﬁrst aﬀected in 2026 when the ﬁrst cohort
generated by the higher birth rate enters the labor force. Eﬀective labor supply and national
income in 2100 are raised by 17 percent relative to the baseline simulation. Due to the younger
population age-structure and the increased labor supply, social security contribution rates in the
   5
       A more extensive analysis of how diﬀerent population policies aﬀect the future ﬁscal and economic development
in the developed world is presented in Fehr, Jokisch and Kotlikoﬀ (2004a, b).
   6
     After 2050 fertility rates gradually adjust again in order to achieve a zero long-run population growth rate.



                                                          29
U.S. decrease. In 2100 the social security payroll tax is 20.9 percent, compared to 23 percent in
the base case. However, the average wage tax rate rises. Compared with the base case results, the
average wage tax rate is 1.1 percentage points higher in 2100. This reﬂects the need to ﬁnance
additional government expenditures associated with the population increase. The capital stock
keeps pretty close track with the higher time path of labor supply. In 2100 the capital stock is 16
percent higher relative to the base case.

     In the case of the EU, Japan, and China, holding fertility rates ﬁxed at their 2004 values
for the next 45 years leads to smaller work forces and populations. In the EU labor supply and
national income in 2100 are 23 percent below their baseline values. These are big diﬀerences.
In China, eﬀective labor supply and national income in 2100 are both 17 percent lower. And in
Japan, the maintenance of current fertility patterns through 2050 reduces eﬀective labor supply
at the end of the century by 33 percent and national income by 32 percent. Indeed, the absolute
size of the Japanese economy, as measured by national income, is smaller in 2100 than in 2004
notwithstanding almost 100 years of technological progress!

     Lower fertility rates raise dependency ratios in the three developed regions. This necessitates
larger increases in social security tax rates. On the other hand, average wage tax rates are
slightly reduced during the transition since government expenditures on education decrease with
the reduction in the number of young people and general government expenditures decrease with
the reduction in population growth. The higher payroll taxes in China, Japan, and the EU lead
households to save less and export more capital to the U.S. Thus, capital stocks in the three
regions decline during the second half of the century. Finally, since capital-labor ratios are little
aﬀected in the four regions, wage rates and the world interest rate remain almost the same as in
the baseline path.

2. Higher Life Expectancies in All Regions

     Now we consider a simultaneous rise in longevity in all regions. To be precise, we gradually
raise life expectancy in each region through 2050 by approximately 3 years, i.e. life expectancy in
2050 is 86.8 years in the U.S., 87.6 years in the EU, 91 years in Japan, and 83.3 years in China.
These values for the developed regions ﬁnd support in the projections of Tuljapurkar, et. al.

                                                 30
(2000). Simulation results for this scenario are reported in the ﬁfth panels of Tables 4 through 7.

     Greater longevity leads to more saving for retirement as well as more labor supply to help
generate this saving. Consequently, the labor supply and the capital stock increase in all four
regions compared to the base case. The broadening of the tax base implies a slight decline in wage
tax rates in the medium and long run. However, at the same time, higher life expectancy leads to
a rise in dependency ratios. Hence, the year-2100 social security contribution rates are increased
by 2.4 percentage points in the U.S., 2.3 percentage points in the EU, 2.2 percentage points in
Japan and 4.1 percentage points in China. Since the increase in capital exceeds the increase in
labor, wage rates rise slightly during the transition. Consequently, the values of the world interest
rate are lower than in the baseline path.

3. Doubling of Immigration in All Regions

     The sixth panels in Tables 4 through 7 show the impacts of immediately and permanently
doubling immigration in all four regions. This means, for example, that in 2004 2 million immi-
grants enter the U.S., 900,000 enter the EU, 108,000 enter Japan, and 780,000 exit China.

     As is clear from the ﬁgures for eﬀective labor supply, doubling immigration makes a material
diﬀerence to the long-run supply of labor in all four regions. Take the developed regions. Relative
to the baseline simulation, this policy raises eﬀective labor supply in 2100 by 31 percent in the
U.S., by 21 percent in the EU, and by 10 percent in Japan. The remarkable thing is how long
it takes for immigration to alter eﬀective labor supplies. In the U.S., for example, the eﬀective
supply of labor is only 11 percent larger in 2030 despite a doubling of immigration starting in
2004. The comparable ﬁgures for the EU and Japan are 6 percent and 2 percent.

     Given that the developed world’s severe ﬁscal problems associated with aging will begin to
appear well before 2030, it would seem that even a doubling of immigration is “too little too late”.
This, indeed, is what the other ﬁgures in the second panel of results show. Relative to the baseline
simulation, doubling immigration makes little diﬀerence to any of the three countries in terms of
their macroeconomic variables.

     Take the U.S. In 2030 the payroll tax rate is 15.3 percent with a doubling of immigration


                                                 31
– not much lower than the 16.4 percent rate without the extra immigrants. In 2100 the payroll
tax rate is 22.4 percent, compared with 23.0 percent under base-case immigration policy. Factor
prices are also essentially unchanged by a doubling of immigration. In 2030, the pre-tax wage is
1.17 in both simulations. And in 2100, the pre-tax wage is 1.05 compared to 1.04 in the base case.
The explanation here is that while the long-run U.S. labor supply rises by 31 percent, the long-run
capital stock rises by 33 percent, leaving the long-run capital-labor ratio essentially unchanged.

     If the long-run real wage in the U.S. stays ﬁxed, but labor supply rises by 31 percent, why
doesn’t the payroll tax rate and, for that matter, the average wage tax rate fall by 31 percent in
light of the 31 percent larger long-run supply of eﬀective labor? The answer is that the model
provides new immigrants with public goods and social insurance beneﬁts on the same basis as
existing natives. And doubling the number of immigrants on an across-the-board basis ends up
costing the U.S. government almost as much in additional expenditures as the U.S. government
earns in additional revenues. As tables 5 and 6 indicate, the same can be said of the EU and
Japan.

     Of course, the opposite happens in China. Higher emigration reduces China’s long-run labor
supply by 5 percent and long-run capital stock by 3 percent. More emigrants means a reduction in
the taxable wage base and thus an increase in payroll tax rates. However, as the results indicate,
the changes in payroll tax rates are quite small.

     Table 10 reports the welfare eﬀects of doubling immigration. Almost all cohorts in the
developed regions experience welfare gains, albeit mostly very small ones. For initially younger
and future generations these gains stem from the reduction in payroll taxes. The gains are smaller
for members of the high-skilled class because the ceiling on key payroll taxes limits the beneﬁts
they can experience from cuts in these taxes. Welfare gains are generally higher in the U.S. and
the EU. This is particularly true of younger and future cohorts. Indeed, for the low-skilled cohort
born in 2030, the welfare gain is 2.07 percent in the EU and 1.35 percent in the U.S., but only
1.03 percent in Japan. Unlike the gains of initial older generations, these gains are substantial.
They appear to reﬂect the reduction in excess burden arising from even the modest reductions in
marginal tax rates arising from the immigration reform.


                                                32
     Initially middle-aged people in China experience small welfare gains which are mainly due
to small reductions in the average wage tax. In contrast, younger and future cohorts experience
welfare losses. Of course, the reasons are the higher payroll tax rates throughout the transition.
As one would expect from the macroeconomic outcomes, welfare eﬀects in China are much smaller
than in the developed regions.

VIII. Social Security Policies

     This section considers diﬀerent social insurance policy scenarios. The ﬁrst is a larger increase
in health expenditures than that assumed in the base case. The second and third scenarios analyze
the consequences of diﬀerent ﬁnancing methods for the social security systems. The fourth scenario
considers cuts in state pension systems. The ﬁnal scenario is a privatization of public pension
systems.

1. Increased Health Expenditures

     In this simulation, health expenditures increase by 3 percent during the ﬁrst 25 years of the
transition instead of the 2 percent rate assumed in the base case. The simulation results are shown
in the seventh panels of Tables 4 through 7.

     Of course, higher health expenditures increase social security contributions. The additional
increase in payroll taxes depend on the relative sizes of overall health expenditures and populations
in each region. Thus in 2030, payroll tax rates are 1.3 percentage points in the U.S., 3.2 percentage
points in the EU, and 3.5 percentage points in Japan and China above their baseline values. In
year 2100 the diﬀerence is 1.8 percentage points in the U.S., 3.2 percentage points in the EU, 3.7
percentage points in Japan, and 0.8 percentage points in China.

     The higher payroll tax burden leads to lower net wages. Consequently, medium-term and
long-run capital stocks are below their respective base-case values. The lower capital formation
is partly oﬀset by higher capital inﬂows into the three developed regions from China during the
ﬁrst decades of the century. This explains the slightly increased output growth during this period.
In the long run, output in the U.S. and China is lower compared to the base case and higher in
the EU and Japan. This is due to the adjustment in eﬀective labor supply in order to oﬀset the

                                                 33
income losses. Higher output growth during the ﬁrst decades and lower wages in the second half
of the century lead to an additional increase in wage tax rates.

     The welfare eﬀects of this simulation as reported in Table 11 conﬁrm our macroeconomic
ﬁndings. Apart from small welfare gains for initially older generations in the EU and Japan,
all cohorts already alive in the initial year and all future cohorts experience welfare losses from
increased health expenditures. The explanation is the higher payroll and wage tax rates. Since the
additional tax burden increases with time, welfare losses rise with the birth year of the observed
generations. Note also the diﬀerences in welfare losses between the four regions. Generations in
the EU and Japan are hurt much more than people in the U.S. and China. This indicates the
bigger size in health expenditures in the former two regions and thus the larger rise in tax rates.

2. Financing Social Security Beneﬁts at the Margin with General Tax Revenues

     Next we consider a scenario where payroll tax rates are ﬁxed at their year-2004 value through-
out the transition. The budgets of the social security systems are then ﬁnanced by general tax
revenues. The results are reported in the eighth panels of Tables 4 through 7.

     Balancing the future budgets of the social security systems by general tax revenues increases
the wage tax rate in all four regions. In year 2100, the average wage tax rate is now 17.8 percent
in the U.S. instead of 6.8 percent in the base case. In the EU it is 17.8 percent instead of 7.4
percent, in Japan 12.0 percent instead of 2.7 percent, and in China 17.6 percent instead of 1.9
percent. Note that the wage tax rates do not increase as much as the payroll tax rates would
otherwise have risen because there is no ceiling on wages subject to taxation. This diﬀerentially
reduces the welfare of high-earnings agents. It also reduces their ability to save and their desire
to work. Thus capital stocks, labor supply and national income are lower than in the base case.
The course of current accounts, wage rates, and interest rates are, however, little changed.

     Table 13 records the welfare eﬀects of this policy. Agents in the low- and middle income
classes experience welfare gains since they now face a lower tax burden. Note also the diﬀerences in
welfare eﬀects between the developed regions, which stem from the diﬀerent extents of population
aging in the three regions. At ﬁrst glance it might be surprising that initially middle-aged and
younger cohorts in the low- and middle-income classes in China experience small welfare losses

                                                34
and those in the high-income class enjoy welfare gains. The reason is that payroll taxes in China
decline in the base-case transition during the ﬁrst few decades. Keeping payroll tax rates ﬁxed at
the year-2004 level translates into lower average wage tax rates during these decades than would
otherwise be the case. This, of course, hurts people in the low- and middle-income class, while
those in the high-income class gain.

3. Financing Social Security Beneﬁts With Government Debt

     This scenario examines the consequences of ﬁnancing social security beneﬁts through 2029
with government debt. To be precise, we keep payroll tax rates in each region ﬁxed at their year-
2004 values through 2029. We also ﬁx the intercept and the progressive terms of our wage tax
rate formula at their 2004 values. The government’s general budget and the budgets of the social
security systems are then balanced with government debt. Starting in year 2030, payroll tax rates
and the intercept of the payroll tax rate formula endogenously adjust to balance social security
systems and government general budgets, respectively. In the years 2030 and thereafter we keep
government debt ﬁxed as a share of national income. The ninth panels in Tables 4 through 7
report results.

     In the U.S. debt increases from 33.3 percent of national income in 2004 to 73.8 percent in
2100, in the EU from 38.9 percent in 2004 to 134.6 percent in 2100 and in Japan from 41.4 percent
in 2004 to 249.5 percent in 2100. In China, payroll tax and wage tax rates decline, with some minor
exceptions, in each year during the ﬁrst few decades of the base-case transition. Consequently,
holding these tax rates ﬁxed through 2030 in China means running a surplus. Indeed, in 2100
government debt in China is negative 38.8 percent of national income, rather than positive 10
percent – its base-case year 2100 value.

     Higher debt ultimately implies higher average tax rates in order to ﬁnance higher interest
payments. In 2100, average wage tax rates are 11.8 percent in the U.S., 21.9 percent in the EU,
and 30.5 percent in Japan. The corresponding 2100 base-case average wage tax rates are 6.8
percent in the U.S., 7.4 percent in the EU, and 2.7 percent in Japan.

     These are, obviously, huge increases. Of course, one would expect that capital formation,
labor supply and output growth to be greatly reduced by this policy. But this doesn’t happen

                                                35
thanks to China’s surplus.

     Next consider the welfare eﬀects of this policy shown in Table 14. Initial middle-aged and
younger generations in the U.S., the EU and Japan gain from this policy reform. This reﬂects,
of course, the fact that they enjoy constant rather than rising tax rates through 2030. The gains
are largest in Japan since in the baseline path the increase in social security contributions is the
largest. Future cohorts in the developed regions experience remarkably large welfare losses. These
stem from the large increase in wage taxes to ﬁnance the higher government debt. Take, as an
example, members of the 2030 Japanese birth cohort. They experience a 20.25 percent welfare
loss. These show the dramatic increase in excess burdens due to the adjustment in the wage taxes.
The opposite is observed in China. Here middle-aged people lose from the reform since they now
face higher payroll tax burdens. Future cohorts, however, experience welfare gains from the lower
and even negative wage taxes.

4. Cutting Pension-Beneﬁt Replacement Rates

     As mentioned, our baseline path includes the legislated cut of the pension replacement rates
in Japan of 20 percent that is being phased in between now and 2017. We now assume the same cut
in all other regions over the same period. The simulation results are reported in the tenth panels
of Tables 4 through 7. In 2100, social security contribution rates are reduced by 3.6 percentage
points in the U.S., by 4.7 percentage points in the EU, and by 4.6 percentage points in China
compared to the respective baseline values. As one would expect, this policy increases capital
formation in the three regions. Thus the long-run capital stock is increased by 11.6 percent in the
U.S., by 10.3 percent in the EU and by 11.2 percent in China relative to the base case. At the
same time, labor supply is slightly reduced, and output growth increases. The higher capital-labor
ratios lead to higher wages and lower interest rates during the transition. Due to higher wage
income, the average wage tax rates in the three regions are lower than in the baseline path.

     The pension reform in the U.S., the EU and China also aﬀects the Japanese economy in
the future. Higher capital stocks in the U.S., the EU and China lead to larger capital imports
by Japan. Consequently, Japan’s capital stock and national income is also higher compared to
the base case. The increase in wages during the transition lowers payroll tax rates slightly since

                                                36
labor supply remains unaﬀected. However, the average wage tax rate increases due to the higher
growth in general government expenditures arising from higher output growth.

     As the welfare eﬀects in Table 15 indicate, initially middle-aged people lose from this pol-
icy reform in all four regions. In the U.S., the EU, and China this reﬂects the cut in pension
replacement rates. People now receive lower beneﬁts than under the baseline scenario. In Japan
the losses stem from the increases in the average wage tax rate. Initial older cohorts in the four
regions are almost unaﬀected. Initial young and future cohorts, however, gain in all four regions.
The reason is mainly the reduction in payroll and wage tax rates in the U.S., the EU, and China
and the increased wages that outweigh the beneﬁt losses. In Japan, the welfare gains of the low-
and middle-income classes also stem from the reduction in payroll taxes and the higher wages.
The highest income classes are adversely aﬀected by the increase in the wage tax rate.

5. Privatizing Pensions

     Our ﬁnal reform is complete pension privatization, which we model as the elimination of any
new public pension beneﬁt accrual coupled with the establishment of individual accounts. The
reform entails paying oﬀ all accrued beneﬁts to all those retired in 2004 and to all those working
in 2004 when they reach retirement. To approximate this payoﬀ of accrued beneﬁts we pay all
initial retirees their full beneﬁts over time and pay post-2004 retirees beneﬁts in retirement whose
values are linearly phased out over a 45-year period starting in 2004. Thus, the members of the
cohort retiring in 2005 receive in public pension beneﬁts 44/45ths of what they would otherwise
have received. The members of the cohort retiring in 2006 receive 43/45ths of what they would
have received, etc.

     We ﬁnance the move to individual accounts via consumption taxation. Speciﬁcally, we com-
pletely eliminate those payroll taxes used to ﬁnance state pensions and impose a new consumption
tax in each region to pay, over time, all accrued beneﬁts. By 2078 all accrued pension beneﬁts
have been paid oﬀ, so the new consumption tax rates from that point on are zero.

     The key feature of the reform is not “privatization” per se, but rather the intergenerational
redistribution associated with moving to private accounts. The redistribution comprises three
element. First, the shift from payroll to consumption taxation reduces the tax burden on current

                                                37
and future workers and shifts it onto current retirees. Second, paying current workers (those
working in 2004) when they reach retirement only their accrued state pension beneﬁts rather
than their projected beneﬁts represents a cut in transfer payments that hurts those workers but
beneﬁts future workers who would otherwise have had to help pay for those beneﬁts. Third, factor
price changes arising from this policy help later generations at the cost of hurting earlier ones.
Speciﬁcally, later generations beneﬁt from higher real wages, while earlier generations lose from
receiving lower returns on their assets.

         There is no need to formally model the private accounts in which agents would be forced to
save as part of this privatization reform. The reason is that our agents face no liquidity constraints.
Hence, they are free to borrow against their private account balances if they wish to consume more
than their disposable income net of contributions to these accounts. Consequently, forcing our
agents to save has no impact on their behavior.7

         In the U.S., the additional consumption tax rate needed to pay oﬀ accrued pension beneﬁts
is initially 6.8 percent and gradually declines thereafter. The U.S. payroll tax rate declines imme-
diately by 7.8 percentage points. Over the transition, the payroll tax rate rises by 2.7 percentage
points since expenses for health care and disability insurance grow.

         In the EU, the added consumption tax rate has an initial value of 15.0 percent and then
declines. Because of this reform, the payroll tax is reduced by 14.6 percentage points in year 2004
and rises to a maximum of 13.9 percent in 2075. In Japan, the consumption tax rate is initially
11.1 percent. It then rises to a maximum of 12.7 percent in 2016 before declining. The payroll
tax is 12.1 percentage points lower in 2004. And the maximum value reached is 15.7 percent in
2050. Finally, the initial rate of the new consumption tax in China is 10.5 percent. The payroll
tax rates is initially reduced by 8 percentage points and rises to its maximum value of 5.5 percent
in 2075.

         Of course,since part of the tax burden is shifted from payroll taxes towards consumption
   7
       Including liquidity constraints would require solving our agents’ utility maximization problems using dynamic
programming. Doing so would be much more time consuming. It would also introduce a degree of approximation
error into the solution that we avoid with our current formulation in which we ﬁnd the solutions to the ﬁrst order
conditions and budget constraints of our agents to a very high degree of precision using Gauss-Seidel iteration.


                                                          38
taxes, the burden on younger households falls and that on the elderly rises. The intergenerational
redistribution associated with the consumption tax depresses aggregate consumption, which per-
mits an increase in national saving and capital formation. The long-run consequences of this
reform are dramatic in all three regions. Relative to the base case simulations, the year 2100
capital stock increases by 87.6 percent in the U.S., by 81.1 percent in the E.U., by 90.4 percent
in Japan, and by 83.2 percent in China.

      The higher capital stocks increase gross wages, which rise by 2100 by approximately 18
percent in all four regions. The combination of higher gross wages and reduced payroll and wage
taxes boosts net wages, which almost double in the four regions. The reductions in labor supplies
in the four regions, reported in Tables 4 to 7, are a direct consequence of the positive income
eﬀects experienced by younger generations. Finally, capital accumulation leads to lower year-2100
interest rates.

      Of course, the advantageous macroeconomic eﬀects of privatization come at a cost, which is
shown in Table 16. The reform entails a major redistribution from older generations in all four
economies towards younger and future generations. The intergenerational and intragenerational
redistribution is less severe in the U.S. compared to the EU, Japan and China, whose initial
consumption tax rates are much higher.

      The elderly are hurt because they are now forced to pay for their pension beneﬁts via the
consumption tax. Younger and future generations beneﬁt enormously from the policy since they
face a much lower payroll tax burdens during their working years and experience much higher
wages. Consider middle-earning agents in the U.S. The oldest such agents included in Table 16 –
those born in 1920 experience a 2.9 percent reduction in welfare. In contrast, the youngest such
agents included in the table – those born in 2030 – enjoy a 12.2 percent rise in welfare. The
corresponding welfare losses and gains experienced by the 1920 and 2030 middle classes are 6.1
percent and 23.5 percent in the EU, 5.3 percent and 15.9 percent in Japan, and 6.3 percent and
13.3 percent in China.

      Another key feature of Table 16 is that the poor initial elderly experience larger welfare
losses than the middle class or rich initial elderly. The explanation for this diﬀerential welfare loss


                                                  39
is that both the poor and rich elderly are constrained with respect to their consumption of leisure
because they are both fully retired. However, the rich elderly are consuming a lot more than the
poor. Hence, while both the rich and the poor experience roughly the same percentage reduction
in consumption from the imposition of the consumption tax, the impact on their utilities are not
the same because a) their initial consumption-leisure ratios diﬀer and b) utility is not separable
with respect to the two arguments.

IX. Conclusion

     The developed world and China all face enormous demographic changes which will greatly
challenge their already overly stressed ﬁscal institutions. Fortunately, our dynamic life-cycle model
suggests there may be a macroeconomic silver lining to this very gray demographic cloud. The
silver lining is China, whose continued rapid acquisition of technology and human capital and
extraordinarily high rate of saving can dramatically raise the world’s supply of capital. Assuming
the developed world’s capital market remains open, China will gradually become the developed
world’s major source of capital.

     Indeed, assuming China attains the developed world’s living standard by the middle of this
century and also maintain its very high propensity to save, it will raise real wages in the developed
world by 40 percent. This is over and above real wage increases arising from technological change.
Even were China to gradually adopt Western spending habits, real wages at mid Century will be
16 percent higher than is currently the case. This again is above and beyond what technological
change can be expected to deliver.

     Moreover, China’s contribution to the developed world’s own development is positive in the
short as well as long runs. Even though capital initially moves from the developed world to China,
there are no major short-run reductions in developed world real wages. The reason is that the
prospect of higher future real wages leads developed world workers to supply less current labor.
This keeps initial developed world capital-labor ratios and the real wages on which they depend
from falling.

     Absent China, our model suggests a very gradual decline in the developed world’s capital
intensivity with real wages per unit of human capital 4 percent lower at the end of the Century

                                                 40
than they are today. This is much less ominous news than we delivered in previous studies that
omitted China. The reason is that we now incorporate government investment, which implies
more developed world saving.

     In addition to examining China’s role in world economic development and incorporating
government investment, this study has entertained a variety of demographic and ﬁscal scenarios.
Our demographic scenarios, which we apply to all four regions simultaneously, are a) maintaining
fertility rates at their current generally very low levels for much longer than governments now
project, b) increasing longevity at faster than projected rates, and c) immediately and permanently
doubling rates of immigration.

     Each of these demographic changes has very little impact on the overall macroeconomic
situation, but each makes a non-trivial diﬀerence to where payroll tax rates end up. For example,
Japan’s payroll tax rate ends up 25 percent higher at the end of the century if its fertility rate
fails to rise to the now-projected 2050 level; the EU’s payroll tax rate ends 5 percentage points
higher in 2030 if EU life expectancy rises by 3 years more by 2050 than now expected; and the
U.S. payroll tax rate is reduced by 1 percent in 2050 if it doubles its rate of immigration.

     Our policy simulations raised the rate of growth of health expenditures over the next quarter
Century, switched, at the margin, to income-tax ﬁnance of government pension beneﬁts, ﬁnanced
future increases in aggregate pension beneﬁts via increases in income taxes rather than payroll
taxes, and privatized state pension systems by paying oﬀ accrued pension beneﬁts with a con-
sumption tax. Each of these policies has important impacts on the macro economy. But the one
with the biggest impact is the privatization of state pensions, which more than doubles long-run
ratios of physical capital per unit of human capital and raises long-run real wages by roughly
a quarter. The policy delivers major beneﬁts to future generations, both because of the higher
wages they earn and the dramatically lower payroll tax rates that they face.

     To conclude, there is no reason to believe that China is currently eating our lunch or will do
so in the near future. On the contrary, there is good reason to believe that China is in the process
of taking us to diner by slowly but surely becoming the world’s biggest saver and the developed
world’s major supplier of capital.


                                                41
References


Altig, D., A.J. Auerbach, L.J. Kotlikoﬀ, K.A. Smetters and J. Walliser, 2001, “Simulating Fun-
    damental Tax Reform in the United States,” American Economic Review 91, 574-595.

Auerbach, A. J. and L. J. Kotlikoﬀ, 1987, Dynamic Fiscal Policy, Cambridge, England: Cam-
    bridge University Press.

Auerbach, A. J. and L. J. Kotlikoﬀ, 1983, “An Examination of Empirical Tests of Social Se-
    curity and Savings,” in E. Helpman et. al., eds., Social Policy Evaluation: An Economic
    Perspective, San Diego, Ca.: Academic Press.

Bohn, H., 2001, “Social Security and Demographic Uncertainty: The Risk Sharing Properties
    of Alternative Policies,” in John Campbell and Martin Feldstein, eds., Risk Aspects of
    Investment Based Social Security Reform, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 203-241.

Blöndal, S. and S. Scarpetta, 1999, “The Retirement Decision in OECD Countries,” Economics
    Department Working Paper No. 202, OECD, Paris.

Cooley, T. F. and J. Soares, 1999a, “A Positive Theory of Social Security Based on Reputation,”
    Journal of Political Economy 107, 135-60.

Cooley, T. F. and J. Soares, 1999b, “Privatizing Social Security,” Review of Economic Dynamics
    2, 731- 55.

De Nardi, M., Imrohoroglu, S. and T. J. Sargent, 1999, “Projected U.S. Demographics and Social
    Security,” Review of Economic Dynamics 2, 575-615.

Docteur, E. and H. Oxley, 2003, “Health-Care Systems: Lessons from the Reform Experience,”
    Economics Department Working Paper No. 374, OECD, Paris.

European Commission, 2003, The Budgetary Challenges Posed by Ageing Populations, European
    Economy: Reports and Studies No. 4 2001, Brussels.




                                             42
European Commission, 2005, Statistical Annex to European Economy, Spring 2005,
    http://europa.eu.int/comm/economy ﬁnance/publications/european economy/
    statisticalannex en.htm, July 1, 2005.

Fehr, H. and C. Habermann, 2005, “Risk Sharing and Eﬃciency Implications of Progressive
    Pension Arrangements,” mimeo, University of Wuerzburg.

Fehr, H., G. Halder, S. Jokisch and L.J. Kotlikoﬀ, 2003, “A Simulation Model for the Demo-
    graphic Transition in the OECD - Data Requirements, Model Structure and Calibration,”
    Wuerzburg Economic Papers No. 45, University of Wuerzburg.

Fehr, H., S. Jokisch and L.J. Kotlikoﬀ, 2004a, “Fertility, Mortality, and the Developed World’s
    Demographic Transition,” CESifo Working Paper No. 1326, Munich.

Fehr, H., S. Jokisch and L.J. Kotlikoﬀ, 2004b, “The Role of Immigration in Dealing with Devel-
    oped World’s Demographic Transition,” Finanzarchiv 60, 296-324.

Fehr, H., S. Jokisch and L.J. Kotlikoﬀ, 2005, “The Developed World’s Demographic Transition
    - The Roles of Capital Flows, Immigration, and Policy,” in: R. Brooks and A. Razin,
    eds., Social Security Reform - Financial and Political Issues in International Perspective,
    Cambridge, 11-43.

Feldstein, M.S., 1974, “Social Security, Induced Retirement, and Aggregate Capital Accumula-
    tion,” Journal of Political Economy 82, 905-926.

Heckman, J. J., Lochner, L., and C. Taber, 1998, “Explaining Rising Wage Inequality: Explo-
    rations with a Dynamic General Equilibrium Model of Labor Earnings with Heterogeneous
    Agents,” Review of Economic Dynamics 1, 1-58.

Huang, H., Imrohoroglu, S. and T. Sargent, 1997, “Two Computational Experiments to Fund
    Social Security,” Macroeconomic Dynamics 1, 7-44.

Hubbard, G. R. and K. L. Judd, 1987, “Social Security and Individual Welfare: Precautionary
    Saving, Borrowing Constraints, and the Payroll Tax,” American Economic Review 77, 630-
    46.

                                             43
Huggett, M. and G. Ventura, 1999, “On the Distributional Eﬀects of Social Security Reform,”
    Review of Economic Dynamics 2, 498-531.

Imrohoroglu, A., Imrohoroglu, S. and D. H. Joines, 1999, “Social Security in an Overlapping
    Generations Economy with Land,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 2, 638-65.

Imrohoroglu, A., Imrohoroglu, S. and D. H. Joines, 1995, “A Life Cycle Analysis of Social
    Security,” Economic Theory 6, 83-114.

Kotlikoﬀ, L. J., 1979, “Social Security and Equilibrium Capital Intensity,” Quarterly Journal of
    Economics, 93, 233-54.

Kotlikoﬀ, L. J., 1996, “Privatizing Social Security: How It Works and Why It Matters,” in: J.
    M. Poterba, ed., Tax Policy and the Economy 10, 1-32.

Kotlikoﬀ, L. J., Smetters, K. and J. Walliser, 1998a, “The Economic Impact of Privatizing Social
    Security,” in: H. Siebert, ed., Redesigning Social Security (J.C.B. Mohr, Tübingen) 327-48.

Kotlikoﬀ, L. J., Smetters, K. and J. Walliser, 1998b, “Social Security: Privatization and Pro-
    gressivity,” American Economic Review 88, 137-41.

Kotlikoﬀ, L. J., Smetters, K. and J. Walliser, 1999, “Privatizing Social Security in the U.S. -
    Comparing the Options,” Review of Economic Dynamics 2, 532-74.

Kotlikoﬀ, L. J., Smetters, K. and J. Walliser, 2002, “Distributional Eﬀects in a General Equilib-
    rium Analysis of Social Security,” in: M. S. Feldstein and J. Liebman, eds., The Distribu-
    tional Eﬀects of Social Security Reform (University of Chicago Press, Chicago) 327-61.

Kotlikoﬀ, L.J., K.A. Smetters and J. Walliser, 2001, “Finding a Way out of America’s Demo-
    graphic Dilemma,” NBER Working Paper No. 8258, Cambridge.

Nashiyama, S. and K. Smetters, 2004, “Consumption Taxes and Economic Eﬃciency in a Stochas-
    tic OLG Economy,” Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.

OECD (2001): Ageing and Income: Financial Resources and Retirement in 9 OECD Countries,
    Paris.

                                              44
OECD (2002): China in the World Economy: The Domestic Policy Challenges, Paris.

OECD (2003a): Education at a glance: OECD Indicators 2003, Paris.

OECD (2003b): Financing Education - Investments and Returns: Analysis of the world education
    indicators, 2002 Edition, Paris.

OECD (2003c): Revenue Statistics 1965-2002, Paris.

Raﬀelhüschen, B., 1989, Anreizwirkungen des Systems der sozialen Alterssicherung. Eine dy-
    namische Simulationsanalyse, Frankfurt a.M., Peter Lang.

Raﬀelhüschen, B., 1993, “Funding Social Security Through Pareto Optimal Conversion Poli-
    cies,” in: B. Felderer, ed., Public Pension Economics, Journal of Economics/Zeitschrift für
    Nationalökonomie, Suppl. 7, 105-31.

Siegel, J., 2005, “The Future for Investors,” New York: Crown Business.

Seidman, L. S., 1986, “A Phase-Down of Social Security: The Transition in a Life Cycle Growth
    Model,” National Tax Journal, 97-107.

Smetters, K. and J. Walliser, 2004, “Opting Out of Social Security,” Journal of Public Economics
    88, 1295-1306.

Social Security Advisory Board, 1999, The 1999 Technical Panel on Assumptions and Methods,
    Social Security Advisory Board, Washington, D.C.

Summers, L.H., 1981, “Capital Taxation and Accumulation in a Life Cycle Growth Model,”
    American Economic Review 71, 533-544.

Tuljapurkar, S., N. Li and C. Boe, 2000, “A universal pattern of mortality decline in the G7
    countries,” Nature 405, 789-792.

United Nations Population Division (UNPD), 2003, World Population Prospects: The 2002
    Revision, http://esa.un.org/unpp/, (June 11, 2003).



                                              45
United Nations Population Division (UNPD), 2005, World Population Prospects: The 2004
    Revision, http://esa.un.org/unpp/, (June 29, 2005).

Whitehouse, E., 2002, “Pension Systems in 15 Countries Compared: The Value of Entitlements,”
    Discussion Paper 02/04, Centre for Pensions and Superannuation, Sydney.

WHO, 2004, The World Health Report 2004, Geneva.




                                            46
                                    Figure 1: The individual life-cycle
                           children are born
                                                
                                                                                                 - Age
0                  21 23                        45                66 68                     90
                                                                                        
    childhood                       parents raise children                  parents die




                Table 1: Comparing Actual and Simulated Population Projections

                                        Population Projection U.S.

    Year                                       2000    2010    2020    2030      2040     2050    2100
    Fertility Rate
    Model                                       2.11    2.05    2.00      1.95    1.90     1.85    1.77
    Oﬃciala                                     2.11    2.08    2.03      1.95    1.89     1.85       -
    Life Expectancy at Birth
    Model                                       81.7    82.1    82.5      83.0    83.4     83.8    83.8
    Oﬃciala                                     77.1    78.3    79.1      79.9    81.0     81.6       -
    Total Populationb
    Model                                      276.2   307.3   340.0   366.4     385.8    400.3   442.0
    Oﬃciala                                    285.0   314.9   344.3   370.4     391.4    408.7       -
    Age Structurec
    <15     Model                               21.6    20.1    19.7      18.5    18.2     17.8    15.9
            Oﬃciala                             21.8    20.5    20.0      19.3    18.5     17.9       -
    15-64   Model                               66.2    67.2    64.0      61.4    61.7     62.1    60.7
            Oﬃciala                             65.9    66.6    64.1      61.5    61.7     62.1       -
    65-90   Model                               12.2    12.7    16.3      20.1    20.2     20.1    23.3
            Oﬃciala                             12.3    12.8    15.9      19.2    19.8     20.0       -




                                                        47
                       Population Projection EU

Year                       2000    2010    2020    2030    2040    2050    2100
Fertility Rate
Model                       1.46    1.53    1.60    1.67    1.74    1.82    1.82
Oﬃciald                     1.58    1.61    1.68    1.77    1.84    1.85       -
Life Expectancy at Birth
Model                       82.2    82.7    83.2    83.6    84.1    84.6    84.6
Oﬃciald                     78.6    80.0    81.1    82.0    83.0    83.6       -
Total Populationb
Model                      376.4   385.8   390.9   391.1   384.1   372.1   340.6
Oﬃciala                    377.3   383.2   384.4   382.8   377.8   369.8       -
Age Structurec
<15     Model               16.9    15.3    14.5    14.3    14.3    14.8    16.5
        Oﬃciala             16.7    15.3    14.4    14.4    14.7    15.0       -
15-64   Model               66.9    66.9    64.7    60.8    57.7    57.2    59.7
        Oﬃciala             66.9    66.5    64.7    60.8    57.5    56.7       -
65-90   Model               16.2    17.8    20.8    24.9    28.0    28.0    23.9
        Oﬃciala             16.3    18.2    21.0    24.7    27.8    28.3       -


                      Population Projection Japan

Year                       2000    2010    2020    2030    2040    2050    2100
Fertility Rate
Model                       1.28    1.37    1.47    1.56    1.66    1.75    1.91
Oﬃciala                     1.32    1.37    1.49    1.68    1.81    1.85       -
Life Expectancy at Birth
Model                       83.8    84.6    85.4    86.2    87.0    87.8    87.8
Oﬃciala                     81.6    83.5    85.1    86.6    87.7    88.1       -
Total Populationb
Model                      126.7   128.9   127.1   121.8   114.2   108.8    84.8
Oﬃciala                    127.0   128.0   125.6   121.0   115.7   109.7       -
Age Structurec
<15     Model               14.6    13.4    12.5    11.9    12.5    12.9    16.0
        Oﬃciala             14.6    13.6    12.4    11.8    12.6    13.0       -
15-64   Model               68.2    64.1    59.2    58.1    55.0    52.1    56.3
        Oﬃciala             68.2    64.0    59.5    57.8    53.0    50.4       -
65-90   Model               17.2    22.5    28.2    30.0    32.5    35.0    27.7
        Oﬃciala             17.2    22.4    28.1    30.4    34.4    36.5       -


                                    48
                                  Population Projection China

Year                               2000      2010      2020      2030     2040      2050       2100
Fertility Rate
Model                                1.62      1.67     1.71      1.76      1.80     1.85       2.01
Oﬃciale                              1.32      1.37     1.49      1.68      1.81     1.85          -
Life Expectancy at Birth
Model                                75.8      76.7     77.5      78.4      79.3     80.2       80.2
Oﬃciale                              71.5      72.6     73.8      75.3      77.1     78.7          -
Total Populationb
Model                             1273.1    1360.7    1455.0   1490.7    1481.3 1430.8        1181.8
Oﬃciale                           1274.0    1354.5    1423.9   1446.5    1433.4 1392.3             -
Age Structurec
<15     Model                        24.6      19.5     18.3      16.5      15.6     16.3       18.5
        Oﬃciale                      24.8      19.5     18.4      16.9      15.6     15.7          -
15-64   Model                        68.6      73.3     70.6      67.8      63.1     61.6       61.7
        Oﬃciale                      68.4      72.2     69.7      66.8      62.1     60.7          -
65-90   Model                         6.8       7.2     11.1      15.7      21.3     22.0       19.8
        Oﬃciale                       6.8       8.3     11.9      16.3      22.3     23.6          -

a
  UNPD (2003), medium variant projections; b in millions; c in percent of total population;
d
  UNPD(2003), medium variant projections, Western Europe; e UNPD (2005), medium variant
projections.




                                                49
                   Table 2: Parameter Values of the Model
                                            Symbol            Value
                                                     U.S.   EU Japan         China
Utility Function
Time preference rate                        θ        0.01   0.00      0.01   -0.13
Intertemporal elasticity of substitution    γ                      0.25
Intratemporal elasticity of substitution    ρ                       0.4
Leisure preference parameter                α                       1.5
Production Function
Technology level                            φ        1.01   1.01     1.01    0.24
Capital share in production                 ε                      0.25
Technical progress                          λ                      0.01
Policy Parameters
Consumption tax rate (in %)                 τc       10.2   23.6     14.7    20.0
Capital tax rate (in %)                     τr       11.0   14.0      8.0    0.0
Corporate tax rate (in %)                   τk       12.0   18.0     16.0    0.0
Expensing fraction (in %)                            0.0    20.0     40.0    0.0
Debt (in % of national income)              B/Y      33.3   38.9     41.4    10.0
Age of retirement                                     63     60       60      60




                                       50
                              Table 3: The Year 2004 of the Baseline Patha
                                                         Model                               Oﬃcialb
                                            U.S.       EU Japan            China U.S.       EU Japan          China
National Income
Private consumption                         79.7      65.1         70.5      52.4   79.3   67.3     69.3       49.5
Government purchases of goods               18.7      31.0         21.9      17.9   17.4   24.3     21.7       17.6
and services
  General public expenditures               10.9 19.3              12.3      13.8      -      -        -          -
  Aggregate education outlays                5.9 6.0                4.4       2.1    5.9    6.0      4.3        2.1
  Aggregate health beneﬁts                   1.9 5.7                5.2       2.0    2.5    6.2      6.8        2.0
Current account                              2.8 8.3               13.8     -16.1   -6.1    0.5      4.5        1.9

Government Indicators
Social contributions received                 8.1 16.4             13.9       7.7    7.9 16.6       13.4          -
  Aggregate pension beneﬁts                   5.3 9.2               7.6       5.2    5.7 11.6       10.8        3.0
  Aggregate health beneﬁts                    1.9 5.7               5.2       2.0    2.5 6.2         6.8        2.0
  Aggregate disability beneﬁts                0.9 1.5               1.1       0.0    0.9    -          -          -
Pension contribution ratec                    7.7 14.2             12.1       8.0   10.6    -       17.3       11.0
Health-care contribution ratec                2.5 8.8               8.2       3.1    2.9    -        8.5        8.0
Disability-insurance contribution             1.4 2.3               1.8       0.0    1.9    -          -          -
ratec
Interest payment on public debtc              3.3      3.8           4.1      1.0    3.0    3.5      3.7        0.8

Tax revenuesc                               20.3      30.3         21.9      15.8   20.6   31.0     19.1       14.8
  Direct taxes                              12.2      14.9         11.5       5.3   12.5   15.1      8.9        2.8
    Personal income taxes                    9.2      10.5          7.5       5.3    9.5   10.7      4.7        0.7
       Wage taxes                            5.7       5.9          4.9       5.3      -      -        -          -
       Capital taxes                         3.5       4.6          2.6       0.0      -      -        -          -
    Corporate income taxes                   3.0       4.4          4.0       0.0    3.0    4.4      4.2        2.1
  Indirect taxes                             8.1      15.4         10.4      10.5    8.1   15.9     10.2       12.0

Wage tax ratesc
 Average                                     7.8       8.0          6.6       7.1      -      -         -         -
 Marginal                                   14.2      13.9         11.9       8.9      -      -         -         -

Capital-output ratio                          2.2      2.2           2.3      2.6      -      -         -         -
Capital-labor ratio                           3.0      2.9           3.1      0.5      -      -         -         -
Interest ratec                                9.8      9.8           9.8      9.8      -      -         -         -
a                                                              b
    in percent of national income if not stated diﬀerently;        European Commission (2005) for the U.S.,
                                                c
the EU and Japan, OECD (2002) for China;            in percent.




                                                          51
                                      Table 4: Simulation Results for the U.S.
                               Index of   Index of   Index of   Current   Index of              Social      Average
                               National   Capital    Labor      Account   Pre-Tax    Interest   Security    Wage
                        Year   Income     Stock      Supply     / NI      Wage       Rate       Cost Rate   Tax

        Base Case       2004   1.00       1.00       1.00        .028     1.00       .098       .116        .078
                        2010   1.13       1.19       1.12       -.039     1.02       .093       .119        .070
                        2020   1.47       1.92       1.35       -.144     1.09       .075       .138        .069
                        2030   1.89       3.04       1.62       -.168     1.17       .061       .164        .078
                        2050   2.63       4.11       2.28        .054     1.16       .063       .171        .093
                        2075   3.29       4.05       3.08        .037     1.07       .080       .207        .080
                        2100   4.11       4.67       3.96        .017     1.04       .087       .230        .068

      Constant Time     2004   1.00       1.00       1.00        .024     1.00       .098       .116        .078
       Preference in    2010   1.13       1.20       1.11       -.053     1.02       .093       .119        .070
          China         2020   1.46       1.99       1.33       -.210     1.11       .072       .138        .069
                        2030   1.90       3.50       1.57       -.323     1.22       .054       .163        .078
                        2050   3.02       8.39       2.17       -.253     1.40       .036       .151        .087




52
                        2075   4.62       18.45      2.95       -.171     1.58       .025       .153        .081
                        2100   6.09       26.09      3.78       -.084     1.62       .023       .164        .078

     Lower Technology   2004   0.98       0.98       0.99       -.063     1.00       .099       .117        .074
        Growth in       2010   1.17       1.35       1.11       -.115     1.05       .085       .114        .073
          China         2020   1.55       2.28       1.37       -.158     1.14       .067       .130        .077
                        2030   1.95       3.41       1.63       -.142     1.20       .056       .160        .085
                        2050   2.67       4.29       2.29        .059     1.17       .061       .171        .096
                        2075   3.24       3.86       3.07        .044     1.06       .083       .211        .082
                        2100   4.06       4.50       3.94        .016     1.03       .089       .233        .069

        Constant        2004   1.00       1.00       1.00        .028     1.00       .098       .116        .078
        Fertility       2010   1.13       1.19       1.12       -.039     1.02       .093       .119        .070
         in All         2020   1.47       1.92       1.35       -.147     1.09       .075       .138        .070
        Regions         2030   1.89       3.06       1.62       -.180     1.17       .061       .164        .080
                        2050   2.73       4.34       2.35        .033     1.16       .062       .166        .098
                        2075   3.69       4.67       3.43        .024     1.08       .078       .188        .093
                        2100   4.81       5.42       4.64        .033     1.04       .087       .209        .079
                                  Table 4 (continued): Simulation results for the U.S.
                                Index of   Index of   Index of   Current   Index of              Social      Average
                                National   Capital    Labor      Account   Pre-Tax    Interest   Security    Wage
                         Year   Income     Stock      Supply     / NI      Wage       Rate       Cost Rate   Tax

           Higher        2004   1.00       1.00       1.00        .024     1.00       .098       .116        .077
      Life Expectancy    2010   1.14       1.22       1.12       -.046     1.02       .092       .119        .070
            in All       2020   1.49       2.02       1.36       -.152     1.10       .073       .138        .069
           Regions       2030   1.93       3.29       1.63       -.182     1.19       .058       .168        .077
                         2050   2.75       4.72       2.31        .043     1.19       .057       .184        .090
                         2075   3.42       4.46       3.14        .052     1.09       .075       .228        .079
                         2100   4.23       4.92       4.05        .020     1.05       .085       .254        .065

          Doubling       2004   1.01       1.00       1.00        .026     1.00       .098       .116        .076
        Immigration      2010   1.17       1.22       1.14       -.044     1.02       .093       .117        .069
       in All Regions    2020   1.57       2.04       1.45       -.148     1.09       .076       .131        .069
                         2030   2.10       3.34       1.80       -.170     1.17       .062       .153        .079
                         2050   3.13       4.84       2.71        .048     1.16       .064       .160        .091




53
                         2075   4.17       5.14       3.90        .035     1.07       .080       .198        .078
                         2100   5.41       6.22       5.18        .021     1.05       .085       .224        .063

      Rise in Health     2004   1.00       1.00       1.00        .028     1.00       .098       .116        .078
     Expenditures by     2010   1.14       1.20       1.12       -.039     1.02       .093       .120        .070
         3 Percent       2020   1.47       1.93       1.35       -.140     1.09       .075       .143        .069
      in All Regions     2030   1.89       3.05       1.62       -.166     1.17       .061       .177        .079
                         2050   2.63       4.06       2.29        .054     1.15       .064       .184        .094
                         2075   3.28       3.96       3.09        .037     1.06       .081       .224        .082
                         2100   4.10       4.55       3.97        .017     1.03       .089       .248        .070

     Financing Beneﬁts   2004   1.00       1.00       1.00        .028     1.00       .098       .116        .078
      By General Tax     2010   1.13       1.20       1.12       -.039     1.02       .093       .116        .073
         Revenues        2020   1.47       1.92       1.35       -.144     1.09       .075       .116        .090
                         2030   1.88       3.05       1.61       -.172     1.17       .061       .116        .125
                         2050   2.63       4.13       2.28        .054     1.16       .063       .116        .146
                         2075   3.27       4.04       3.07        .037     1.07       .080       .116        .169
                         2100   4.07       4.59       3.93        .018     1.04       .087       .116        .178
                                  Table 4 (continued): Simulation results for the U.S.
                                 Index of   Index of   Index of   Current   Index of                Social      Average
                                 National   Capital    Labor      Account   Pre-Tax      Interest   Security    Wage
                          Year   Income     Stock      Supply     / NI      Wage         Rate       Cost Rate   Tax

     Financing Beneﬁts    2004   1.00       1.00       1.00        .031     1.00         .098       .116        .078
         By Debt          2010   1.13       1.18       1.11       -.039     1.01         .094       .116        .070
                          2020   1.47       1.88       1.35       -.146     1.09         .077       .116        .069
                          2030   1.86       2.99       1.60       -.164     1.17         .061       .166        .098
                          2050   2.61       3.91       2.29        .044     1.14         .066       .173        .116
                          2075   3.24       3.74       3.10        .035     1.05         .085       .210        .123
                          2100   4.03       4.21       3.99        .016     1.01         .094       .234        .119

     Cut of Replacement   2004   1.00       1.00       1.01        .029     1.00         .098       .116        .078
        Rates in All      2010   1.14       1.21       1.12       -.039     1.02         .092       .117        .069
           Regions        2020   1.48       1.99       1.35       -.143     1.10         .073       .126        .068
                          2030   1.91       3.19       1.62       -.169     1.18         .059       .144        .076
                          2050   2.66       4.39       2.26        .054     1.18         .060       .148        .088




54
                          2075   3.35       4.46       3.06        .034     1.10         .074       .176        .076
                          2100   4.21       5.21       3.94        .016     1.07         .079       .194        .065

         Privatizing      2004   1.01       1.00       1.02        .021     0.99         .100       .038        .077
          Pensions        2010   1.17       1.29       1.13       -.047     1.03         .089       .039        .068
                          2020   1.54       2.26       1.36       -.144     1.13         .067       .044        .065
                          2030   1.99       3.77       1.62       -.171     1.24         .052       .054        .071
                          2050   2.81       5.79       2.22        .050     1.27         .048       .052        .076
                          2075   3.68       7.01       2.99        .018     1.24         .052       .060        .062
                          2100   4.71       8.76       3.85        .010     1.23         .053       .065        .054
                                          Table 5: Simulation Results for the EU
                               Index of     Index of   Index of   Current   Index of              Social      Average
                               National     Capital    Labor      Account   Pre-Tax    Interest   Security    Wage
                        Year   Income       Stock      Supply     / NI      Wage       Rate       Cost Rate   Tax

        Base Case       2004   1.42         1.38       1.45        .083     0.99       .098       .253        .080
                        2010   1.53         1.57       1.53        .032     1.01       .093       .265        .060
                        2020   1.79         2.27       1.67       -.052     1.08       .075       .286        .051
                        2030   2.03         3.17       1.76       -.083     1.16       .061       .327        .058
                        2050   2.28         3.44       2.00        .031     1.14       .063       .381        .071
                        2075   2.57         3.06       2.44        .014     1.06       .080       .380        .079
                        2100   3.19         3.50       3.11        .020     1.03       .087       .367        .074

      Constant Time     2004   1.42         1.38       1.45        .081     0.99       .098       .253        .080
       Preference in    2010   1.53         1.58       1.53        .025     1.01       .093       .265        .060
          China         2020   1.81         2.38       1.66       -.094     1.09       .072       .286        .053
                        2030   2.09         3.71       1.74       -.194     1.21       .054       .321        .066
                        2050   2.69         7.21       1.95       -.215     1.39       .036       .329        .101




55
                        2075   3.67         14.11      2.36       -.157     1.56       .025       .273        .123
                        2100   4.76         19.68      2.99       -.076     1.60       .023       .261        .120

     Lower Technology   2004   1.41         1.36       1.44        .005     0.99       .099       .255        .078
        Growth in       2010   1.58         1.78       1.53       -.035     1.04       .085       .255        .071
          China         2020   1.89         2.71       1.69       -.069     1.12       .067       .272        .072
                        2030   2.11         3.57       1.79       -.057     1.19       .056       .317        .075
                        2050   2.31         3.60       2.01        .037     1.16       .061       .377        .081
                        2075   2.54         2.93       2.44        .022     1.05       .083       .385        .082
                        2100   3.15         3.38       3.10        .020     1.02       .089       .369        .074

        Constant        2004   1.42         1.38       1.44        .082     0.99       .098       .253        .080
        Fertility       2010   1.53         1.56       1.53        .030     1.01       .093       .265        .060
         in All         2020   1.78         2.25       1.66       -.054     1.08       .075       .287        .050
        Regions         2030   2.01         3.14       1.74       -.083     1.16       .061       .329        .055
                        2050   2.17         3.34       1.90        .034     1.15       .062       .394        .062
                        2075   2.19         2.67       2.06        .017     1.07       .078       .424        .060
                        2100   2.45         2.67       2.39        .005     1.03       .087       .412        .065
                                  Table 5 (continued): Simulation results for the EU
                                Index of   Index of   Index of   Current   Index of               Social      Average
                                National   Capital    Labor      Account   Pre-Tax     Interest   Security    Wage
                         Year   Income     Stock      Supply     / NI      Wage        Rate       Cost Rate   Tax

           Higher        2004   1.43       1.38       1.45        .081     0.99        .098       .253        .080
      Life Expectancy    2010   1.55       1.60       1.54        .029     1.01        .092       .264        .061
            in All       2020   1.83       2.40       1.69       -.056     1.09        .073       .286        .053
           Regions       2030   2.09       3.44       1.78       -.090     1.18        .058       .330        .059
                         2050   2.39       3.98       2.04        .022     1.18        .057       .397        .069
                         2075   2.68       3.39       2.50        .026     1.08        .075       .402        .079
                         2100   3.29       3.70       3.18        .023     1.04        .085       .390        .072

          Doubling       2004   1.43       1.38       1.45        .082     0.99        .098       .253        .080
        Immigration      2010   1.55       1.58       1.55        .030     1.00        .093       .263        .060
       in All Regions    2020   1.85       2.32       1.72       -.052     1.08        .076       .281        .052
                         2030   2.14       3.30       1.86       -.084     1.15        .062       .317        .060
                         2050   2.53       3.79       2.22        .032     1.14        .064       .360        .075




56
                         2075   3.02       3.61       2.86        .016     1.06        .080       .364        .079
                         2100   3.89       4.33       3.77        .023     1.03        .085       .356        .069

      Rise in Health     2004   1.43       1.38       1.45        .084     0.99        .098       .253        .080
     Expenditures by     2010   1.54       1.58       1.54        .033     1.01        .093       .270        .061
         3 Percent       2020   1.80       2.29       1.68       -.050     1.08        .075       .303        .053
      in All Regions     2030   2.04       3.18       1.77       -.086     1.16        .061       .359        .061
                         2050   2.30       3.43       2.02        .026     1.14        .064       .413        .078
                         2075   2.59       3.03       2.48        .011     1.05        .081       .412        .090
                         2100   3.22       3.46       3.17        .017     1.02        .089       .399        .087

     Financing Beneﬁts   2004   1.42       1.38       1.45        .084     0.99        .098       .253        .080
      By General Tax     2010   1.53       1.57       1.53        .032     1.01        .093       .253        .071
         Revenues        2020   1.79       2.27       1.67       -.051     1.08        .075       .253        .081
                         2030   2.02       3.17       1.75       -.085     1.16        .061       .253        .124
                         2050   2.26       3.44       1.98        .028     1.15        .063       .253        .184
                         2075   2.56       3.06       2.43        .013     1.06        .080       .253        .195
                         2100   3.17       3.46       3.10        .021     1.03        .087       .253        .178
                                   Table 5 (continued): Simulation results for the EU
                                 Index of   Index of   Index of   Current   Index of               Social      Average
                                 National   Capital    Labor      Account   Pre-Tax     Interest   Security    Wage
                          Year   Income     Stock      Supply     / NI      Wage        Rate       Cost Rate   Tax

     Financing Beneﬁts    2004   1.42       1.38       1.44        .080     0.99        .098       .253        .080
         By Debt          2010   1.52       1.55       1.53        .026     1.00        .094       .253        .060
                          2020   1.79       2.23       1.68       -.063     1.07        .077       .253        .051
                          2030   1.96       3.04       1.70       -.112     1.16        .061       .340        .112
                          2050   2.26       3.28       2.01        .006     1.13        .066       .383        .135
                          2075   2.58       2.89       2.50       -.012     1.04        .085       .378        .196
                          2100   3.27       3.31       3.28       -.009     1.00        .094       .359        .225

     Cut of Replacement   2004   1.43       1.39       1.46        .085     0.99        .098       .251        .080
        Rates in All      2010   1.55       1.60       1.54        .036     1.01        .092       .260        .060
           Regions        2020   1.82       2.36       1.68       -.044     1.09        .073       .267        .050
                          2030   2.06       3.32       1.76       -.074     1.17        .059       .293        .055
                          2050   2.29       3.66       1.98        .040     1.17        .060       .332        .061




57
                          2075   2.59       3.33       2.39        .017     1.09        .074       .333        .062
                          2100   3.22       3.86       3.05        .022     1.06        .079       .320        .057

         Privatizing      2004   1.46       1.40       1.49        .097     0.98        .100       .107        .085
          Pensions        2010   1.60       1.71       1.57        .055     1.02        .089       .111        .063
                          2020   1.90       2.69       1.70       -.015     1.12        .067       .116        .049
                          2030   2.15       3.95       1.77       -.044     1.22        .052       .127        .048
                          2050   2.41       4.81       1.93        .070     1.26        .048       .137        .035
                          2075   2.78       5.12       2.28        .020     1.22        .052       .139        .022
                          2100   3.52       6.34       2.92        .024     1.21        .053       .135        .021
                                          Table 6: Simulation Results for Japan
                               Index of    Index of   Index of   Current   Index of              Social      Average
                               National    Capital    Labor      Account   Pre-Tax    Interest   Security    Wage
                        Year   Income      Stock      Supply     / NI      Wage       Rate       Cost Rate   Tax

        Base Case       2004   0.49        0.50       0.49        .138     1.01       .098       .221        .066
                        2010   0.50        0.53       0.49        .082     1.02       .093       .257        .043
                        2020   0.54        0.72       0.49       -.050     1.10       .075       .299        .027
                        2030   0.60        1.00       0.52       -.070     1.18       .061       .301        .031
                        2050   0.60        0.95       0.52        .060     1.17       .063       .359        .022
                        2075   0.61        0.77       0.57        .027     1.08       .080       .354        .026
                        2100   0.71        0.83       0.69        .028     1.05       .087       .328        .027

      Constant Time     2004   0.49        0.50       0.49        .139     1.01       .098       .220        .066
       Preference in    2010   0.50        0.54       0.49        .081     1.03       .093       .256        .043
          China         2020   0.55        0.76       0.49       -.085     1.11       .072       .295        .028
                        2030   0.63        1.17       0.51       -.172     1.23       .054       .291        .039
                        2050   0.72        2.03       0.51       -.180     1.41       .036       .304        .051




58
                        2075   0.89        3.62       0.56       -.127     1.59       .025       .256        .067
                        2100   1.10        4.82       0.68       -.050     1.63       .023       .227        .065

     Lower Technology   2004   0.48        0.49       0.48        .057     1.00       .099       .224        .067
        Growth in       2010   0.51        0.61       0.49        .016     1.06       .085       .248        .050
          China         2020   0.57        0.86       0.50       -.066     1.14       .067       .283        .040
                        2030   0.63        1.12       0.52       -.040     1.21       .056       .290        .041
                        2050   0.61        1.00       0.52        .065     1.18       .061       .354        .028
                        2075   0.60        0.73       0.57        .034     1.07       .083       .360        .026
                        2100   0.71        0.80       0.68        .028     1.04       .089       .332        .025

        Constant        2004   0.49        0.50       0.49        .138     1.01       .098       .222         .066
        Fertility       2010   0.49        0.53       0.49        .081     1.02       .093       .257         .043
         in All         2020   0.54        0.71       0.49       -.053     1.10       .075       .300         .026
        Regions         2030   0.60        0.99       0.51       -.068     1.18       .061       .302         .027
                        2050   0.56        0.91       0.48        .069     1.17       .062       .378         .009
                        2075   0.48        0.62       0.44        .021     1.09       .078       .425        -.004
                        2100   0.48        0.55       0.46       -.010     1.05       .087       .400         .007
                                   Table 6 (continued): Simulation results for Japan
                                Index of   Index of   Index of   Current   Index of               Social      Average
                                National   Capital    Labor      Account   Pre-Tax     Interest   Security    Wage
                         Year   Income     Stock      Supply     / NI      Wage        Rate       Cost Rate   Tax

           Higher        2004   0.49       0.50       0.49        .142     1.00        .098       .220        .067
      Life Expectancy    2010   0.50       0.55       0.49        .087     1.03        .092       .255        .044
            in All       2020   0.55       0.76       0.50       -.047     1.11        .073       .298        .027
           Regions       2030   0.62       1.08       0.52       -.072     1.20        .058       .305        .030
                         2050   0.63       1.10       0.53        .059     1.20        .057       .367        .019
                         2075   0.63       0.85       0.58        .036     1.10        .075       .382        .021
                         2100   0.73       0.87       0.70        .033     1.06        .085       .350        .021

          Doubling       2004   0.49       0.50       0.49        .138     1.01        .098       .221        .066
        Immigration      2010   0.50       0.54       0.49        .083     1.02        .093       .256        .043
       in All Regions    2020   0.54       0.72       0.50       -.048     1.10        .076       .296        .027
                         2030   0.62       1.00       0.53       -.068     1.17        .062       .297        .031
                         2050   0.63       0.99       0.54        .058     1.16        .064       .349        .024




59
                         2075   0.66       0.83       0.62        .028     1.08        .080       .343        .027
                         2100   0.79       0.94       0.76        .030     1.05        .085       .320        .026

      Rise in Health     2004   0.49       0.50       0.49        .139     1.01        .098       .221        .066
     Expenditures by     2010   0.50       0.54       0.49        .085     1.02        .093       .261        .044
         3 Percent       2020   0.54       0.73       0.50       -.049     1.10        .075       .316        .028
      in All Regions     2030   0.61       1.00       0.52       -.075     1.18        .061       .336        .032
                         2050   0.60       0.95       0.52        .055     1.16        .064       .399        .027
                         2075   0.62       0.76       0.58        .023     1.07        .081       .394        .034
                         2100   0.72       0.82       0.70        .027     1.04        .089       .365        .036

     Financing Beneﬁts   2004   0.49       0.50       0.49        .142     1.01        .098       .221        .065
      By General Tax     2010   0.49       0.53       0.49        .086     1.02        .093       .221        .072
         Revenues        2020   0.54       0.72       0.49       -.052     1.10        .075       .221        .091
                         2030   0.60       1.00       0.51       -.074     1.18        .061       .221        .098
                         2050   0.60       0.96       0.51        .060     1.17        .063       .221        .140
                         2075   0.61       0.77       0.57        .025     1.08        .080       .221        .142
                         2100   0.71       0.82       0.68        .030     1.05        .087       .221        .120
                                   Table 6 (continued): Simulation results for Japan
                                 Index of   Index of   Index of   Current   Index of              Social      Average
                                 National   Capital    Labor      Account   Pre-Tax    Interest   Security    Wage
                          Year   Income     Stock      Supply     / NI      Wage       Rate       Cost Rate   Tax

     Financing Beneﬁts    2004   0.48       0.50       0.48        .125     1.01       .098       .221        .065
         By Debt          2010   0.49       0.53       0.48        .061     1.02       .094       .221        .043
                          2020   0.54       0.71       0.50       -.076     1.09       .077       .221        .027
                          2030   0.55       0.91       0.47       -.161     1.18       .061       .328        .170
                          2050   0.61       0.94       0.53        .004     1.15       .066       .354        .158
                          2075   0.64       0.76       0.61       -.028     1.05       .085       .339        .265
                          2100   0.78       0.84       0.77       -.030     1.02       .094       .302        .331

     Cut of Replacement   2004   0.49       0.50       0.49        .131     1.00       .098       .222        .066
        Rates in All      2010   0.50       0.54       0.49        .072     1.03       .092       .256        .044
           Regions        2020   0.54       0.75       0.49       -.063     1.11       .073       .295        .029
                          2030   0.61       1.05       0.52       -.080     1.19       .059       .296        .034
                          2050   0.61       1.03       0.52        .057     1.19       .060       .352        .026




60
                          2075   0.63       0.86       0.57        .018     1.11       .074       .345        .033
                          2100   0.75       0.94       0.70        .021     1.08       .079       .315        .038

         Privatizing      2004   0.49       0.50       0.49        .134     1.00       .100       .100        .071
          Pensions        2010   0.51       0.58       0.49        .081     1.04       .089       .110        .047
                          2020   0.57       0.85       0.50       -.042     1.14       .067       .129        .032
                          2030   0.64       1.24       0.52       -.064     1.24       .052       .138        .033
                          2050   0.65       1.36       0.51        .068     1.28       .048       .157        .014
                          2075   0.69       1.33       0.55        .005     1.25       .052       .155        .016
                          2100   0.83       1.58       0.68        .008     1.24       .053       .143        .024
                                          Table 7: Simulation Results for China
                               Index of    Index of   Index of   Current   Index of              Social      Average
                               National    Capital    Labor      Account   Pre-Tax    Interest   Security    Wage
                        Year   Income      Stock      Supply     / NI      Wage       Rate       Cost Rate   Tax

        Base Case       2004   1.33        1.52       8.90       -.161     0.15       .098       .111         .071
                        2010   2.29        2.76       9.78       -.020     0.24       .093       .082         .088
                        2020   4.23        6.31       10.13       .078     0.42       .075       .085         .076
                        2030   5.82        10.71      8.99        .091     0.65       .061       .115         .043
                        2050   8.52        15.15      7.87       -.029     1.09       .063       .189        -.015
                        2075   9.57        13.44      8.62       -.018     1.12       .080       .269        -.002
                        2100   11.31       14.65      10.47      -.014     1.09       .087       .277         .019

      Constant Time     2004   1.33        1.52       8.95       -.155     0.15       .098       .111         .073
       Preference in    2010   2.33        2.82       9.92       -.007     0.24       .093       .082         .092
          China         2020   4.56        7.06       10.77       .115     0.43       .072       .080         .094
                        2030   7.01        14.62      10.38       .161     0.68       .054       .099         .086
                        2050   12.12       38.24      9.27        .121     1.32       .036       .149         .063




61
                        2075   14.80       67.12      9.05        .100     1.65       .025       .224         .013
                        2100   17.66       86.13      10.54       .053     1.69       .023       .260        -.010

     Lower Technology   2004   1.39        1.58       9.36        .020     0.15       .099       .110         .097
        Growth in       2010   1.90        2.52       10.30       .095     0.19       .085       .096         .089
          China         2020   2.80        4.71       11.00       .147     0.26       .067       .112         .058
                        2030   3.40        6.77       10.31       .124     0.33       .056       .151         .012
                        2050   4.48        8.21       9.99       -.063     0.45       .061       .224        -.054
                        2075   5.02        6.83       11.54      -.043     0.44       .083       .282        -.016
                        2100   6.00        7.57       14.11      -.025     0.43       .089       .283         .016

        Constant        2004   1.33        1.52       8.91       -.160     0.15       .098       .111         .071
        Fertility       2010   2.29        2.76       9.78       -.018     0.24       .093       .082         .088
         in All         2020   4.23        6.29       10.12       .081     0.42       .075       .085         .076
        Regions         2030   5.80        10.68      8.96        .095     0.65       .061       .115         .043
                        2050   8.27        14.95      7.60       -.025     1.09       .062       .193        -.018
                        2075   8.57        12.35      7.66       -.016     1.13       .078       .293        -.012
                        2100   9.35        12.03      8.68        .018     1.08       .087       .305         .012
                                  Table 7 (continued): Simulation Results for China
                                Index of   Index of   Index of   Current   Index of              Social      Average
                                National   Capital    Labor      Account   Pre-Tax    Interest   Security    Wage
                         Year   Income     Stock      Supply     / NI      Wage       Rate       Cost Rate   Tax

           Higher        2004   1.33       1.52       8.96       -.157     0.15       .098       .111         .073
      Life Expectancy    2010   2.32       2.82       9.85       -.015     0.24       .092       .083         .090
            in All       2020   4.33       6.67       10.24       .082     0.43       .073       .086         .079
           Regions       2030   6.01       11.65      9.13        .097     0.66       .058       .117         .047
                         2050   8.94       17.48      8.01       -.023     1.12       .057       .202        -.015
                         2075   10.00      14.88      8.84       -.027     1.14       .075       .303        -.013
                         2100   11.65      15.44      10.71      -.016     1.10       .085       .318         .017

          Doubling       2004   1.33       1.52       8.90       -.159     0.15       .098       .111         .071
        Immigration      2010   2.28       2.74       9.75       -.016     0.24       .093       .083         .089
       in All Regions    2020   4.20       6.21       10.07       .085     0.42       .076       .085         .076
                         2030   5.73       10.43      8.89        .101     0.65       .062       .117         .042
                         2050   8.27       14.61      7.67       -.032     1.09       .064       .192        -.017




62
                         2075   9.16       12.91      8.26       -.023     1.12       .080       .273        -.003
                         2100   10.79      14.19      9.95       -.021     1.09       .085       .278         .021

      Rise in Health     2004   1.33       1.51       8.91       -.163     0.15       .098       .111         .071
     Expenditures by     2010   2.29       2.77       9.78       -.022     0.24       .093       .084         .089
         3 Percent       2020   4.25       6.35       10.15       .076     0.42       .075       .090         .077
      in All Regions     2030   5.84       10.73      9.02        .092     0.65       .061       .150         .045
                         2050   8.53       15.00      7.92       -.028     1.08       .064       .238        -.012
                         2075   9.57       13.17      8.68       -.017     1.11       .081       .303         .001
                         2100   11.30      14.30      10.54      -.013     1.08       .089       .285         .022

     Financing Beneﬁts   2004   1.32       1.52       8.90       -.164     0.15       .098       .111        .071
      By General Tax     2010   2.29       2.76       9.79       -.021     0.24       .093       .111        .063
         Revenues        2020   4.25       6.34       10.16       .078     0.42       .075       .111        .053
                         2030   5.84       10.78      9.00        .093     0.65       .061       .111        .047
                         2050   8.47       15.15      7.81       -.029     1.09       .063       .111        .060
                         2075   9.43       13.27      8.49       -.018     1.12       .080       .111        .149
                         2100   11.16      14.33      10.36      -.014     1.08       .087       .111        .176
                                   Table 7 (continued): Simulation Results for China
                                 Index of   Index of   Index of   Current   Index of              Social      Average
                                 National   Capital    Labor      Account   Pre-Tax    Interest   Security    Wage
                          Year   Income     Stock      Supply     / NI      Wage       Rate       Cost Rate   Tax

     Financing Beneﬁts    2004   1.33       1.52       8.91       -.154     0.15       .098       .111         .071
         By Debt          2010   2.28       2.73       9.77       -.012     0.23       .094       .083         .088
                          2020   4.21       6.16       10.12       .087     0.42       .077       .085         .075
                          2030   5.81       10.62      8.99        .106     0.65       .061       .115         .043
                          2050   8.40       14.37      7.87       -.016     1.07       .066       .191        -.018
                          2075   9.27       12.21      8.54       -.007     1.09       .085       .274        -.010
                          2100   10.79      12.87      10.27      -.001     1.06       .094       .283         .007

     Cut of Replacement   2004   1.33       1.51       8.94       -.162     0.15       .098       .111         .072
        Rates in All      2010   2.31       2.80       9.82       -.020     0.24       .092       .081         .089
           Regions        2020   4.29       6.55       10.17       .076     0.42       .073       .077         .077
                          2030   5.91       11.25      9.02        .088     0.66       .059       .101         .044
                          2050   8.62       16.20      7.82       -.031     1.11       .060       .162        -.014




63
                          2075   9.76       14.82      8.57       -.017     1.15       .074       .225        -.002
                          2100   11.54      16.29      10.38      -.013     1.12       .079       .231         .017

         Privatizing      2004   1.33       1.50       9.01       -.171     0.15       .100       .031         .077
          Pensions        2010   2.36       2.98       9.91       -.031     0.24       .089       .028         .094
                          2020   4.49       7.51       10.33       .061     0.44       .067       .030         .083
                          2030   6.28       13.55      9.19        .076     0.69       .052       .039         .052
                          2050   9.18       21.55      7.74       -.038     1.19       .048       .052        -.007
                          2075   10.69      23.20      8.33       -.012     1.29       .052       .055        -.002
                          2100   12.66      26.84      9.95       -.011     1.28       .053       .053         .010
                       Table 8: Simulation Results for the Three-Region Simulation
                    Index of   Index of   Index of   Current   Index of              Social      Average
                    National   Capital    Labor      Account   Pre-Tax    Interest   Security    Wage
             Year   Income     Stock      Supply     / NI      Wage       Rate       Cost Rate   Tax

     U.S.    2004   1.01       1.37       1.01       -.057     1.00       .072       .114        .076
             2010   1.16       1.60       1.17       -.050     1.00       .072       .116        .078
             2020   1.45       2.04       1.43       -.039     1.01       .070       .141        .080
             2030   1.70       2.45       1.68       -.041     1.02       .069       .183        .084
             2050   2.30       3.00       2.34        .008     0.99       .075       .193        .090
             2075   3.07       3.71       3.20        .010     0.96       .081       .214        .082
             2100   3.97       4.78       4.16       -.001     0.96       .082       .231        .077

      EU     2004   1.45       1.90       1.47        .014     0.99       .072       .250        .083
             2010   1.57       2.08       1.59        .014     0.99       .072       .259        .077
             2020   1.75       2.40       1.76        .023     1.00       .070       .296        .067
             2030   1.83       2.55       1.83        .025     1.01       .069       .365        .056
             2050   1.99       2.52       2.05       -.013     0.98       .075       .428        .056




64
             2075   2.40       2.81       2.53       -.012     0.95       .081       .398        .082
             2100   3.08       3.59       3.26        .000     0.95       .082       .374        .093

     Japan   2004   0.50       0.68       0.50        .077     1.01       .072       .216        .061
             2010   0.51       0.71       0.51        .072     1.01       .072       .250        .049
             2020   0.53       0.75       0.52        .030     1.02       .070       .307        .034
             2030   0.55       0.79       0.54        .044     1.02       .069       .335        .026
             2050   0.52       0.70       0.53        .014     0.99       .075       .410        .010
             2075   0.57       0.71       0.59       -.004     0.97       .081       .375        .028
             2100   0.70       0.85       0.72        .008     0.97       .082       .339        .041
                           Table 9: Simulation Results for the Base Case with Adjustment Costs
                    Index of     Index of   Index of   Current   Index of                        Social      Average
                    National     Capital    Labor      Account   Pre-Tax    Capital   Interest   Security    Wage
             Year   Income       Stock      Supply     / NI      Wage       Price     Rate       Cost Rate   Tax

     U.S.    2004   1.02         1.00       1.02       -.015     1.00       1.000     .098       .114        .083
             2010   1.16         1.22       1.13       -.072     1.02       1.038     .088       .116        .075
             2020   1.46         1.87       1.38       -.145     1.08       1.062     .068       .136        .073
             2030   1.86         2.74       1.65       -.114     1.14       1.017     .054       .166        .081
             2050   2.61         3.72       2.32        .040     1.13       0.907     .066       .173        .094
             2075   3.26         3.88       3.07        .039     1.07       0.902     .084       .208        .077
             2100   4.09         4.53       3.95        .017     1.04       0.917     .087       .230        .064

      EU     2004   1.48         1.38       1.53        .034     0.98       0.949     .098       .244        .104
             2010   1.61         1.64       1.61        .005     1.01       0.970     .088       .253        .084
             2020   1.85         2.28       1.74       -.042     1.08       0.979     .068       .258        .069
             2030   2.05         3.00       1.82       -.036     1.14       0.933     .054       .326        .069
             2050   2.30         3.33       2.02        .033     1.14       0.843     .066       .378        .072




65
             2075   2.55         3.01       2.41        .027     1.06       0.858     .084       .382        .062
             2100   3.15         3.39       3.07        .023     1.03       0.882     .087       .370        .052

     Japan   2004   0.47         0.50       0.46        .100     1.02       0.874     .098       .229        .049
             2010   0.49         0.55       0.47        .046     1.05       0.909     .088       .261        .030
             2020   0.53         0.72       0.49       -.069     1.11       0.938     .068       .303        .021
             2030   0.60         0.91       0.52       -.057     1.16       0.901     .054       .308        .032
             2050   0.61         0.95       0.52        .045     1.17       0.804     .066       .356        .035
             2075   0.61         0.78       0.56        .036     1.09       0.818     .084       .352        .031
             2100   0.71         0.82       0.68        .026     1.05       0.851     .087       .329        .030

     China   2004   1.24         1.52       8.57       -.066     0.15       1.161     .098       .110        .052
             2010   2.04         2.32       9.45        .025     0.23       1.235     .088       .085        .074
             2020   3.78         4.81       9.95        .086     0.39       1.196     .068       .088        .068
             2030   5.42         8.25       9.05        .059     0.61       1.080     .054       .117        .045
             2050   8.36         12.84      8.06       -.025     1.04       0.937     .066       .187        .004
             2075   9.66         13.32      8.69       -.023     1.12       0.885     .084       .264        .018
             2100   11.37        14.48      10.51      -.014     1.09       0.914     .087       .277        .036
                Table 10: Welfare Eﬀects of Lower Technology Growth in China

                U.S.                   EU                      Japan                         China
Birth       Income Class           Income Class             Income Class                  Income Class
Year         1     2     3          1     2     3            1     2     3                1      2          3
1920    -0.73   -0.49   -0.10   -0.68   -0.48    -0.15   -0.70   -0.40    -0.11      1.05       2.24     2.06
1930    -1.58   -1.18   -0.38   -1.25   -1.08    -0.63   -1.57   -1.16    -0.55      0.22       1.33     1.31
1940    -2.34   -1.88   -0.72   -2.01   -1.74    -1.02   -2.40   -1.94    -1.12     -1.06       0.10     0.40
1950    -1.53   -1.43   -1.02   -1.98   -1.76    -1.15   -2.25   -1.98    -1.35    -10.08      -8.07    -4.25
1960    -0.10   -0.66   -0.98   -0.21   -0.79    -1.10   -0.26   -0.85    -1.11    -21.70     -17.12    -7.99
1970     1.61    0.54   -0.50    0.97    0.06    -0.86    1.22    0.24    -0.75    -28.60     -22.17    -9.05
1980     2.35    1.32    0.10    1.12    0.33    -0.65    1.55    0.68    -0.39    -33.45     -24.66    -7.85
1990     2.16    1.35    0.33    1.38    0.80    -0.22    2.10    1.35     0.17    -40.40     -30.67   -12.50
2000     1.38    0.90    0.28    0.71    0.39    -0.20    1.46    0.99     0.18    -45.17     -35.54   -18.92
2010     0.57    0.38    0.14   -0.03   -0.09    -0.20    0.66    0.48     0.10    -48.43     -38.65   -22.54
2020     0.05    0.07    0.07   -0.46   -0.35    -0.14    0.12    0.14     0.08    -51.18     -41.00   -24.34
2030    -0.40   -0.21    0.00   -0.74   -0.52    -0.09   -0.33   -0.16     0.09    -53.03     -42.83   -25.89




                Table 11: Welfare Eﬀects of Doubling Immigration in All Regions

                    U.S.                EU                    Japan                     China
    Birth       Income Class        Income Class           Income Class              Income Class
    Year         1     2     3       1    2      3          1    2      3             1     2     3
    1920      0.00   0.00 0.00 0.00       0.00    0.00   0.01    0.00     0.00     0.00      0.00    0.00
    1930      0.03   0.02 0.01 0.02       0.02    0.02   0.04    0.03     0.02     0.02      0.02    0.02
    1940      0.06   0.05 0.03 0.06       0.05    0.04   0.08    0.07     0.05     0.08      0.08    0.06
    1950      0.13   0.09 0.04 0.10       0.08    0.05   0.11    0.10     0.07     0.21      0.18    0.11
    1960      0.07   0.06 0.04 0.04       0.06    0.05   0.05    0.07     0.06     0.22      0.18    0.11
    1970     -0.03   0.01 0.01 0.02       0.06    0.05   0.00    0.04     0.05     0.11      0.12    0.09
    1980      0.69   0.50 0.23 0.21       0.19    0.07   0.03    0.06     0.05    -0.05      0.04    0.06
    1990      0.64   0.47 0.19 0.41       0.34    0.02   0.05    0.07     0.01    -0.20     -0.06    0.05
    2000      0.89   0.67 0.30 0.79       0.65    0.03   0.18    0.17    -0.01    -0.29     -0.14    0.03
    2010      1.04   0.78 0.37 1.28       1.05    0.10   0.39    0.32     0.00    -0.25     -0.12    0.04
    2020      1.12   0.83 0.39 1.70       1.40    0.20   0.68    0.53     0.04    -0.18     -0.09    0.01
    2030      1.35   0.98 0.44 2.07       1.68    0.30   1.03    0.79     0.10    -0.21     -0.14   -0.03




                                                   66
 Table 12: Welfare Eﬀects of a Rise in Health Expenditures By 3 Percent in All Regions

               U.S.                    EU                     Japan                   China
Birth      Income Class            Income Class            Income Class            Income Class
Year        1     2     3           1     2     3           1     2     3           1     2     3
1920     0.00    0.01    0.00    0.07    0.08   -0.01    0.07    0.04   -0.02   -0.02   -0.01   -0.01
1930    -0.03   -0.01   -0.01    0.05    0.07   -0.02    0.04    0.02   -0.03   -0.04   -0.03   -0.03
1940    -0.05   -0.03   -0.02    0.03    0.04   -0.03    0.02    0.00   -0.05   -0.08   -0.07   -0.06
1950    -0.06   -0.04   -0.02   -0.06   -0.03   -0.04   -0.07   -0.05   -0.05   -0.17   -0.14   -0.08
1960    -0.08   -0.06   -0.03   -0.29   -0.19   -0.08   -0.33   -0.22   -0.08   -0.19   -0.15   -0.05
1970    -0.18   -0.13   -0.06   -0.69   -0.50   -0.14   -0.77   -0.55   -0.13   -0.26   -0.19   -0.04
1980    -0.35   -0.25   -0.13   -1.17   -0.88   -0.23   -1.26   -0.92   -0.19   -0.42   -0.25   -0.02
1990    -0.67   -0.49   -0.26   -2.17   -1.73   -0.45   -2.32   -1.79   -0.35   -0.78   -0.48   -0.07
2000    -1.08   -0.79   -0.44   -3.29   -2.68   -0.71   -3.49   -2.72   -0.56   -1.29   -0.88   -0.29
2010    -1.35   -0.98   -0.54   -4.05   -3.36   -0.91   -4.20   -3.29   -0.71   -1.72   -1.22   -0.53
2020    -1.50   -1.08   -0.58   -4.54   -3.81   -1.04   -4.77   -3.79   -0.83   -1.90   -1.34   -0.58
2030    -1.68   -1.22   -0.64   -4.91   -4.15   -1.15   -5.23   -4.20   -0.93   -2.02   -1.42   -0.61




 Table 13: Welfare Eﬀects of Financing Beneﬁts By General Tax Revenues in All Regions

               U.S.                    EU                     Japan                   China
Birth      Income Class            Income Class            Income Class            Income Class
Year        1     2     3           1     2     3           1     2     3           1     2     3
1920    -0.02   -0.01 0.00 -0.05        -0.03   -0.04 -0.08 -0.04 -0.23 0.00 0.02 -0.08
1930    -0.02   -0.01 0.00 -0.05        -0.04   -0.05 -0.08 -0.04 -0.19 0.00 0.01 -0.08
1940    -0.04   -0.02 -0.01 -0.06       -0.05   -0.04 -0.10 -0.06 -0.26 -0.02 -0.01 -0.10
1950    -0.02   -0.02 -0.01 -0.02       -0.02   -0.02 0.05 0.02 -0.14 -0.19 -0.15 0.02
1960     0.00   -0.01 -0.01 0.09         0.04   -0.03 0.37 0.23 -0.12 -0.34 -0.27 0.11
1970     0.05    0.02 -0.02 0.22         0.14   -0.10 0.62 0.43 -0.34 -0.30 -0.24 0.10
1980     0.12    0.07 -0.08 0.39         0.27   -0.20 0.80 0.58 -0.50 -0.20 -0.18 0.04
1990     0.20    0.13 -0.16 0.73         0.56   -0.62 1.19 0.91 -0.94 -0.02 -0.07 -0.03
2000     0.28    0.19 -0.25 1.13         0.89   -1.09 1.47 1.11 -1.17 0.21 0.11 -0.13
2010     0.33    0.23 -0.28 1.48         1.21   -1.53 1.75 1.34 -1.43 0.35 0.23 -0.19
2020     0.34    0.25 -0.35 1.65         1.38   -1.87 2.05 1.62 -1.82 0.38 0.26 -0.30
2030     0.35    0.26 -0.49 1.65         1.40   -2.06 2.18 1.75 -2.09 0.44 0.30 -0.46




                                                 67
                      Table 14: Welfare Eﬀects of Financing Beneﬁts By Debt

                U.S.                    EU                     Japan                        China
Birth       Income Class            Income Class            Income Class                 Income Class
Year         1     2     3           1     2         3       1      2            3        1     2     3
1920      0.01    -0.02     0.00 -0.09    -0.12    0.02 -0.28     -0.18 0.08 0.07              0.06     0.03
1930      0.09     0.05     0.02 -0.04    -0.07    0.06 -0.19     -0.09 0.10 0.13              0.12     0.08
1940      0.18     0.13     0.06   0.06    0.02    0.11 -0.10     -0.02 0.19 0.29              0.28     0.20
1950      0.26     0.19     0.11   0.35    0.23    0.15   0.62     0.42 0.26 0.56              0.48     0.29
1960      0.43     0.31     0.17   0.83    0.60    0.27   2.27     1.53 0.44 0.46              0.39     0.24
1970      0.53     0.44     0.27   1.53    1.18    0.42   3.50     2.59 0.62 0.21              0.24     0.20
1980      0.23     0.28     0.24   0.90    0.87    0.34   1.75     1.62 0.39 0.23              0.32     0.20
1990     -0.07     0.10     0.18   0.06    0.32    0.07 -0.62      0.00 -0.39 -0.02            0.17     0.22
2000     -1.00    -0.58    -0.14 -2.45    -1.69   -0.69 -6.90     -5.10 -2.30 -0.53           -0.22     0.09
2010     -3.03    -2.16    -1.06 -7.01    -5.74   -2.21 -15.80   -12.97 -5.31 -1.00           -0.60    -0.18
2020     -3.55    -2.52    -1.22 -8.56    -7.11   -2.85 -17.05   -14.03 -5.95 -0.93           -0.49    -0.05
2030     -4.08    -2.89    -1.36 -10.72   -9.06   -3.77 -20.25   -16.94 -7.42 -0.75           -0.30     0.16




            Table 15: Welfare Eﬀects of a Cut of Replacement Rates in All Regions

                 U.S.                    EU                   Japan                        China
 Birth       Income Class            Income Class          Income Class                 Income Class
 Year         1     2     3           1     2     3         1     2     3                1     2     3
 1920      0.21     0.12     0.00 0.34     0.23 -0.04 -0.10      -0.03    0.00        0.04    0.18     0.25
 1930      0.10     0.03    -0.03 0.28     0.17 -0.10 -0.20      -0.12   -0.05       -0.05    0.08     0.16
 1940     -0.02    -0.08    -0.09 0.13     0.03 -0.17 -0.36      -0.26   -0.15       -0.27   -0.13     0.00
 1950     -2.84    -1.59    -0.48 -3.04   -1.75 -0.48 -0.45      -0.36   -0.23       -3.71   -3.14    -1.79
 1960     -1.80    -1.11    -0.46 -2.98   -1.84 -0.57 -0.23      -0.27   -0.25       -3.18   -2.55    -1.32
 1970     -0.49    -0.34    -0.25 -1.11   -0.70 -0.35 0.06       -0.11   -0.25       -1.71   -1.39    -0.73
 1980      0.67     0.46     0.08 0.41     0.35 -0.10 0.23        0.01   -0.23       -0.74   -0.74    -0.43
 1990      1.64     1.15     0.38 2.29     1.83 0.36 0.60         0.28   -0.13        0.50    0.07    -0.29
 2000      2.84     1.76     0.64 4.21     3.33 0.78 0.83         0.41   -0.12        2.03    1.23     0.19
 2010      3.04     2.13     0.79 5.76     4.57 1.11 0.98         0.50   -0.15        3.33    2.22     0.83
 2020      3.51     2.42     0.86 6.87     5.48 1.34 1.16         0.62   -0.20        3.84    2.53     0.93
 2030      4.02     2.77     0.94 7.58     6.07 1.48 1.31         0.71   -0.31        4.36    2.86     1.00




                                                   68
                Table 16: Welfare Eﬀects of Privatizing Pensions in All Regions

               U.S.                    EU                   Japan                 China
Birth      Income Class            Income Class          Income Class          Income Class
Year        1     2     3           1     2     3         1     2     3         1     2     3
1920    -4.72   -2.88   -1.01   -8.92   -6.14   -3.39 -8.12   -5.31   -2.32 -7.11   -6.34   -4.36
1930    -5.14   -3.19   -1.08   -9.06   -6.39   -3.73 -8.84   -5.78   -2.42 -6.73   -6.01   -4.12
1940    -5.73   -3.82   -1.48   -9.42   -6.67   -3.73 -9.49   -6.60   -3.25 -7.14   -6.43   -4.48
1950    -6.31   -4.17   -2.11   -9.06   -6.22   -3.12 -6.01   -4.37   -2.81 -9.38   -8.07   -5.68
1960    -4.50   -3.17   -2.09   -5.82   -4.05   -3.05 -1.94   -1.62   -2.45 -8.63   -7.02   -4.49
1970    -1.69   -1.19   -1.57   -2.40   -1.29   -2.60 0.35     0.55   -2.10 -7.01   -5.71   -3.47
1980     1.22    1.18   -0.34    0.97    1.51   -1.59 2.20     2.31   -1.29 -5.52   -4.69   -2.50
1990     3.67    2.99    0.73    5.19    5.36    0.22 4.56     4.62   -0.15 -2.17   -2.54   -2.37
2000     7.10    5.28    1.80   11.93   10.22    1.77 8.29     7.09    0.61 5.13     2.71   -0.51
2010    10.84    7.60    2.72   19.36   15.48    3.31 12.78    9.99    1.35 12.82    8.31    2.74
2020    14.59    9.89    3.48   26.20   20.25    4.62 17.83   13.38    2.12 17.11   10.89    3.81
2030    18.27   12.21    4.22   30.92   23.49    5.50 21.54   15.90    2.64 21.21   13.34    4.65




                                                69
