                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            EXPANDING SCHOOL ENROLLMENT BY
                              SUBSIDIZING PRIVATE SCHOOLS:
                                 LESSONS FROM BOGOTÁ

                                             Claudia Uribe
                                          Richard J. Murnane
                                            John B. Willett
                                         Marie-Andrée Somers

                                         Working Paper 11670
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11670


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2005




We gratefully acknowledge the help of Bryan S. Graham, who showed us how to apply his innovative
strategy for detecting peer group effects to our data. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Claudia Uribe, Richard J. Murnane, John B. Willett and Marie-Andrée Somers. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Expanding School Enrollment by Subsidizing Private Schools: Lessons from Bogotá
Claudia Uribe, Richard J. Murnane, John B. Willett and Marie Andrée Somers
NBER Working Paper No. 11670
September 2005
JEL No. I2

                                            ABSTRACT


Many countries use tax revenues to subsidize private schools. Whether these policies meet social
objectives depends, in part, on the relative quality of education provided by the two types of schools.
We use data on elementary school students and their teachers in Bogotáá, Colombia to examine
difference in resource mixes and differences in the relative effectiveness of public and private
schools. We find that, on average, the schools in the two sectors are equally effective. However, they
produce education using very different resource combinations. Moreover, there are large differences
in the effectiveness of schools in both sectors, especially in the private sector. The results of our
analysis shed light on the quantity-quality tradeoff that governments in many developing countries
face in deciding how to use scarce educational resources.



Claudia Uribe                                          John B. Willett
Inter-American Development Bank                        Harvard Graduate School of Education
1300 New York Avenue NW                                Appian Way
Washington, DC 20577                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
claudiau@iadb.org                                      john_willett@harvard.edu

Richard J. Murnane                                     Marie-Andrée Somers
Harvard Graduate School of Education                   Harvard Graduate School of Education
Appian Way                                             Appian Way
Cambridge, MA 02138                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                               somersma@gse.harvard.edu
richard_murnane@harvard.edu
                Expanding School Enrollment by Subsidizing Private Schools:
                                          Lessons from Bogotá



I.       Introduction

         In many countries, government policies that use tax revenues to pay all or part of

the cost of educating children in private schools have blurred the distinction between

public and private schools. For example, Chile and New Zealand have implemented

educational voucher programs to stimulate competition among schools.1 The government

of the Netherlands pays the costs of educating children at schools run by religious

organizations.2 Recently, some countries have introduced policies of subsidizing private

schools as a way of increasing supply.3 For example, the city of Bogotá in Colombia

subsidizes private schools that enroll low-income students, as part of a strategy to meet

its commitment to universal access to primary schooling.

         Underlying these private sector strategies is the assumption that participating

private schools will provide a quality education to their students, and will do so without




1
     Edward B. Fiske and Helen F. Ladd, When schools compete: A cautionary tale (Washington, DC:
     Brookings, 2000); Chang-Tai Hsieh and Miguel Urquiola, “When Schools Compete, How Do They
     Compete? An Assessment of Chile’s Nationwide School Voucher Program,” National Bureau of
     Economic Research (NBER) Working Paper 10008 (October 2003).
2
     Estelle James, “Public Subsidies for Private and Public Education: The Dutch Case.” In Private
     Education: Studies in Choice and Public Policy, ed. D.C. Levy (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press,
     1986).
3
     Indeed, Estelle James (“Why Do Different Countries Choose a Different Public-Private Mix of
     Educational Services?” Journal of Human Resources 28 (Summer 1993): 571-592) finds that countries
     with the largest percentage of private school enrollments are those with excess demand for schooling.

                                                    1
reducing the quality of public schools.4 Understanding whether this assumption is valid

requires investigation of the manner in which public schools and private schools

“produce” student achievement, especially because, in many settings, the student body

composition, teacher characteristics, and class sizes of public schools and private schools

differ markedly.5 If these factors play a role in determining children’s skills, then these

differences may compromise the success of “private sector” strategies in providing a

high-quality education to the children they are meant to help.

        Understanding the effects of teacher quality, class size, and peer group

composition on school success is relevant to the design of public policies regarding the

rules under which private schools operate. For example, the larger the role of peer group

composition in determining students’ achievement, the more important it is to design

public policies that prevent the concentration of low income children in particular

schools.

        Disentangling the relative contributions of class size, peer group, and teacher

quality is not possible in typical data sets in which each teacher works with only one

group of children. In this study, however, we make use of an unusual property of a

dataset from Bogotá – some teachers teach math to more than one classroom of students

– to estimate the roles of teacher quality, peer groups, and class size. Because students

appear to be randomly assigned to these classrooms, we can identify the effects of class

4
    There is some evidence that private schools are more cost-effective than private schools. For example,
    using data from Indonesia, Estelle James, Elizabeth M. King, and Ace Suryadi (“Finance,
    Management, and Costs of Public and Private Schools in Indonesia,” Economics of Education Review
    15 (October 1996): 387-398) find that the cost per student of achieving a given level of academic
    performance is lower in private schools than public schools.



                                                    2
size and peers by comparing student achievement across classrooms taught by the same

teacher. In these analyses, we obtain unbiased estimates of the causal effects of these

classroom characteristics on student mathematics achievement by fitting statistical

models that include teacher fixed effects.            Also, we implement a new methodology

based on excess variance contrasts to estimate the impact of peer group composition on

student mathematics achievement.           Finally, we fit an additional series of statistical

models in which classrooms are treated as random effects to examine the extent to which

differences between the public and private sectors in teacher quality, class size, and peer

composition explain differences in the mathematics achievement of students in the two

sectors.

        Our results show that teacher quality, peer groups, and class size all influence

student achievement. We also show that the average attributes of public schools and

private schools differ markedly in dimensions that affect student achievement. Finally

we show that differences in student achievement among schools in the public sector, and

especially among schools in the private sector, are much larger than the average

difference between the achievement of children attending public schools and those

attending private schools, net of family background influences. The implication for

parents is that the decision to use public or private schools is much less important than

the choice of school within either sector. The implication for governments is that the

details of subsidy programs are extremely important.

        Section 2 provides a brief summary of Bogotá’s recent strategy of subsidizing

5
    Patrick McEwan & Martin Carnoy, “The Effectiveness and Efficiency of Private Schools in Chile’s
    Voucher System, Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 22 (Autumn 2000): 213-239.

                                                  3
private schools. Section 3 discusses previous research on the effects of class size, peers,

and teacher characteristics, particularly in Latin America. We focus on studies that have

used the most plausible research designs. Section 4 presents the data, sample, measures

and analytical strategies that we use to answer our research questions. Section 5 presents

our findings, and Section 6 concludes with a discussion of the implications of these

findings for school policy in Bogotá, and in other countries that provide public funds to

private schools.


II. The Bogotá Setting

        Since the 1950s, Bogotá has experienced a six-fold growth in population as

migrants have streamed into the city in search of better economic opportunities or a

refuge from the armed conflict that has ravaged large parts of the country. Providing

        access to schooling for the growing population has been a major challenge for the

Bogotá government. In 1997 when a new mayoral administration came into office, it

found that more that 140,000 children in the city from the lowest income level were not

attending school. Of those students from low income families who were in school, close

to one third were enrolled in private unsubsidized schools of dubious quality.6

        Committed to providing access to publicly funded schooling for all school-aged

children, the Department of Education (Secretaría de Educación del Districto—SED) has

used a two-pronged strategy to meet the demand for primary schooling. One prong is

expansion of the public sector, by increasing class sizes,7 reassigning teachers from


6
    SED, Informe de Gestión : 1998-2000 (Bogotá D.C.: Secretaría de Educación, Alcaldía Mayor,
    2000).
7
    SED established a minimum of 35 students per class in grades 1-5, and of 40 in grades 6-11.

                                                  4
administrative posts to classrooms, and constructing or rehabilitating classrooms in run-

down schools. A related policy is to give students from low income families preferential

access to the limited number of places available in public schools.

        The second prong is subsidizing private schools that enroll low income students.

As a result, in the year 2000, 53 percent of students in the city were enrolled in the city’s

2,900 private schools.8 For-profit schools, typically started by individuals, constitute 90

percent of all private schools in the city. The second most common type are religious

schools, which make up 8 percent of the total, and are usually either subsidized or

“contracted” by the government to provide educational services in low income areas.

Finally, cooperative schools are established by neighborhood organizations typically in

areas of unmet demand. They derive funding from both tuitions and public subsidies.

        Public and private school sectors in Bogotá differ in a number of ways,

particularly with respect to student composition, teacher qualifications, and class size.

Consequently, even though SED’s strategy of subsidizing private schools may have

increased access to primary schooling in the city, the schooling experiences of low-

income students attending schools in the two sectors may be quite different.

        Private schools in Bogotá can set their own student admission policies, which are

mostly based on academic criteria and/or on families’ ability to pay.9 Although private


8
    In comparison, only 21 percent of all pre-university level students in the country were enrolled in
    private schools in the same year, from SED, Boletin Estadístico. Versión Borrador (Bogotá, Colombia:
    Secretaría de Educación Distrital, 2001).
9
    The yearly tuition fee for private schools in Bogotá in the 2002 school-year ranged from $30 to $2,400,
    with an average of $285 (SED, Estadísticas Educativas, 1998-2003 (Bogotá, Colombia: Secretaría de
    Educación Distrital, 2003). This is considerably less than the $439 average expenditure per student in
    public schools. However, these figures are not completely comparable because the public sector
    expenditure figure includes the costs of school supplies, transportation, and nutritional supplement,
    while the private school tuitions do not. Also, many private schools impose additional fees for school

                                                    5
schools in Bogotá enroll students from the whole range of the socio-economic spectrum,

on average they serve a more affluent segment of the population than do public schools.

For example, 43 percent of the private schools in our sample primarily enroll students

from the lowest two (of six) socio-economic strata10 while 10 percent primarily enroll

students from the highest three strata. In comparison, 75 percent of public schools in our

sample primarily enroll students from the lowest two strata, and none primarily enrolls

students from the upper income strata.

         Public and private schools also differ in the characteristics of their teachers. Most

public primary school teachers in Bogotá have four-year degrees in education and post-

graduate training.11 As a result of relatively low turnover (3 percent annually) among

Bogotá public school teachers and restrictions on the opening of new teaching posts in

the public sector, the public school teaching force is mostly middle-aged and

experienced, and relatively costly.12 In contrast, private school teachers in Bogotá have

much less teaching experience and fewer formal educational credentials than public

school teachers.13

         There are three complementary explanations for these differences. First, as a


     activities and expect parents to make “voluntary” donations (bonos).
10
     Bogotá has a six-level system of socio-economic stratification, with 6 as the highest and 1 as the
     lowest. Roughly, estrato 1 and 2 correspond to families earning up to two times the minimum wage
     (the 2003 minimum wage is approximately US$100/month). Estrato 4 and 5 families earn
     approximately between 5 to 10 times the minimum wage.
11
     Based on data from A. Sarmiento, B. L. Caro, J. I. González, E. Castaño, E., and J. Espinosa,
     Evaluación de la Calidad de la Educación Primaria en Santa Fé de Bogotá 1998, Factores Asociados
     al Logro, Informe Final Versión Definitiva (Santa Fé de Bogotá: Departamento Nacional de
     Planeación, Secretaría de Educación de Bogotá, Corporación Mixta para el Desarrollo de la Educación
     Básica, 1999).
12
     New regulations that came into effect in 2002 introduce performance accountability mechanisms for
     promotions and reduce the weight of academic credentials and experience in determining promotions.
     These changes are likely to bring about changes in the city’s teaching force over the coming years.
13
     Sarmiento et al.; Alejandro Gaviria and Jorge Hugo Barrientos, “Determinantes de la Calidad de la

                                                   6
result of a 1995 constitutional court ruling, private schools are required to pay teachers

according to the public teacher salary scale that rewards experience and educational

credentials.14 However, private schools have greater flexibility than public schools in

hiring teachers with modest credentials and in dismissing teachers at will. Consequently

private schools have more control of personnel costs than do public schools. Second, in

recent years a weak economy has made it difficult for many private schools to collect

tuition payments and has created great pressure to reduce operating costs. Third,

government regulations restrict the rate of private school tuition increases to the rate of

inflation.

         There are a number of concerns about the impact that the recent reforms aimed at

increasing access have had on the quality of education provided to students. One stems

from the increase in class sizes in public sector schools. A second is that schools may be

becoming more segregated by socioeconomic status as students from the lowest income

groups are given preferential assignment to public and private subsidized schools, leaving

middle class children to attend unsubsidized private schools. A third is that as the city

increases its subsidies program, some private schools accustomed to serving a relatively

affluent population are increasingly serving children from low income families. Serving

these children poses new challenges that are difficult to meet, especially by schools that

contain costs by hiring as teachers adults with little pedagogical training or teaching

experience.

         If class size, peer groups, and teacher qualifications affect student achievement,


     Educación en Colombia,” Planeación y Desarrollo 32 (Autumn 2001): 339-386.
14
     Article 198, 1991 Constitution.

                                                 7
these reforms may jeopardize quality in both sectors. This provides our motivation for

examining the effects that these factors have on student achievement and the roles they

play in explaining the relative effectiveness of public and private schools. These issues

are important not only to Bogotá, but also to other countries and cities that subsidize their

private schools.

       Before describing our approach to answering these questions, we review research

from other countries. We limit our review to studies that have employed compelling

strategies for estimating the unbiased causal impacts of class size, peers, and teacher

quality on student achievement, and the relative effectiveness of public and private

schools.


III.   Prior Research

       A substantial literature examines the effects of class size, peer effects, and teacher

quality on student achievement, both in the US and in developing countries.15 Most

studies are problematic, however, because they lack compelling strategies to account for

the non-random assignment of teachers and students to classrooms. For instance, most

studies of the effects of class size on student achievement do not adequately account for

the assignment of weaker students (or stronger students) to the smallest classes. As a

result the estimates of class size effects are likely to be biased. Similarly, it is likely that

highly motivated parents choose their child’s school based on the characteristics of its

students. Consequently, in many studies, estimates of peer group effects may be biased

because researchers do not adequately control for the unobserved influences of parental



                                               8
motivation on children’s achievement. Following this same logic, if more able students

(or less able students) are assigned to better teachers, then the application of conventional

methods will result in biased estimates of the effects of teacher characteristics on student

achievement.

         It follows that a powerful strategy for obtaining unbiased estimates of the causal

effects of class size, peers, and teacher characteristics on achievement is to randomly

assign teachers and students to classrooms. Randomized controlled trials are expensive,

however, and remain few in number.16 The next best alternative is to learn from “natural

experiments” in which policies or policy changes create exogenous variation in the

assignment of students to classrooms.

         Miguel Urquiola,17 for example, estimates the effects of class size by exploiting

the results of a policy rule in Bolivia: when class enrollment size reaches 30 students, a

school can apply to the Ministry of Education for another teacher, such that in the

15
     For an older review of research in developing countries, see Bruce Fuller, “What School Factors Raise
     Achievement in the Third World?” Review of Educational Research 57 (Autumn 1987): 255-292.
16
     The best known class size experiment is Project STAR in Tennessee. See A.B. Krueger,
     “Experimental Estimates of Education Production Functions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114
     (May 1999): 497-532. In terms of peer effects, the Moving to Opportunity project randomly awards
     housing vouchers to residents of low-income neighborhoods in various cities in the US. For results
     from Boston, see Lawrence F. Katz, Jeffrey R. Kling, and Jeffrey B. Liebman, “Moving to Opportunity
     in Boston: Early Results from a Randomized Mobility Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
     116 (May 2001): 607-654. The effects of peers in tertiary education have been evaluated using
     random assignments of students to college dorms or rooms within dorms (e.g. Bruce Sacerdote, “Peer
     Effects with Random Assignment: Results for Dartmouth Roommates,” Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 116 (May 2001): 681-704.). The one random assignment experiment on teacher quality
     that we are aware of finds that Teach for America participants are somewhat more effective in teaching
     math (but not reading) to low-income children than the other teachers serving in these schools. See
     Paul Decker, Daniel Mayer, and Steven Glazerman, The Effects of Teach for America on Students:
     Evidence from a National Evaluation (Princeton, NJ: Mathematica Policy Research, June 2004). One
     other relevant random assignment study finds that tutors have a large positive impact on the
     achievement of low-income students (see Abhijit Banerjee, Shawn Cole, Esther Duflo, and Lee
     Linden, “Remedying Education: Evidence from Two Randomized Experiments in India,” MIT
     Working Paper (September 2003).


                                                     9
following year there will be an additional classroom, and both will have fewer students.

The characteristics of students in class sizes of 30 should be equal on average to the

characteristics of students after the new classrooms are added, with the only difference

being the number of students in the classroom. Consequently, the difference in student

achievement before and after the application of the class size rule should provide an

unbiased estimate of the class size effect. Using a regression-discontinuity research

design, Urquiola finds that the mathematics achievement of third grade students in a class

of 20 students is 0.24 to 0.45 standard deviations (SD) higher than the achievement of

students in a class of 30 students. Using a similar analytic strategy in Israel, Joshua

Angrist and Victor Lavy18 find a comparable class size effect of 0.46 SD for 5th grade

mathematics.19 A remaining potential source of bias in these estimates, however, is that

teachers hired to accommodate extra classrooms may be less effective. In this instance,

the difference in achievement between the pre- and post-rule group of students may be

biased downward by the lower average quality of teachers in the latter group. In other

words, this design cannot control for the effect of unobserved teacher characteristics.

         Another recent approach to identifying class size effects has been to use panel

datasets containing measures of student achievement at several points in time and

information on teachers and their classes in several school years. Such data permit

estimation of class size effects by comparing the performances of students taught by the

17
     Miguel Urquiola, “Identifying Class Size Effects in Developing Countries: Evidence from Rural
     Schools in Bolivia,” World Bank Working Paper 2711 (October 2000).
18
     Joshua D. Angrist and Victor Lavy, “Using Maimonides’ Rule to Estimate the Effect of Class Size on
     Scholastic Achievement,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (May 1999): 533-575.
19
     Such policy rules have also been used in research from the US, but contrary to research from
     developing countries, the effect of class size is not statistically significant. See Caroline M. Hoxby,

                                                     10
same teacher in different school years. Studies using this methodology find smaller class

size effects than those reported in studies using the regression discontinuity

methodology.20 One possible explanation concerns differences in setting. Panel studies

of class size effects utilize datasets from the U.S, while studies using the regression

discontinuity design utilized data from Bolivia and Israel.

         Researchers have also used panel data on teachers and students to examine the

impact of teaching experience on teaching performance. One striking finding from these

studies is that the effectiveness of teachers increases markedly with experience during

their first years on the job.21

         As for peer group effects among elementary or secondary school students, to our

knowledge only two studies make use of data from a random assignment experiment.

Bryan Graham, using data from the Tennessee STAR experiment, reports that the

predicted math achievement of a primary school student placed in a class in which the

average academic ability of classmates was one standard deviation above the average

value for classrooms in the sample is 0.15 standard deviations higher than the predicted

math achievement of the same student placed in a class with peers of average academic



     “The Effects of Class Size on Student Achievement: New evidence from Population Variation,”
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 115 (November 2000): 1239-1285.
20
     By including dummy variables for every student and every teacher in the sample, studies using such
     datasets are able to eliminate all unobserved time-invariant student characteristics and teacher
     characteristics as sources of bias. Eric A. Hanushek, John F. Kain, and Stephen G. Rivkin ( “Teachers,
     Schools, and Academic Achievement,” NBER Working Paper 6691 (August 1998)) find that a 10-
     student difference in class size is associated with only a 0.04 to 0.06 SD difference in student
     achievement. Using panel data from New Jersey, Jonah E. Rockoff ("The Impact of Individual
     Teachers on Student Achievement: Evidence from Panel Data," American Economic Review 94 (May
     2004): 247-252) finds that the effect of class size on mathematics achievement is not statistically
     significant.
21
     See Hanushek, Kain, and Rivkin; and Rockoff.


                                                    11
ability.22 In a study using this same dataset but a different methodology, Boozer and

Cacciola report similar findings.23

          To date, the best estimates of peer effects in the developing world have been

obtained from regression models that use school fixed effects to account for unobserved

differences among schools.             In this approach the effect of peers is estimated by

comparing achievement differences among students in different classrooms within the

same school. Applying this strategy to data from Chile, Patrick McEwan24 finds that

students in an eighth grade classroom in which the average level of mother’s education of

classmates is one standard deviation above the average for classrooms in the sample

score 0.287 SD higher on a test of mathematics achievement than do students in a class in

which the average level of peers’ mother’s education is at the sample average. This

estimate may still be biased by unobserved teacher characteristics, however, unless

students are randomly allocated to classrooms within schools, which does not seem be

true for the Chilean dataset.25

          In summary, class size effects have been relatively well estimated in developing

countries. However, reliable estimates of peer effects and teacher quality effects on


22
      Bryan Graham, Using Conditional Excess Variance Contrasts to Identify Social Interactions: Theory
      and an Application on the Relationship Between Peer Groups and Academic Achievement (Cambridge,
      MA: Harvard University Department of Economics, unpublished manuscript, September 2004).
23
     Michael A. Boozer and Stephen E. Cacciola, “Inside the 'BlackBox' of Project Star: Estimation of Peer
      Effects Using Experimental Data,” Economic Growth Center Discussion Paper 832 (June 2001).
24
      Patrick J. McEwan, “Peer Effects on Student Achievement: Evidence from Chile,” Economics of
      Education Review 22 (April 2003): 131-141.
25
      McEwan, “Peer Effects on Student Achievement”, also estimates the effects of peer composition by
      comparing the test scores of siblings and twins who are assigned to different classrooms, i.e. by using
      siblings/twins fixed effects. He finds that a one standard deviation difference in the mean mother’s
      education of one’s classroom peers is associated with a difference in mathematics achievement of
      0.371 and 0.536 SD, for the sample of siblings and twins respectively. These estimates will be biased,
      however, if siblings differ in ability, and/or students are non-randomly assigned to classrooms.

                                                     12
student achievement in developing countries are still unavailable. Given the slow

progress in understanding roles that different resources play in determining why some

schools are more effective than others, it is not surprising that progress has also been

slow in understanding the relative effectiveness of public schools and private schools,

and the differences between them.26 In most studies, the private school effect is defined

as the difference in achievement between public and private schools, net of the pre-

existing characteristics of their students.            This effect is estimated by regressing

achievement on a private school indicator and an array of student background variables.

Research from Colombia using this methodology finds a private school advantage in the

range 0.20 to 0.29 SD for secondary school achievement.27 However, these models fail

to control for important student and school characteristics such as parents’ expectations

and school admissions policies, which may result in selection bias in OLS estimates.

Attempts have been made to correct this bias using standard Heckman selectivity bias

corrections, but their application fails to meet critical assumptions.28

         More reliable estimates of the relative effectiveness of private schools come from

randomized voucher experiments in which a “treatment” group of students is given

vouchers to attend a private school, and their post-treatment achievement is compared to

26
     For reviews of the evidence, see Patrick J. McEwan, “The potential impact of large-scale voucher
     programs,” Review of Educational Research 70 (Summer 2000): 103-149; and Richard J. Murnane,
     “The Role of Markets in American K-12 Education,” in The Limits of Market Organization,
     ed.,Richard R. Nelson (New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2005). For evidence pertaining to Latin
     America, see Marie-Andrée Somers, Patrick J. McEwan, and J. Douglas Willms, “How Effective Are
     Private Schools in Latin America?” Comparative Education Review 48 (February 2004).
27
     George Psacharopoulos, “Public vs. Private Schools in Developing Countries: Evidence from
     Colombia and Tanzania,” International Journal of Educational Development 7 (January 1987): 59-67;
     Donald Cox and Emmanuel Jimenez, “The Relative Effectiveness of Private and Public Schools:
     Evidence from Two Developing Countries,” Journal of Development Economics 34 (November 1991):
     99-121.

                                                  13
that of students who were included in the lottery but did not receive a voucher. Most

relevant to this paper is a random assignment experiment conducted for secondary school

students in Colombia that was evaluated by Joshua Angrist et al.29 These authors report a

private school advantage of 0.29 SD.

         Although estimates from randomized experiments are clearly informative, they do

suffer from the limitation of treating schools as black boxes. As a result they do not shed

light on the reasons why private schools are more effective than public schools. This may

matter, especially if peer group composition is an important determinant of student

achievement. A combination of self-selection by parents and the operation of private

school admission policies may create academically stronger peer groups that enhance the

effectiveness of private schools. However, if this is an important part of the explanation

for the relative effectiveness of private schools, public policies designed to increase

student enrollments in private schools may result in a reduction in their effectiveness.

Somers, McEwan and Willms30 present evidence indicating that the private school effect

for 3rd and 4th grade language and mathematics achievement is no longer statistically

significant after controlling for peer group socioeconomic status (SES). In Colombia,


28
     See Somers, McEwan, and Willms for further discussion.
29
     Joshua Angrist, Eric Bettinger, Erik Bloom, Elizabeth King, and Michael Kremer, “Vouchers for
     Private Schooling in Colombia: Evidence from a Randomized Natural Experiment,” American
     Economic Review 92 (December 2002): 1535-1558. For experiments in the US, see W.G. Howell,
     P.J. Wolf, D.E. Campbell, and P.E. Peterson, “School Vouchers and Academic performance: Results
     from Three Randomized Field Trials,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 21 (Spring 2002):
     91-217; Cecilia, E. Rouse, “Private School Vouchers and Student Achievement: An Evaluation of the
     Milwaukee Parental Choice Program,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 113 (May 1998): 553-602; and
     Eric Bettinger, The Effects of Educational Vouchers on Academic and Non-academic Outcomes: Using
     Experimental Economic Methods to Study a Randomized Natural Experiment (Unpublished
     manuscript, 2003).
30
     See Somers, McEwan, and Willms for further discussion.


                                                  14
more notably, the estimated private school effect is 0.32 SD, but is reduced to 0.02 SD

when controls for peer SES are included in the model. Unfortunately, estimated effects

from the Somers, MacEwan, and Willms study and other studies are likely to be biased

by the omission of important student and school characteristics – hence the need for new

research.

       One other limitation of the literature on private school effects is that it does not

explore the extent to which there is variation in quality among schools within each sector.

This is critical because the greater the variation in quality among schools in a sector

relative to the difference in average quality between sectors, the less important is the

decision about which sector in which to enroll a child, and the more important is the

decision about which school within a sector in which to enroll a child.

       The effects of class size, peer group composition, and teacher characteristics on

student achievement, and the roles of these resources in explaining differences in the

relative effectiveness of public and private schools are all relevant to understanding the

impacts of Bogotá’s recent policies. Our approach to investigating these effects is based

on a special property of our dataset that allows us to address some of the limitations of

prior work.



IV. Research Design

Dataset

       To address our research questions, we designed a two-wave study of 5th grade

classrooms in public and private schools in Bogotá, Colombia. Beginning with the


                                            15
population of schools serving fifth grade students in the city, we stratified schools by

sector (public & private) and by school socio-economic status (SES).31 We then selected

schools from these strata randomly. Figure A1 in the appendix contains a flowchart that

describes how we arrived at the final analytic sample. In 1999, out of the 102 schools

selected for the study, 14 refused to participate. One year later, we contacted the 88

remaining schools for follow-up. On this occasion, 10 schools refused to participate, one

school did not offer 5th grade, and in four schools the 5th grade mathematics teacher did

not answer the questionnaire.

         Of the 3,095 5th grade students tested in 2000, 714 were either “new” to the

school or had been absent from school the previous year on the day the fourth grade tests

were administered. For these students, we imputed a pretest score using a hot-decking

procedure.32,33 The final sample includes 3,095 students from 73 schools, grouped in 97

5th grade classrooms and taught by 77 mathematics teachers. Of these students, 1,660 (54

percent) were enrolled in private schools and 1,435 students (46 percent) in public


31
     For administrative purposes, Bogotá is stratified into 6 distinct socio-economic strata with 6 being the
     highest (see footnote 10). Schools in Bogotá are highly segregated by socio-economic level.
32
     The personal and family characteristics used in this procedure included student’s age, gender, number
     of days absent from school, mother’s education, mother head of household, family’s ownership of an
     encyclopedia, computer, car, refrigerator, washing machine, vacuum cleaner, phone, and having access
     to electricity in the home. All of the latter have been used as indicators of the student’s socio-
     economic level. We also fitted our final models on the smaller sample of students for whom we had
     complete data. The results were not substantively different from those reported in the paper.
33
     In order to evaluate the generalizability of our study’s findings to the population from which our
     sample was drawn, we assessed whether the schools and students that did not respond in the second
     wave of data collection differed in any systematic manner from those that did. On average, non-
     matched students are more likely to be male, to have obtained lower scores on the tests, to come from
     single mother households and to have been absent from school more often. Although proportionally
     more public schools dropped out of the study than did private schools, we found no statistically
     significant differences in school average pre-test scores or school SES between public schools that
     participated both years and those that dropped out of the study after the first year. However, among
     private schools, those schools that participated in both years had, on average, higher pre-test scores and
     student SES than those schools that dropped out after the first year.

                                                      16
schools. Our sample includes 37 for-profit schools, nine religious schools, and one

cooperative school.

           A particular characteristic of this dataset, which drives an important part of our

analysis, is that of the 77 teachers in the sample, 13 taught fifth grade mathematics to

multiple groups of children. As we discuss below, this characteristic of the data allows

us to estimate the impacts of class size and peer group quality on student achievement,

controlling for unobserved teacher characteristics.



Measures

       Our data analyses involve three types of variables (outcome variables, question

predictors and control predictors) measured at four different levels (the student, the

classroom, the teacher, and the school). Table A1 in the appendix lists the variables and

provides brief descriptions.


Student-Level Outcome and Control Predictors

       Table 1 presents the means and standard deviations of the variables included in

our data-analysis for the full sample of students and separately for students in public

schools and private schools. We discuss differences between the sectors later in this

section.


Outcome Variable

       Our outcome variable is each student’s score (MSCORE) on an IRT-scaled

mathematics test developed by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural


                                              17
Organization (UNESCO) and the Oficina Regional de Educación de la UNESCO para

América Latina y el Caribe (OREALC),34 and administered to students in the final weeks

of their 5th grade school year.35 The average mathematics score across all students in the

sample was almost 300 points, with a standard deviation of about 40.


Control Predictors

             We included as control predictors the average of each student’s scores on

achievement tests in mathematics and language taken at the end of the fourth grade

(PRETEST) and its square.36 In doing this, we assume that the pretest scores capture

students’ total educational experience up to that point in time, as well as the effects of

other earlier student background factors that may be influencing their achievement. Note

that the pre-test is scaled differently than the post-test, and as a result we were unable to




34
     This test was developed in 1997 for an international comparative study of 3rd and 4th graders organized
     by UNESCO’s Laboratorio Latinoamericano de la Calidad de la Educación (LLECE). Thirteen Latin
     American countries, including Colombia, participated in this study. Curriculum and testing experts
     from all participating countries, with the help of the Educational Testing Service (ETS), developed and
     pilot tested the instruments to make them reflect the curriculum of the first four years of primary
     education in the participating countries.
35
     This test has two parallel forms (Form A and Form B), each containing 32 questions. We used both
     forms of this test in the study, randomly distributing each form to approximately half the students in
     each classroom. We included in all models a dichotomous predictor to distinguish the form of the fifth
     grade test taken by each student. The reported Cronbach’s alpha reliability for Form A of the test is
     .86 and for Form B is .88, as reported in United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural
     Organization (UNESCO), Primer Estudio Internacional Comparativo sobre Lenguaje, Matemática y
     Factores Asociados en Tercero y Cuarto Grado: Informe Preparado por el Laboratorio de Evaluación
     de la Calidad de la Educación (Santiago, Chile: UNESCO/OREALC, 1998), p.67.
36
     The 4th grade tests used in this study were developed by Universidad Nacional for Bogotá’s
     Department of Education 1998 student assessment program where they were used to test 3rd graders.
     We verified that the substantive results were not different when the models were fit with both the 4th
     grade reading score and math score included separately as control variables. Since the fourth grade
     tests were different from the fifth grade tests and it was not possible to create a meaningful common
     metric, it would have been inappropriate to define the outcome variable as the difference between the
     fourth and fifth grade math score.

                                                    18
use a change score as our outcome variable.37

          We included two student demographic characteristics as control predictors: (a)

AGE, the student’s chronological age, measured in years, and (b) FEMALE, student

gender, measured as a dichotomous variable (coded 1 for female, and 0 for male).

Notice, in Table 1, that of the 3,095 students in the sample, 57 percent are girls. This is

due to the inclusion of 19 all-female classes (and two all-male classes) in the sample of

97 classes. Also, boys were more likely to change schools and to be absent from school,

preventing us from matching them on the two years of this study. Students in the sample

are on average 10.8 years old, and their ages range from eight to seventeen.

           We used two sets of predictors as indicators of student SES: (a) MHH, a

dichotomous indicator of whether the mother was head of the household (coded 0=no,

1=yes), and (b) indicators of the mother’s educational attainment (MOTHED).38,39

Approximately one quarter of the students in the sample lived in mother-headed

households. On average (median and mode) mothers had completed some high school.


37
     The pre-tests had 3 parallel forms, each containing 17 questions on mathematics and 17 on language.
     We administered all three forms of the pretest, randomly distributing the forms to approximately one
     third of the students in each classroom. Items were scored separately by subject, on a scale ranging
     from 0 to 306. Students achieved an average of 200.2 points (st. dev. 50) with scores ranging from 12
     to 306 points (6 students in the sample obtained perfect scores). There are no published reliability or
     validity estimates for the pretests.
38
     In our sample, 356 observations (9.9 percent of the student sample) were missing information on
     mother’s education. We imputed these missing values by substituting the median value for the
     student’s classmates (we imputed the median rather than the mean because we did not want the
     imputed values to be sensitive to outliers). Likewise, 178 observations (4.9 percent of the student
     sample) were missing data on whether their mother was head of the household (MHH). Given that we
     constructed this variable based on students’ responses to whether their father lived with them or not, in
     the cases where they failed to answer we assumed that their father did not.
39
     We chose to use mother’s education rather than father’s education for two reasons. First, there are a
     number of studies that suggest that mother’s education is more important than father’s education in
     determining IQ, e.g. Arleen Leibowitz, “Home Investments in Children,” Journal of Political Economy
     82 (March 1974): S111-S131. Second, there was a high percentage of missing data on father’s
     education in our sample.

                                                     19
             We also included as control predictors measures of the student’s school

attendance, the availability of books in the home, and the support provided at home for

the completion of homework, which previous studies in Bogotá had found to be related to

student achievement.40 We measured these variables, as follows:

•    DAYABS, the numbers of days that the student was absent from school over the

     previous two weeks.41

•    HELPHW, the frequency with which a student receives help with his or her

     homework at home, measured on a Likert-type scale (where 1=never receives help,

     2=sometimes receives help, 3=always receives help).                     In the data analyses, we

     converted this ordinal variable into a system of dichotomous (dummy) predictors,

     with HWHELP3 (always receives help) being omitted from the fitted models as a

     reference category.42

•    BOOKS, measuring the availability of books in the student’s home, a composite

     variable standardized to a mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1.43

In spite of the low levels of mother’s education among students in the sample, 97 percent

of students reported having books in their homes and 93 percent reported receiving help

sometimes or always with their homework at home. Students in the sample were absent

from school an average of 0.65 days in the two weeks preceding completion of the

questionnaire.

40
     Sarmiento et al., “Evaluación de la Calidad”.
41
     In the 77 cases (2.8 percent of the student sample) in which information was missing on this variable,
     we substituted the sample mean for the missing value.
42
     In the 19 cases (0.7 percent of the student sample) in which information was missing for this variable,
     we substituted the value 2, which was the modal response.


                                                     20
Question Predictors

         To answer our research questions on the influence of classrooms, teachers and

peers on student achievement, we included two classroom-level question predictors and

two teacher-level predictors in the data-analyses.



Classroom Characteristics

         The predictor that we used to represent peer-group composition is the “leave-out”

mean44 of the student’s classmates’ mothers’ educational level (CLMOTHED). This is

defined as the classroom mean of mother’s education, leaving out each student’s own

value from the calculation. As can be seen in Table 1, students in the sample are likely to

have a peer-group whose average level of mother’s education is an incomplete secondary

school education, but there is considerable variation across classrooms.

         We measure class size as the number of students enrolled in each classroom as

reported by the teacher. On average, classrooms in the sample have 37 students (std. dev.

8.5) although the range extends from 10 to 53 students.45 Based on exploratory analyses

that revealed a non-linear relationship between class size and student achievement, we

defined our class size predictor (CLASSIZE) as the natural logarithm of the sample

maximum class size (53) minus the student’s own class size, or ln[53 - class size +




43
     For the 15 cases (0.5 percent of the student sample) in which information was missing on this variable,
     we assumed that there were no books in the home.
44
     See Michael A. Boozer and Stephen E. Cacciola, “Inside the 'BlackBox' of Project Star: Estimation of
     Peer Effects Using Experimental Data,” Economic Growth Center Discussion Paper 832 (June 2001).
45
     Averaged over students rather than classrooms, the mean is 36 students.

                                                    21
0.167].46 Note that we followed Mosteller’s and Tukey’s47 advice and “started” the

transformation by adding a small amount (0.167) to the difference in order to avoid

infinities when the student’s class size equaled the maximum.


Teacher Characteristics

         We included as predictors two sets of teacher characteristics that are rewarded by

the existing salary structure. The first measures educational preparation to teach. The

original ordinal variable recorded the teacher’s highest educational degree obtained

(coded: 1= Pedagogical high school; 2= Education technology (2- or 3-year post

secondary certificate); 3= A four-year university program in education; 4=Post graduate

courses, including Masters in education (2 year + thesis), or specialization (1 or 2 years

graduate level program); 5= Graduate from a five-year university-level program in a field

other than education). In our analyses, we converted this ordinal variable into a system

of dichotomous (dummy) predictors, with completion of a four-year university program

in education (the modal value in our analytic sample) omitted from the fitted models as a

reference category.

         We measured teacher experience (TEAEXP) by the number of years that the 5th

46
     We chose a log function over a quadratic function of class size for several reasons. First, a quadratic
     functional form results in predicted values that first increase and then decrease very sharply with class
     size. Based on previous research on class size, we deemed this pattern to be implausible. We
     therefore chose a log functional form because it constrains achievement to be a monotonic function of
     class size. Second, we could not reject the null hypothesis that the predicted values of student
     achievement from models with the alternative functional forms for class size were not different, when
     evaluated at either the 10th or 90th percentile of the class size distribution. Third, the model’s fit was
     slightly better with the log specification than with the quadratic specification.
47
     Frederick Mosteller and John W. Tukey, Data Analysis and Regression (Boston, MA: Addison-
     Wesley, 1977), ch.4. To verify the appropriateness of this recommendation, we estimated a non-linear
     model of student achievement against ln[Max Class Size + k – Class size] in order to determine the



                                                      22
grade mathematics teacher had been in the teaching profession. Given that previous

research suggests that the relationship between student achievement and teachers’ years

of experience is non-linear,48 we included the natural logarithmic transformation of this

variable (L_TEAEXP) as a predictor in the regression analyses.49 On average, teachers in

the sample have 16 years of teaching experience (std. dev. 9.8), while 11 percent have 3

years or less of experience.


School Sector

In order to examine the effect of school sector on student achievement, we included a

dichotomous predictor (PRIVATE), coded 1 = Private, 0 = Public). Fifty four percent of

the students in the sample attended private schools.                      A total of 59 private school

classrooms located in 47 private schools are included in the sample.

Data-Analytic Strategy

          The goal of our analysis is to investigate to what extent differences in class size,

peers, and teacher quality account for differences between the effectiveness of public and

private elementary schools in Bogotà.                     Before proceeding to a comparison of

achievement across sectors, however, we address two baseline questions. The first is

whether student achievement varies across classrooms, net of student characteristics and


     value of k that maximized the model fit. This procedure did indeed return a value very close to the
     recommended value.
48
     Hanushek, Kain, and Rivkin; Richard J. Murnane and Barbara R. Phillips, “Learning by Doing,
     Vintage, and Selection: Three Pieces of the Puzzle of Relating Teaching Experience and Teaching
     Performance,” Economics of Education Review 1 (Autumn 1981): 453-465; Rockoff.
49
     As in the case of class size, we chose the log functional form over the quadratic functional form
     because the pattern of predicted values resulting from the latter seemed unlikely, given previous
     research (such as that by Rivkin, Hanushek, and Kain). The difference in predicted values between the
     log and quadratic functional forms is not statistically significant at either the 10th or 90th percentile of
     experience. Moreover, model fit is virtually identical for the two functional forms.

                                                       23
prior achievement.       The second is whether achievement, net of background

characteristics, varies among students in different classrooms taught by the same teacher.

These questions are important because the focus of our analysis is on predictors that vary

at the classroom or teacher level (e.g. class size, peer group, teacher characteristics). If

student achievement, net of background characteristics, did not vary among classrooms,

our research could not provide any results. Fortunately, as explained below, student

achievement is higher in some classrooms than in others, and this is even true among

classrooms taught by the same teacher. Our second step is to investigate whether class

size and peer characteristics explain differences in achievement among classrooms,

irrespective of sector. Finally, we estimate the extent to which class size, peer and

teacher quality explain differences in achievement between the public and private sector.

       In these analyses, to ensure that standard errors are estimated correctly, we fit all

regression models using either fixed effects or random effects to account for the

clustering of students within classrooms. The following section provides greater detail

on each of the statistical models fitted in our analysis.



Research Question 1

       On average, do children enrolled in some 5th grade classrooms (or assigned to

some 5th grade teachers) have higher end-of-year mathematics achievement than children

in other classrooms (or children assigned to other teachers), after controlling for student

SES and end of 4th grade achievement?

       Do children enrolled in some 5th grade Bogotá classrooms have higher end-of-


                                              24
year mathematical achievement, on average, than children enrolled in other 5th grade

classrooms taught by the same teacher?

        We address these “baseline” research questions using three complementary

strategies.   First, we use fixed-effects regression analysis to model the relationship

between a student’s 5th grade mathematics achievement score and a set of dummy

predictors representing classroom membership (Model 1a) or teacher membership

(Model 1b), controlling for a vector of student background characteristics. In these

models, we allow all students in each classroom or assigned to each teacher to share a

unique intercept parameter. Inspection of estimates of these intercepts allows us to assess

whether student mathematics achievement differs by classrooms or by teachers, net of

selected student background characteristics. Note that the structure of our data does not

allow us to estimate both teacher and class effects at the same time. However, any

differences in “fit” between the teacher and classroom models suggest the existence of

classroom effects on student achievement that are unique from those of the teacher, an

issue that is a focus of attention in this analysis. The hypothesized fixed-effects models

are as follows:


                  (1a)   Yij = ∑ β 0 j D j + β 1 S ij + ε ij
                                 J




                  (1b)   Yik = ∑ β 0 k Dk + β 1 S ik + ε ik
                                 k




The variables and parameters are defined as follows:


                                                 25
           Yij /k= 5th grade mathematics achievement of student i in classroom j or with

                  teacher k.

           Dj/k = vector of classroom or teacher dummy predictors (one per classroom or

                  teacher).

           Sij/k = vector of grand-mean-centered individual-level student characteristics

                  for student i in classroom j or with teacher k.

           β0j/k = intercept (“fixed effect”) for classroom j or teacher k (the average

                  mathematics achievement of students in classroom j or with teacher k,

                  adjusted for the included student control characteristics).

           β1 =   parameter vector representing the effects of the student characteristics.

           εij/k = residual for student i in classroom j or with teacher k.


       We test the null hypothesis that all classroom fixed effects (intercept parameters

β0j) or teacher fixed effects (intercept parameters β0k) are simultaneously equal. If we

reject these null hypotheses, we can conclude, in Model 1a, that the fifth grade classroom

(or, in the case of Model 1b, the fifth grade math teacher) to which the student was

assigned influenced his or her end of 5th grade mathematics achievement score, net of

included student control characteristics.

       It is important to note, however, that the obtained fixed effects coefficients are

estimates, and are therefore fallible (contain error). Consequently, the sample variance of

the estimated fixed effects is inflated (biased upward), relative to the estimated variance

of the true fixed effects. To estimate the variance of the true fixed effects, σ µ2 , we



                                             26
therefore adopt a second strategy, using random effects regression analysis:


               (1a*) Yij = β 0 + β 1 S ij + (u j + ε ij )

               (1b*) Yik = β 0 + β 1 S ik + (u k + ε ik )



where µj/k is the deviation of the average mathematics achievement of students in

classroom j or with teacher k from the grand mean of achievement (the µj/k are also called

the random-effects). The random effects approach represented in Models 1a* and 1b*

embeds deviations of the mean achievement for teachers/classrooms into the error

structure, rather than retaining them as fixed effects in the structural part of the model as

Models 1a and 1b .

       The advantage of using a random-effects regression approach is that it estimates

the variance of the true classroom/teacher effects directly, rather than obtaining an error-

inflated sample variance of estimated fixed effects. We can therefore use the random-

effects approach to test the null hypothesis that the variance of the true fixed effects is

zero (H0: σ µ2 = 0 ), using a Breusch-Pagan Lagrangian Multiplier Test.

       The disadvantage of random effects regression, however, is that it does not

eliminate bias in model coefficients (the β1’s) caused by the unobserved and non-random

sorting of students to teachers, as does the fixed effects regression approach. Therefore,

in our analyses, we use random effects regression to test whether there is statistically

significant variation in teacher and classroom effects, but use the parameter estimates

from fixed-effects regression analyses to address any subsequent research questions


                                               27
pertaining to the impact of student, classroom and teacher characteristics on achievement.

       Finally, in a third exercise, we return to fixed effects analysis.      In order to

examine whether there are classroom-specific characteristics that exert an influence

above and beyond the impact of the teacher, we test the null hypothesis that all classroom

coefficients β0j that pertain to classrooms taught by the same teacher are simultaneously

equal. If we can reject these null hypotheses, we can conclude that even among

classrooms taught by the same teacher, average student achievement differs across

classrooms, net of included student control characteristics.

       While the above strategy can detect the presence of classroom or teacher effects,

it does not reveal which specific classroom and teacher characteristics are responsible for

the effects. Our next research questions examine this issue.



Research question 2

       Do the student-body composition and number of students in the class in which a

student spent the 5th grade influence his or her 5th grade mathematics achievement score?

       To answer this question, we fit a set of regression models in which we add class

size and peer group composition as predictors to the baseline teacher fixed-effects model

(Model 1b). With this strategy, we examine whether differences in class size and peer

groups among classes taught by the same teacher explain differences in student

achievement. The regression model has the following form:


       (2)     Yijk = ∑ β 0 k Dk + β 1 S ijk + β 2 C jk + ε ijk
                       K




                                               28
Where additional variables and parameters are defined as follows:


       Yijk = 5th grade mathematics achievement of student i in classroom j with teacher

            k.

        Dk = vector of teacher dummy predictors (one per teacher).

       Sijk = vector of grand-mean-centered individual-level student characteristics for

             student i in classroom j with teacher k.

       Cjk = vector of grand-mean-centered classroom and peer-group characteristics of

            classroom j with teacher k.

       β1 = parameter vector representing the effects of the student characteristics.

       β2 = parameter vector representing the effects of the classroom and peer-group

            characteristics.

       εijk = residual for student i in classroom j with teacher k.



       Our strategy of including a set of dummy predictors to represent all observed and

unobserved differences in the outcome among teachers (the fixed effects of teachers)

resolves a problem that has plagued previous studies, namely, the non-random

assignment of students to teachers. Once teacher fixed effects are included in the model,

we are still able to estimate the impact of the classroom-level class-size and peer-group

predictors on student achievement because our dataset contains some teachers who taught

multiple classes, thereby providing classroom-level outcome variation that is not

eliminated by the inclusion of the teacher fixed effects. However, our strategy will

produce unbiased estimates of class size and peer group effects (β2) only if students are
                                             29
randomly assigned to different classes taught by the same teacher. To learn about

assignment processes, we interviewed a teacher or administrator in each of the 13 schools

in which individual teachers taught mathematics to more than one fifth grade class. Our

respondents reported that in all but two cases, students were assigned to classes to obtain

a mix of student backgrounds and abilities in each class and to roughly equalize class

sizes. In two cases students with especially low or high skills were assigned to a

particular class. We eliminated these two classrooms from the analytic sample.

         To further verify that students taught by the same teacher were not assigned to

classes on the basis of ability or socioeconomic status, we utilized a strategy proposed by

McEwan,50 in which “virtual” classrooms are created by randomly reassigning students

into “new” classrooms.          Comparing the distribution of class size and peer group

composition in the “virtual classrooms” with those in the actual classrooms, we found

almost no differences in the two distributions.51 Of course, this means that there is only

modest variation in class size and peer composition among classrooms taught by the

same teacher, and as a result our tests of class size and peer group effects have little

statistical power.

         In summary, we believe that our method of making use of a unique property of

our Bogotá dataset provides new insights into the roles that class size and peer group

composition play in explaining the relative effectiveness of public and private schools.

However, our empirical results are by no means definitive because they are based on


50
     Patrick J. McEwan, “Peer Effects on Student Achievement: Evidence from Chile,” Economics of
     Education Review 22 (April 2003): 131-141.
51
     This simulation exercise allowed us to compare not only the mean characteristics of the classrooms
     taught by a given teacher, but also their variances.

                                                  30
estimates from student achievement in the modest number of classrooms (33) taught by

the 13 teachers who taught more than one fifth grade class.


Research Questions 3a, 3b, and 3c

         Do students enrolled in private schools have higher mathematics achievement

than students enrolled in public schools, after controlling for (a) student background

characteristics; (b) student background characteristic and peer group composition; and

(c) student background characteristics, peer group composition, and class size?


         To address question 3a we fit the random effects regression model below (Model

3). This model is similar to our Model 1a, except that the classroom-specific intercepts

(the classroom fixed effects) have been converted into the corresponding random effects,

uj, in order that school-sector (PRIVATE) can be included as a predictor:


            (3)       Yijk = β 0 + β 1 S ijk + β 3 PRIVATE jk + u j + ε ijk



where:

         β0 = intercept parameter representing the average student 5th grade mathematics

              achievement (across all classrooms and teachers), controlling for all

              predictors in the model.

         β3 = effect of the school sector of classroom j with teacher k on student 5th grade

              mathematics achievement, controlling for all other predictors in the model.

         uj = random effect of classroom j on student 5th grade mathematics achievement.


                                              31
         To address question 3b, we add the predictor representing peer group composition

to the model described above (to provide Model 3b); to address question 3c, we further

add the class size predictor (to provide Model 3c).

         Unlike the corresponding estimates obtained from our teacher fixed effects model

(Model 2), it is possible that the estimated effect of school sector obtained in our

classroom random effects model (Model 3) may be biased by the omission of unobserved

student and classroom characteristics. However, we can reduce the magnitude of the bias

in the school sector effect in Models 3b and 3c by constraining the effects of the class

size and peer group predictors to the estimates that we obtained in our teacher fixed

effects specification (Model 2), and by controlling for students’ pre-test scores. The logic

to constraining these coefficients in this way is that, by virtue of its fixed effects

specification, Model 2 takes into account all unobserved teacher quality differences with

which class size and peer attributes may be correlated. 52



Research Question 4:

         Does a student’s math achievement at the end of 5th grade depend on his or her

5th grade math teacher’s qualifications and years of teaching experience?


         To address this research question, we supplement the hypothesized random

effects model in Model 3, above, as follows:

52
     We also tested whether including interactions between PRIVATE and the other predictors in the model
     substantially improved model fit. We could not reject the null hypothesis that the interaction terms are


                                                     32
         (4) Yijk = β 0 + β 1 S ijk + β 2 C jk + β 3 PRIVATE jk + β 4 TEACHER jk + u j + ε ijk


Where:

         β4 = effect of a vector of teacher qualifications and teaching experience,

                 controlling for vectors of student and classroom characteristics.


Again, and for the same reasons, we constrain the coefficients on the class size and peer

group quality predictors to their values estimated from fitting Model 2.



V.       Findings

Do Classrooms and Teachers Matter to Student Mathematics Achievement?

         The 5th grade classroom and teacher to which a student was assigned makes a

difference to his or her end of 5th grade mathematics achievement score. Based on tests

of the equality of the fixed-effects across the 97 classrooms in Model 1a and across the

77 teachers in Model 1b, we can reject the null hypotheses that there are no differences

among classrooms (F=4.30; p<.001) and no differences among teachers (F=4.77;

p<.001).53

         It is important to remember that the sample variance of the estimated teacher and

classroom fixed-effects is inflated (biased upward) by the fallibility of the estimates. As

explained earlier, one way of dealing with the fallibility of the estimated

classroom/teacher fixed effects is to fit a random-effects model, and to estimate the


     jointly equal to 0 (χ2=11.91, p=0.4528, df=12, based on Model 3b). We therefore include only the
     main effect of PRIVATE in our reported analyses.

                                                   33
variance of the true teacher or classroom effects directly (Models 1a* and 1b*). After

controlling for the effects of the usual student background characteristics, we find that the

estimated variance of true classroom effects is 69.3, and statistically significant

(p<0.001).54

          Note that the estimated variance of the estimated classroom fixed-effects is 159.8,

which is more than twice the size of the estimated true variance obtained directly from

the random-effects model.              This implies a high degree of error in the fixed-effects

estimates, and indicates that the estimated reliability of our measurement of the

classroom fixed-effects is less than 0.5 (69.4/159.8 = 0.434). The estimated inter-quartile

range of the true classroom fixed-effects (after disattenuating for the fallibility of the

estimates) is 9.8 points. This is about half of the difference between the median scores of

3rd graders and 4th graders when the same test was administered to large samples of

students in these grades in Colombia in 1999.55              Applying random-effects regression

analysis to teachers rather than classrooms reveals that the estimated variance of true

teacher effects is 51.5 (p<0.001),56 which is less than half the estimated variance of the

estimated teacher effects from the fixed effects analysis (139.5).            In this case, the

estimated inter-quartile spread in true fixed-effects is 9.2 points.

          These findings suggest two complementary lessons.               First, consistent with

parents’ beliefs, some teachers are much more effective than others in helping students

learn mathematics. Second, consistent with the beliefs of many teachers, average student


53
     F96,2986=4.30***.
54
     The χ2 test statistic (1 degree of freedom) is 337.2.
55
     UNESCO, p.258.
56
     The χ2 test statistic (1 degree of freedom) is 418.2.

                                                       34
test scores, adjusted for student background characteristics, are quite unreliable measures

of teacher effectiveness.



Is It Teachers Or Classrooms That Matter?
       To answer this question, we tested for the equality of the classroom fixed effects

among groups of classrooms taught by the same teacher (after controlling for student

background characteristics). We reject the global null hypothesis that there were no

differences in the average achievement (net of student background characteristics) of
                                                            57
students in different classes taught be the same teacher.        This is important because it

means that it is possible, in subsequent analyses, for class size and peer group effects to

make a difference in explaining why student achievement is higher in some classrooms

than in others taught by the same teacher.

       Before turning to the roles of specific classroom attributes in predicting student

math achievement, we summarize briefly the impacts of those student-level

characteristics that have the strongest impacts on student achievement within-classrooms

(see Appendix Table A2, first column of estimates in top half). First, as many other

studies have shown, a student’s achievement score at the end of one grade (4th) is a strong

predictor of the student’s achievement at the end of the next grade (5th). Second, on

average, boys outperform girls by an average of 8 points (p<.001). Third, younger

students perform slightly better on average than older students (p<.001), a likely result of

accumulated academic failure among the latter. Fourth, 5th grade mathematics

achievement also depends upon school attendance. Students who were absent one



                                             35
additional day in the two weeks before the math test was administered have scores that

are 1.9 points less, on average (p<.001).



Do peer-group composition and class size matter to student mathematics achievement?

          As other researchers have pointed out,58 the estimation of peer effects and class

size effects has often been biased as a result of failing to account for the non-random

assignment of students to teachers. To minimize this problem, we rely on variation in

peer groups among classes taught by the same teacher in the same school.

          Columns 2 through 4 of Table 2 contain estimates of parameters from Models 2a,

2b, and 2c, which include fixed effects for teachers and different combinations of the two

class-specific predictors, class size and peer group composition. As indicated in Models

2b and 2c in columns 3 and 4, the point estimates suggest that students in classrooms in

which their peers have more educated mothers achieve higher mathematics scores.

While the relevant coefficients in the teacher fixed effects models are not statistically

significant, they are similar in value to the statistically significant coefficients in the

analogous models fitted with random effects in columns 6 and 7 of Table 2.59

          Based on the fitted fixed effects from Model 2b in column 3, a one SD difference

57
     F=7.1, p<0.001.
58
      Caroline M. Hoxby, “Peer Effects in the Classroom: Learning from Gender and Race Variation,”
      NBER Working Paper 7867 (August 2000); McEwan, “Peer Effects on Student Achievement”; Boozer
      and Cacciola.
59
     In essence, the parameter estimates from the fixed effects models are less biased than those from the
      analogous random effects models. On the other hand, because there are only 13 teachers in our sample
      who teach multiple classes, the standard errors of the estimates from fixed effects models will be larger
      than those from random-effect models, resulting in a loss of power when making statistical inferences.
      Fortunately, the estimated peer effects from the fixed effects and random effects models (in Table 2)
      are very similar, so we can conclude that the random effects model provides unbiased estimates after


                                                      36
in the average value of mothers’ education is associated with a 0.150 std. dev. difference

in individual students’ math achievement. This is a little more than half the size of the

analogous peer group effect of 0.287 SD estimated by McEwan60 using data from Chile.

The difference may stem from differences in the age of the students, or differences in

model specification -- our model controls for unobserved teacher characteristics. Our

estimate of the magnitude of the peer effect is almost identical to that found by Graham

in his analysis of the Tennessee STAR experiment.61

          Bryan Graham62 provides a more powerful method of detecting the contribution

of peer effects to achievement. His rationale begins with the observation that, if peer

effects on student achievement do exist, there will be greater between-classroom

variation in student achievement than one would expect in the absence of peer effects. In

other words, “excess” between-group variation will be present. Of course, in a setting in

which each teacher teaches only a single classroom, the presence of excess variance

could simply reflect the impact of heterogeneity in teacher quality and not peer effects.

But, in our sample, some teachers teach multiple classes of students and so we can use a

variant of Graham’s method to separate peer and teacher effects providing we assume



     all. As such, we can use the (more precise) standard errors from the analogous random effects model
     to make statistical inferences.
60
     McEwan, “Peer Effects on Student Achievement”. Given our identification strategy, it is possible that
     the “peer effect” actually reflects differences in the effectiveness with which the same teacher teaches
     groups of students with different characteristics.
61
     We also tried estimating peer effects using an alternate measure of peer composition: the percentage of
     students in classroom j with two parents. In the fixed effects specification (Model 2b), a 1 percent
     difference in the number of children from a two-parent family results in a 35.3 point difference in a
     classroom’s average test score (and is statistically significant at the 5 percent level). Thus using this
     alternate measure also leads us to conclude that peer effects are statistically significant in our dataset.
62
     Bryan Graham, "Using Conditional Excess Variance Contrasts to Identify Social Interactions: Theory
     and an Application on the Relationship Between Peer Groups and Academic Achievement,” Harvard
     University Department of Economics (September 2004).

                                                      37
that “teaching quality” is constant across classrooms taught by the same teacher.63                      In

this application, excess between-classroom variation across classrooms taught by the

same teacher can be attributed to peer group effects. To implement Graham’s approach,

we therefore use data from the students of teachers with multiple classrooms to estimate

the actual between-classroom variance in student achievement, as well that which would

be expected were there no peer effects.64 If the ratio of these two variances is greater than

1, then positive peer effects are present.             We find an excess variance ratio of 2.2,

suggesting the presence of peer effects. However, due to the small sample size and the

modest variation in peer composition among classrooms taught by the same teacher, we

cannot reject the null hypothesis that the magnitude of the ratio is different from unity.65

        Returning to Table 2, the estimates from Models 2a and 2c (in columns 2 and 4)

indicate that class size is a statistically significant predictor of student achievement.

(Figure A2 in the appendix presents this fitted relationship.) Based on this fitted model,

students in a classroom with 30 students are predicted to score 0.35 standard deviations

higher (13.5 points) than students in a classroom with 40 students. The magnitude of the

impact is quite similar to that reported by Urquiola in Bolivia and Angrist and Lavy in

Israel (who find that mathematics achievement is 0.24-0.45. and 0.46 of a standard

deviation higher in a class that is 10 students smaller, respectively).

        Notice in Table 2 that while class size is a strong predictor of student achievement

in the models fitted with teacher fixed effects, this is not the case in the models fitted with


63
     Although a reasonable assumption, it is nonetheless restrictive; for example, teachers may be more or
     less effective when teaching material for the first time, or in the morning, etc.
64
     See Graham’s paper for details of the estimation of the actual and expected variances.
65
   F = 0.67; df=1, 31; p=0.4193.

                                                    38
classroom random effects. The explanation is that, in the Bogotá schools included in our

sample, the most effective teachers were assigned to work with the largest classes.

Consequently, we argue that estimates of the class size effect from the random effects

models – that do not fully control for differences in teacher quality – are biased.

        One implication of this pattern is that estimates of the relative effectiveness of

individual teachers taken from models that control for class size and peer group effects

are quite different from estimates taken from models that do not control for these factors.

For example, one teacher in our sample ranked 43rd in terms of average student

achievement when only the student level characteristics were controlled; this teacher

ranked first when both peer-group composition and class size were included as

predictors. Figure 1 displays plots that present the sample distribution of the estimated

coefficients on the teacher fixed-effects from fitted Model 1b, and Models 2b and 2c.

Notice that variation in estimated teacher quality is much larger when estimated from

fitted Model 2c, which controls for class size, than when derived from the fitted models

that do not. The explanation is that more effective teachers were assigned to the largest

classes in the data set. The net result is that differences in class size, when not taken into

account, reduce the estimated variation in teacher quality. This finding raises serious

questions about school accountability initiatives that attribute differences in average

student achievement across classrooms solely to differences in teacher quality.



Does School Sector Matter to Student Achievement?

       As shown in Table 1, students who attended private schools in our Bogotá dataset


                                             39
are more economically advantaged, on average, than those students who attended public

schools. Private school students are less likely to live in mother-headed families than are

public school students. Their mothers have more education, on average, than the mothers

of public school students. The differences in individual student characteristics between

public and private schools naturally result in corresponding differences in the

characteristics of peer-groups by sector. As a result, public school students have less

advantaged peer groups than do private school students. Public school students are also

likely to study in classrooms with larger class sizes than are private school students.

       One respect in which public school students have a potential advantage over

students in private schools is in the academic preparation and experience of their

teachers. No public school teacher in the sample has less than six years of teaching

experience in contrast to 28 percent of private school teachers. While almost 70 percent

of public school teachers have a Master’s Degree or are working towards one, the

corresponding figure for private school teachers is 12 percent. As explained earlier, this

pattern stems primarily from the public school teacher salary scale and its applicability to

private schools.    The salary schedule provides strong incentives for public school

teachers to gain educational credentials and to remain in teaching. The requirement that

private schools pay teachers according to this same schedule creates incentives for private

schools to avoid highly experienced teachers with significant educational credentials

because they are very expensive. One-third of private school teachers are on the first step

of the salary scale. No public school teachers are on the first step and more than 95

percent are on the top half of the scale.


                                             40
       We turn now to the question of whether the differences in peer groups, class sizes,

and teacher characteristics contribute to differences in the achievement of students

attending schools in the two sectors. The average achievement difference between the

two sectors can be found in Table 3, as indicated by the estimated coefficient of

PRIVATE in the different specifications of Model 3. We also illustrate the variability in

average student achievement among groups of students taught by different teachers in

each sector by plotting the estimated teacher fixed effects from Models 1 and 2 by sector

(see Figure 2).

       Panel A of Figure 2 displays the distribution of average teacher-specific fifth

grade student math scores in public schools and private schools in the sample. The mean

of the distribution for students in private schools is 8 points higher than the mean for

students in public schools (based on the estimated coefficient of PRIVATE for Model

3a* in Table 3, which does not include the student-level controls). This is not a surprise

given the difference between the average socioeconomic status of private school students

and public school students.     What is striking is the wide variation in teacher-specific

average achievement among teachers in both sectors. This highlights that private schools

in the sample do not all serve high achieving students.

       Panel B of Figure 2 displays the distribution of predicted average student

achievement for different teachers, after controlling for student background

characteristics including pre-score, by sector (i.e. the teacher fixed effects from Model

1b). The difference in the adjusted average achievement of students in the two sectors is

0.8 points (0.02 SD) and not statistically significantly different from zero, based on the


                                            41
results of Model 3a in Table 3. This estimate is much smaller than the Colombian

estimate from Somers, McEwan and Willms (0.32 SD), even though both estimates were

obtained from a similar model, and from datasets of students of comparable age. It is

also smaller than that reported by Angrist et al. in their evaluation of the voucher

experiment in Colombia (0.29 SD). A plausible explanation is that the mix of private

schools in the country as a whole is different from the mix of private schools in our

Bogotá sample.     (The statistically significant variation in predicted average student

achievement among students taught by different private school teachers indicates how

sensitive the size of the “private school effect” is to the composition of the private school

sample.)

       Panel C of Figure 2 displays the distribution of predicted average achievement of

students taught by different teachers taken from fitted Model 2b, which controls for peer

group as well as for student background, by sector. Net of student background and the

peer group effect, the adjusted achievement of students in private school classes is four

points lower than that of students in the public sector (or 0.10 SD), based on the results of

Model 3b in Table 3. This highlights that a high SES peer group is one of the relative

advantages many private schools offer. However, again it is striking how great the

variation in average student achievement is among students enrolled in the classes of

different private school teachers.

       Finally, Panel D of Figure 2 displays the distribution of predicted average

achievement of students taught by different teachers taken from fitted Model 2c, which

controls for class size as well as for peer group and student background characteristics.


                                             42
The adjusted mean achievement for private school students is now 14.5 points lower than

the analogous mean for public school students, based on the results of Model 3c in Table

3. The explanation is that class size and peer groups matter to student achievement and,

on average, class sizes are smaller and peer groups are more advantaged in the private

sector.

          Interpreting the estimated teacher fixed effects displayed in Panel D as our best

estimates of teacher quality, the wide range of quality estimates for private school

teachers is remarkable, especially relative to the magnitude of the variation in estimated

effectiveness among public school teachers. The best private school teachers appear to

be better than the best public school teachers, while the worst private school teachers

appear to be considerably less effective than the worst public school teachers.66

Unfortunately, we do not know whether the least effective private school teachers are

more likely to be dismissed for poor performance than the weakest public school

teachers.

          These findings raise the question of whether there is a statistically significant

difference in the variation of teacher quality between the public and private sectors. As

previously discussed, the estimated variance of the estimated teacher fixed effects is

inflated by the errors of estimation, such that we must once again use random effects

regression analysis to better estimate the variance in true teacher effects. To achieve this,

we fit the following regression model, in which we permit the variance of the teacher

66
     It is important to point out that we do not know for sure that the average differences in achievement
     among students in classrooms taught by different teachers represent teacher effects. Although we do
     control for class size and one measure of peer group composition, it is possible that there are also


                                                     43
random effects to differ by sector:



         Yijk = β 0 + β 1 S ijk + β 2 PRIVATE jk + (η k I k + ν k Dk + ε ijk )



where ηk and vk are sector-specific teacher random-effects, and Ik and Dk are indicator

variables such that Ik=1 if a student’s school is public, and Dk =1 if a student’s school is

private, otherwise they are set to zero. By comparing the -2*(log likelihood) statistic of

this sector-heterogeneous teacher random effects model to that of a model with sector-

homogeneous teacher random effects, we can test whether permitting a sector-specific

error structure significantly contributes to model fit. This is equivalent to testing the null

hypothesis that the population variances of teacher random effects in the public and

private sectors are identical, σ η2 = σ v2 . We find that the sector-specific variances of the

teacher random effects are 64.8 in the public sector and almost double – 123.2 – in the

private sector.      Again, because of low statistical power, we cannot reject the null

hypothesis that the variance of the true teacher random effects is the same across

sectors.67

         In conclusion, the panels of Figure 2 shed light on differences in the ways that

public schools and private schools “produce” student achievement. As indicated in Panel

B, on average, private schools in our Bogotá sample are as effective as public schools in


     unmeasured classroom-specific differences that account for some of the classroom-specific
     achievement differences.
67
     χ2= 2.1, df=1, p=0.147.



                                                   44
producing student achievement. However, schools in the two sectors use very different

mixes of resources. On average, private schools have less skilled teachers than public

schools, but they compensate by having smaller classes and somewhat more advantaged

student peers.


Do Teacher Qualifications and Experience matter to Student Achievement?

       The difference between the two sectors in the average quality of teachers and the

extraordinary variation in teacher quality among teachers in the private sector prompts

the question: do teaching experience and educational credentials, the attributes rewarded

in the national teachers’ contract, also predict teaching performance?

       To answer this question, we fitted the set of regression models presented in Table

4 that estimate the effects of teacher education and years of experience on student

mathematics achievement, with classrooms treated as a random effect. An important

disadvantage of using a random effects specification, however, is that the estimated

effects of class size and peer composition will be biased, given that these variables may

be correlated with unobserved teacher quality. In estimating Models 4a and 4b, we

therefore constrain the parameters associated with the peer group and class size predictors

to their values estimated in the fixed effects analysis (Model 2c), which are not biased by

unobserved teacher quality. For comparative purposes, we display the results from fitting

these models with the peer group and class size parameters left unconstrained (Models 4c

and 4d).

       Figure 3 illustrates the fitted relationship between student achievement and

teacher experience from Model 4b (which does not control for sector). Notice that the

                                            45
slope of this relationship is quite steep during a teacher’s first years in the classroom,

after which the fitted relationship becomes flatter. This supports the findings from other

recent studies which suggest that the greatest gains from additional experience occur

during the first years of teaching.68 Notice, however, that in Models 4c and 4d the

coefficient on this predictor is close to zero, suggesting that more experienced teachers

appear to be assigned to larger classes and the most needy groups of students, thus

exerting a compensatory effect that neutralizes the effects of experience.

         Notice in Models 4a and 4b that teachers who have less than a four-year college

education are less effective, on average, than those with a four year degree. Nine percent

of the teachers in private schools in the sample have less than a four-year degree

compared to two percent of public school teachers. Thus, differences in educational

credentials and years of teaching experience help to explain the difference between the

average quality of private school teachers and those of public school teachers.

         It is also important to point out that the estimates for Models 4a and 4b indicate

that teachers with educational credentials beyond a four-year degree (EDLEVEL4) are

not more effective, on average, than are those with a four-year degree. This supports the

view of many Bogotá school officials that a salary schedule that rewards post-graduate

educational credentials is not an efficient use of scarce resources.

         A final pattern to notice is that the percentage of the variation in student

achievement explained by Model 4b (20.6) – a random effects model that includes

predictors for teacher experience and educational credentials – is much lower than the

68
     Other studies that show this same pattern include Hanushek, Kain and Rivkin; Murnane and Phillips;
     and Rockoff.

                                                   46
percentage of variation explained by Model 2c (35.1), a model that includes fixed effects

for teachers. The explanation is that, while information on educational credentials and

years of teaching experience do indeed play a role in predicting teacher quality, they

explain only a modest part of the variation in effectiveness among teachers in enhancing

student achievement.


VI.        Lessons

       We conclude by describing four lessons about the consequences of initiatives by

the Bogotá government to greatly expand access to elementary school education. First, it

is likely that expanding access led to a decline in the average quality of education. One

mechanism through which this took place is that class sizes in public school classrooms

increased. Another is that private schools hired teachers with relatively low skills. The

likely decline in average quality does not mean that expanding access was a mistake –

only that, given severe resource constraints, it was not accomplished without cost.

       The second lesson is that the government’s two-pronged strategy for expanding

access seems quite efficient, given the assumption that it was unable politically to change

the structure of public school teachers’ compensation schedule or prevent its extension to

private schools. Public schools, with very experienced and highly educated teachers,

were told to serve more students. They responded by having the most skilled teachers

teach the largest classes. It was probably less expensive to subsidize private schools that

served low-income students than it was to educate the children in public schools. While

schools in the two sectors produced achievement with quite different input mixes, on

average, they were equally effective in producing student achievement.

                                            47
         The third lesson concerns the teacher salary schedule. Our evidence indicates that

teachers with education beyond a four-year college degree were not more effective in

producing student achievement than teachers with a four-year degree were. Thus, unless

it could be demonstrated that the most highly educated teachers made contributions

greater than other teachers in respects not measured by test scores, challenging the

structure of the salary scale may be a way to improve efficiency.

         Finally, the importance of peer groups in influencing student achievement creates

a difficult public policy problem. Peer group effects create strong incentives for parents

with resources to try to place their children in schools with advantaged peers and for

schools interested in attracting students from such families to specialize in serving such

families. The resulting sorting by socioeconomic status widens inequality in access to

good schooling. Evidence from New Zealand and Chile demonstrates that such sorting by

socioeconomic status does take place in large scale voucher plans in which the value of

the voucher is the same for all students.69

         One way to reduce the likelihood of sorting by socioeconomic status is to use

differentially valued vouchers that create incentives for schools to attract students whom

they would otherwise spurn.70 This idea has a long history.71 To date, there has been no

significant trial of a school choice system with differentially valued vouchers.

         The value of vouchers is only one of many critical details in the design of a

voucher system. Others concern whether schools can charge families more than the value

69
     On New Zealand, see Fiske and Ladd ; on Chile, see Chang-Tai Hsieh and Miguel Urquiola.
70
     Caroline M. Hoxby, Ideal Vouchers (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University unpublished manuscript,
     2001); Dennis Epple and Richard Romano, “Education Vouchers and Cream-Skimming,” NBER
     Working Paper 9354 (November 2002).

                                                 48
of a child’s voucher, the quality of information available on school performance, the

process through which spaces are allocated in schools for which demand exceeds supply,

rules about dismissing difficult students, and the availability of free transportation. By

influencing the options available to low income families and the attractiveness of

participation to potential suppliers of school services, these details are likely to influence

how an educational voucher system would influence the quality of education provided to

children from different backgrounds.

         Perhaps the most important lesson from this paper for the debate over school

vouchers is that the concept of unregulated markets is of little value in predicting

outcomes. The reason is that, in the language of economics, peer group effects are

externalities, and unregulated, competitive markets do not produce an efficient allocation

of resources when externalities are present. Any school choice system will be a system

with regulations. It is important to pay attention to how, in the face of peer group effects,

parents choosing schools and entrepreneurs with different motivations for starting schools

respond to the detailed regulations that define a choice system. These responses will

determine how the system influences the quality of education provided to children from

different backgrounds.




71
     See the discussion in Murnane, “The role of markets in American K-12”.

                                                  49
                                        Table 1
             Descriptive Statistics on Outcome and Predictors, by Sector

VARIABLE        FULL SAMPLE             PUBLIC                  PRIVATE
                n students =3,095       n students=1,435        n students=1,660
                n classrooms=97         n classrooms=38         n classrooms=59
                n teachers=77           n teachers=29           n teachers=48
                n schools=73            n schools=26            n schools=47
OUTCOME VARIABLE
MSCORE          297.6 (39.1)            292.3 (38.1)            302.2 (39.4)

STUDENT-LEVEL CONTROL PREDICTORS

PRETEST         200.2 (50.1)            191.2 (49.4)            207.9 (49.4)
FEMALE          .57                     .59                     .56
AGE             10.8 (.97)              11.0 (1.1)              10.7 (.83)
DAYABS          .65 (1.4)               .73 (1.5)               .58 (1.3)
MHH             .25                     .27                     .22
MOTHED1         .06                     .09                     .04
MOTHED2         .26                     .32                     .20
MOTHED3         .37                     .40                     .35
MOTHED4         .31                     .19                     .41
BOOKS           0 (1.00)                -.16 (1.16)             .14 (.81)
HWHELP1         .07                     .07                     .07
HWHELP2         .81                     .8                      .82
HWHELP3         .12                     .13                     .11

CLASS-LEVEL PREDICTORS
CLMOTHED        2.9 (.48)               2.7 (.37)               3.1 (.47)
CLASS SIZE      36.8 (8.5)              40.2 (3.8)              33.9 (10.1)

TEACHER PREDICTORS
EDLEVEL1        .05                     .02                     .07
EDLEVEL2        .01                     0                       .02
EDLEVEL3        .49                     .30                     .65
EDLEVEL4        .38                     .68                     .12
EDLEVEL5        .07                     0                       .13
TEAEXP          16.2 (9.8)              19.9 (7.7)              12.9 (10.1)

                                         50
                                      Table 2
Fixed and Random Effects Regression Models Showing the Estimated Effects of Peer-
 Group Composition and Class Size on Students’ 5th grade Mathematics Achievement
                                       Score
               (n students=3,095; n classrooms =97; n teachers=77)


                        TEACHER FIXED EFFECTS                    CLASSROOM RANDOM EFFECTS

                        2a          2b            2c             2a (r.e.)      2b (r.e.)       2c (r.e.)
CLASS-LEVEL PREDICTORS
 CLMOTHED                         12.199        7.932                          13.805***      12.698***
 CLASSIZE            26.534*                   23.919~            -0.483                        -1.011

Goodness of Fit
R2 “overall”           0.351      0.350         0.351             0.290           0.312          0.312
~p<.10; *p<.05; **p<.01; ***p<.001


Notes: Class-size is represented by a modified log transformation described in Section 3 of the text. Under

this transformation, smaller values of class size correspond to larger values in the transformed predictor.

Coefficients associated with the teacher fixed effects and the control predictors have been omitted from the

table to save space. The regression coefficients associated with the control predictors can be found in

Appendix Table A2.




                                                    51
                                       Figure 1
Sample distribution of estimated regression coefficients on the teacher fixed-effects, by
                                  model specification
             400
   Teacher Fixed Effects
    300      250  350




                           Student Controls (Model 1b)          + Peer Composition (Model 2b)
                           + Class Size (Model 2c)




                                             52
                                         Table 3
      Taxonomy of Classroom Random effects Regression Models Estimating the
     Effects of School Sector on Students’ 5th grade Mathematics Achievement Score
                   (n students=3,095; n classrooms=97; n teachers=77)


                                                                       3b                         3c
                                                                 (coefficient on          (coefficients on
                             3a*                   3a
                                                                 CLMOTHED                 Class Size and
                      (no student-level
                                                                constrained to its         CLMOTHED
                          controls)
                                                                 value in Model            constrained to
                                                                       2b)                 their values in
                                                                                             Model 2c

CLASS-LEVEL PREDICTORS
 CLMOTHED                                                            (12.199)                 (7.932)
 CLASSIZE                                                                                    (23.919)

SCHOOL SECTOR (PRIVATE=1)
 PRIVATE          8.239*                         0.754               -3.789~                -14.502***


Goodness of Fit
R2 “within”                 0.009                0.200                 0.201                   0.201
 2
R “between”                 0.050                0.650                 0.681                   0.294
 2
R “overall”                 0.025                0.290                 0.316                   0.195

~p<.10; *p<.05; **p<.01; ***p<.001

Notes: Regression coefficients for control variables can be found in Appendix Table A2.




                                                   53
                                        Figure 2
  Distribution of Estimated Teacher Fixed Effects by Sector and Model Specification
(Panel B is based on fitted Model 1; Panel C is based on fitted Model 2b; and Panel D is
                               based on fitted Model 2c)


                                                                Panel A                                                                                                              Panel B
                                                     Unadjusted Teacher Fixed-Effects                                                                      Teacher Fixed-Effects Adjusted for Student-Level Controls (M1)
240 260 280 300 320 340 360 380 400 420




                                                                                                            240 260 280 300 320 340 360 380 400 420
                                               Private                                  Public                                                                     Private                                Public




                                                                Panel C                                                                                                             Panel D
                                          Teacher Fixed-Effects Adjusted for Peer-Group SES (M2b)                                                     Teacher Fixed-Effects Adjusted for Peer-Group SES and Class Size (M2c)
240 260 280 300 320 340 360 380 400 420




                                                                                                         240 260 280 300 320 340 360 380 400 420




                                               Private                                  Public                                                                    Private                                 Public




                                                                                                    54
                                         Table 4
           Taxonomy of Fitted Constrained and Unconstrained Random effects
           Models Showing the Estimated Effects of Teacher Characteristics on
                  Students’ 5th grade Mathematics Achievement Score
                  (n students=3,095; n classrooms =97; n teachers=77)


                   CLASSROOM RANDOM EFFECTS
                                                                 CLASSROOM RANDOM EFFECTS
                    (with Class Size and CLMOTHED
                                                                     (Unconstrained Models)
                     constrained to the values of their
                      estimates in Fitted Model 2c)
                         4a                    4b                       4c                   4d

CLASS-LEVEL PREDICTORS
 CLMOTHED              (7.932)              (7.932)                 16.154***            15.694***
 CLASSIZE              (23.919)             (23.919)                  -0.802                -1.033

SCHOOL SECTOR (PRIVATE=1)
 PRIVATE        -12.695*                                               -1.603

TEACHER PREDICTORS
Teacher Years of Experience
 L_TEAXP                3.796                5.918*                    0.097                0.327
Teacher Level of Education (Licensure or EDLEVEL3 omitted category)
 EDLEV1                -10.673              -11.842                    -2.766               -2.840
 EDLEV2                -23.592~             -27.053*                   -2.345               -2.683
                                                                               ~
 EDLEV4                 -3.479               2.405                    4.837                 5.438*
 EDLEV5                 5.107                3.233                     -2.405               -2.838
Test of joint            5.55                 7.05                      4.70                7.98~
significance of
EDLEV
(Chi-square)

Goodness of Fit
R2 “overall”            0.251                0.206                     0.318                0.318
~p<.10; *p<.05; **p<.01; ***p<.001


Note: Estimated regression parameters associated with the control predictors can be found in Appendix
Table A2.




                                                     55
                                         Figure 3
                                                                     th
      Fitted Relationship between 5 Grade Mathematics Achievement Score and
 Years of Teacher Experience for a Prototypical Student in a Classroom of Average Size
                              and Average Peer-Group SES
                                    (from Model 4b)
                 (n students = 3,095; n classrooms = 97; n teachers=77)



                                 310


                                 290
Fitted 5th G rade M ath S core




                                 270


                                 250


                                 230


                                 210


                                 190


                                 170
                                       1   3   5   7   9   11   13        15   17    19   21   23   25   27   29   31   33   35

                                                                Years of Teacher Experience




                                                                                56
                        Appendix Figures and Tables
                                    Figure A1
                        Sampling Process for the Two-Wave
                                 Data Collection




                                     SELECTED SAMPLE
                                           102 schools
                                      (59 Private, 43 Public)




 REFUSED 1999
    14 schools
(5 Private, 9 Public




                              ACHIEVED SAMPLE 1999

                             88 schools (54 Private, 34 Public)
                                      3,993 students




 REFUSED 2000                                                     Non-matched students 1999
     15 schools                                                             897
(7 Private, 8 Public)
    663 Students


                                     SAMPLE 2000
                                73 schools (47 private, 26
                                         public)
                                 77 mathematics teachers
                                     99 Classrooms
                                 3,149 5th grade students




                                                                     “New” students 2000
                                                                             714


                                   Two classrooms
                                 excluded because of
                                      tracking




                              FINAL ANALYTIC SAMPLE
                                 73 schools (47 private, 26
                                          public)
                                  77 mathematics
                                             57 teachers
                                      97 Classrooms
                                  3,095 5th grade students
                                    Table A1
              Description of Outcome, Predictor and Control Variables


VARIABLE         DEFINITION


OUTCOME VARIABLE

 MSCORE          Student mathematics achievement score on a standardized test administered at the
                 end of 5th grade (possible score range = 0 to 492 points).


STUDENT-LEVEL CONTROL PREDICTORS

 FORM            Dichotomous variable indicating test form (0 = Form B, 1= Form A)

 PRETEST         Student achievement on a mathematics and language test administered at the end of
                 4th grade (possible score range = 0 to 306 points).

 AGE             Student age at the end of the 5th grade school year (years).

 FEMALE          Dichotomous variable indicating student’s gender (0 = male, 1 = female)

 MOTHED          Ordinal variable indicating mother’s educational level (0 = no education, 1 =
                 incomplete primary, 2 = complete primary, 3 = incomplete secondary and, 4 =
                 complete secondary and beyond).

 MHH             Dichotomous variable indicating whether the student’s mother is the head of the
                 household (0=no,1=yes)

 DAYABS          Number of days that the student was absent from school in the last 2 weeks.

 HWHELP          System of dummy variables that indicate the frequency with which the student
                 receives help with homework at home (1 = never, 2 = sometimes, 3 = always). In
                 our analyses, HWHELP = 3 (always receives help) acts as the reference category.

 BOOKS           PCA-based composite measure constructed from multiple indicators of the
                 availability of books, story-books, and encyclopedias in a student’s home.
                 Standardized to a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one, with positive
                 scores indicating better availability.


CLASSROOM PEER-GROUP COMPOSITION and CLASS SIZE

 CLMOTHED        “Leave-out” classroom average level of students’ mother’s education.

 CLMEAN          “Leave-out” classroom mean score on the pretest.

 CLASSIZE        Continuous variable indicating number of students enrolled in the classroom


                                              58
TEACHER CHARACTERISTICS

 EDLEVEL        Ordinal variable indicating the teacher’s maximum educational level (either
                obtained or in process of obtaining). In our analyses, we converted this variable
                into a system of dichotomous (dummy) predictors, EDLEVEL1 through
                EDLEVEL5 (1 = Pedagogical high school, 2 = Educational Technology 3 =
                Licensure in Education, 4 = Postgraduate courses including Master’s degree or
                specialization in education, 5=other professional qualification). EDLEVEL3
                (licensure) was omitted from our analyses as a reference category.

 TEAEXP         Continuous variable indicating the total number of years that the teacher has been
                in the teaching profession.

 SSCALE         Ordinal variable indicating the teacher’s step on the salary scale (1-14)


SCHOOL CHARACTERISTICS

 PRIVATE        Dichotomous variable indicating whether the school is public or private (1 =
                private, 0 = public)




                                             59
                                       Table A2
    Estimated Regression Coefficients Associated with Control Predictors, by Model

                 Model 1a Model 1b Model 2a Model 2b Model 2c Model 2a Model 2b Model 2c
                                                               (r.e.)   (r.e.)   (r.e.)
 Constant       296.312*** 296.546*** 296.546*** 296.586*** 296.572*** 296.027*** 295.945*** 296.091***
 FORM            -6.277*** -6.325*** -6.328*** -6.335*** -6.334*** -6.440*** -6.403*** -6.457***
 PRETEST         0.308***   0.301*** 0.302***      0.302***       0.303***    0.329***    0.314***    0.310***
 PRETEST SQ      0.001***   0.001*** 0.001***      0.001***       0.001***    0.001***    0.001***    0.001***
 FEMALE         -8.172*** -8.180*** -8.160*** -8.145*** -8.140*** -7.358*** -8.125*** -8.160***
 AGE            -2.734*** -2.636*** -2.579*** -2.649*** -2.593*** -2.160**                -2.311**    -2.214**
 AGE SQ           -0.841*   -0.896** -0.906**      -0.885**       -0.897**    -1.003**    -0.840*     -0.869*
 DAYABS         -1.853*** -1.758*** -1.807*** -1.762*** -1.805*** -1.939*** -1.888*** -1.832***
 MHH             4.626***   4.371*** 4.385***      4.395***       4.399***    4.521***    4.730***    4.702***
 BOOKS           2.395***   2.479*** 2.453***      2.465***       2.446***    2.693***    2.363***    2.404***
 HWHELP1         7.734**     7.735** 7.792**       7.672**        7.745**     7.650**     7.695**     7.626**
 HWHELP2         7.600***   7.627*** 7.592***      7.528***       7.526***    7.374***    7.503***    7.463***
 MOTHED            0.512      0.606    0.579       0.936          0.796       1.868**     0.991       0.974
                 Model 3a Model 3b     Model 3c Model 3d Model 4a Model 4b Model 4c Model 4d
 Constant       292.310*** 295.540*** 298.140*** 300.424*** 292.056*** 277.394*** 295.328*** 293.681***

 FORM            -6.782*** -6.447*** -6.401*** -6.359*** -6.353*** -6.351*** -6.389*** -6.392***
 PRETEST                    0.329***    0.318***       0.313***    0.311***    0.309***    0.313***    0.312***
 PRETEST SQ                 0.001***    0.001***       0.001***    0.001***    0.001***    0.001***    0.001***
 FEMALE                     -7.307*** -8.094*** -7.665*** -7.809*** -7.882*** -8.512*** -8.524***
 AGE                        -2.134**   -2.343*** -2.517*** -2.570*** -2.561*** -2.417*** -2.400***
 AGE SQ                     -1.005**    -0.873**       -0.922**    -0.898**    -0.883**    -0.827*     -0.826*
 DAYABS                     -1.938*** -1.896*** -1.866*** -1.860*** -1.865*** -1.894*** -1.899***
 MHH                        4.517***    4.660***       4.413***    4.469***    4.426***    4.801***    4.824***
 BOOKS                      2.683***    2.456***       2.460***    2.442***    2.405***    2.388***    2.381***
 HWHELP1                     7.603**    7.854**        7.697**     7.707**     7.662**     8.044**     8.024**
 HWHELP2                    7.348***    7.577***       7.531***    7.568***    7.544***    7.712***    7.695***
 MOTHED                      1.850*      1.244~         1.044       0.998       0.899       1.055       1.042
~p<.10; *p<.05; **p<.01; ***p<.001




                                                  60
                                                  Figure A2
              Plot Displaying the Fitted Relationship between Students’ 5th Grade Mathematics
                                     Achievement Score and Class Size,
                   for a Prototypical Student in a Classroom of Average Peer-Group SES
                                            (Based on Model 2c)
                            (n students=3,095; n classrooms=97; n teachers=77 )




                              370
Fitted 5th Grade Math Score




                              320




                              270




                              220




                              170
                                    25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45
                                                     Number of Students in Classroom




                                                             61
