                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 RETHINKING THE GAINS FROM
                                  IMMIGRATION: THEORY AND
                                    EVIDENCE FROM THE U.S.

                                       Gianmarco I.P. Ottaviano
                                            Giovanni Peri

                                         Working Paper 11672
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11672


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2005




Gianmarco I.P. Ottaviano, Department of Economics, University of Bologna, Strada Maggiore 45, 40125
Bologna, Italy. Email: ottavian@economia.unibo.it. Giovanni Peri, Department of Economics, UC Davis,
One Shields Avenue, Davis, CA 95616. Email: gperi@ucdavis.edu. We thank Moshe Buchinski, Jan
Bruekner, Gerri Carlino, Gordon Hanson, Francesc Ortega, Ronald Rogowski, Duncan Thomas, Etienne
Wasmer and participants to seminars at the NBER ITI group, CEPR ERWIT, University of Southern
California, UC Irvine, UCLA, UC Riverside, Claremont McKenna College and the Philadelphia FED for
helpful comments and discussion. Ahmed Rahman provided invaluable help in the editing of the paper.
Ottaviano is grateful to FEEM and MIUR for financial support. Peri acknowledges the UCLA International
Institute for partially funding this project. Errors are ours. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Gianmarco I.P. Ottaviano and Giovanni Peri. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Rethinking the Gains from Immigration: Theory and Evidence from the U.S.
Gianmarco I.P. Ottaviano and Giovanni Peri
NBER Working Paper No. 11672
September 2005
JEL No. F22, J61, J31, R13

                                           ABSTRACT



Recent influential empirical work has emphasized the negative impact immigrants have on the wages

of U.S.-born workers, arguing that immigration harms less educated American workers in particular

and all U.S.-born workers in general. Because U.S. and foreign born workers belong to different skill

groups that are imperfectly substitutable, one needs to articulate a production function that

aggregates different types of labor (and accounts for complementarity and substitution effects) in

order to calculate the various effects of immigrant labor on U.S.-born labor. We introduce such a

production function, making the crucial assumption that U.S. and foreign-born workers with similar

education and experience levels may nevertheless be imperfectly substitutable, and allowing for

endogenous capital accumulation. This function successfully accounts for the negative impact of the

relative skill levels of immigrants on the relative wages of U.S. workers. However, contrary to the

findings of previous literature, overall immigration generates a large positive effect on the average

wages of U.S.-born workers. We show evidence of this positive effect by estimating the impact of

immigration on both average wages and housing values across U.S. metropolitan areas (1970-2000).

We also reproduce this positive effect by simulating the behavior of average wages and housing

prices in an open city-economy, with optimizing U.S.-born agents who respond to an inflow of

foreign-born workers of the size and composition comparable to the immigration of the 1990s.

Gianmarco I.P. Ottaviano                              Giovanni Peri
Dip. di Scienze Economiche                            Department of Economics
Università di Bologna                                 University of California, Davis
Strada Maggiore 45                                    One Shields Avenue
40125 Bologna                                         Davis, CA 95616
ITALY                                                 and NBER
ottavian@economia.unibo.it                            gperi@ucdavis.edu
1     Introduction

The United States has experienced a surge of immigration for the last three decades. As Figure 1 illustrates,
the percentage of foreign-born residents in the United States has been steadily growing since 1970, and reached
a proportion of 13% of the population by 20031 . Economists, demographers and social scientists have used both
theoretical models and empirical analysis to gauge the impact of these immigrants on the U.S. economy, and on
its native residents in particular. The National Research Council (1997) produced a 430 page volume analyzing
the characteristics and eﬀects of immigration on American society; since then, a number of other studies have
re-examined and re-analyzed the issue. While the debate on several specific findings is still open, the recent
analysis of the impact of the foreign-born on U.S.-born seems to have focused its attention on certain issues and
set aside others. Our paper wishes to take a fresh look at the overall issue, emphasize important connections
between economic theory and empirical findings, and provide a coherent framework to measure the impact of
immigration on the average productivity of U.S. natives.
    The question we tackle is: what is the impact of immigration on the productivity and income of workers
born in the United States? The question really has two parts. The first is imbued with a macro flavor: does the
inflow of foreign born workers have a positive or negative net eﬀect on the average production and income of U.S.
born residents? This question supposes that we aggregate the wages and incomes of quite heterogeneous U.S.
workers. The second question is more micro in focus: how are the gains and losses from immigration distributed
across U.S. born workers with diﬀerent skills, and between labor and physical capital? The consensus emerging
from the recent literature is that the eﬀects of immigration on the average (aggregate) income accruing to U.S.
natives is rather small. Quantifications of this eﬀect (such as in Borjas, 1995) imply that the sum total of
foreign born workers accounts for a mere 0.1% increase in the average income (from labor and capital) of U.S.
born residents. Therefore, the argument goes, one can neglect this minuscule average eﬀect and concentrate
solely on the second question dealing with the distributional eﬀects of immigration. Moreover, as immigrants
are normally endowed with little physical capital (since few can transport their private homes or enterprises
into the U.S.) most of the literature (e.g. Borjas 1995, 2003) represents immigration as an increase in the
labor supply with a constant capital stock, and so readily finds a negative impact of immigration on average
wages and a positive impact of immigration on the return to capital (due to complementarities between the
two factors). The “macro” aspects of the issue (related to average income and average wage income) have been
analyzed much more superficially, however, then the “micro” aspects. Most of the recent debate has focused on
the eﬀects of immigration on the relative wages of more and less educated U.S. born workers. Some economists
argue in favor of a large relative impact (Borjas, 1994, 1999, 2003; Borjas, Freeman and Katz, 1997) while others
   1 While remarkable, such rapid increases are not unprecedented for the U.S. Large inflows from Europe during the period

1880-1910 brought the percentage of foreign-born very close to 15% around the year 1910, and previous episodes of very intense
immigration (e.g. 1.5 million Irish immigrants between 1845 and 1854, in the wake of a great famine) caused similar surges.



                                                              2
favor a smaller, barely significant eﬀect (Butcher and Card, 1991; Card, 2001; Lewis, 2003). While the size and
significance of these relative wage eﬀects from immigration remain controversial, this paper intends to combine
this analysis with the analysis of average wage eﬀects, which have rashly and facilely been considered settled
(or unapproachable, or irrelevant) in the literature. As such we nest the “macro” (average) and the “micro”
(distributional) aspects of the problem within the same framework.
   The eﬀects of immigration on the average wage of U.S. born individuals are extremely diﬃcult (if not
impossible) to estimate directly with aggregate U.S. data. Time series of aggregate U.S. wage and immigration
numbers after World War II contain only few dozens of observations, and the perennial issues of omitted variable
bias and endogeneity make the inference of causality from measured correlations a daunting task. The reported
eﬀects of migration on average wages found in the literature have been calculated (rather than estimated) using
very simple aggregate production functions and imposing crucial restrictions on the substitutability of skills and
the supply of factors (labor and capital). We will argue that these assumptions made in the literature, which
produce estimates implying that immigration has negligible eﬀects on the total income of U.S. born residents
and negative eﬀects on the average wages of U.S. born workers, may not be the most appropriate. Treating the
issues of skill complementarities and physical capital accumulation more carefully, we uncover positive eﬀects of
immigration on the average wages and incomes of natives. We analyze this crucial point by employing estimation
and simulation exercises on both aggregate data and data from metropolitan areas.
   The modern analysis of the eﬀects of immigrant inflows on the wages of natives began with studies (such
as Grossman 1982; Altonji and Card 1991) that treated the foreign-born simply as a single homogeneous group
of workers, imperfectly substitutable with U.S.-born workers (though possibly divisible into sub-groups). A
number of studies on the relative supply of skills and relative wages of U.S. born workers (such as Katz and
Murphy 1992; Card and Lemieux 2001) make clear, however, that workers with diﬀerent levels of schooling and
experience are better considered as imperfectly substitutable factors. As a consequence, more recent analysis of
the impact of immigration on the wages of U.S. born workers has been carried out partitioning workers among
imperfectly substitutable groups (by education and experience) while assuming perfect substitution of native
and foreign-born workers within each group (e.g. Card 2001 and Borjas 2003).
   Our paper combines the first and second approaches, in the sense that both cases can be seen as special
examples nested in our more general framework. We assume the existence of an aggregate production function
that combines workers and physical capital, while using education, experience and place of origin (U.S. versus
elsewhere) to categorize imperfectly substitutable groups. Following Borjas (2003) we choose a constant elasticity
of substitution (CES) form for production, and we nest two groups (U.S. born and foreign born workers) within
eight experience groups, and these in turn into four educational attainment groups. This allows for the imperfect
substitutability of individuals both of diﬀerent country origins and of diﬀerent education-experience levels.



                                                        3
This imperfect substitutability may arise from diﬀerent training, occupational choices and various unobserved
characteristics of workers from the U.S. and elsewhere. While intuition suggests that a Chinese-born cook is not
a perfect substitute for an American cook, and that an Italian tailor and a French architect diﬀer from their U.S.
counterparts, the degree of substitutability between the foreign and U.S. born must ultimately be determined
empirically. Finally, we include physical capital in production, and treat its accumulation as endogenously
driven by market forces that equalize real returns to capital in the long run.2 This is also a departure from the
literature, which mostly assumes a fixed capital stock when evaluating the distributional eﬀects of immigration.
In summary then, our production function can be used to calculate the relative, absolute and average wage
eﬀects from the recent inflow of immigrants, as well as simulate the eﬀects of counter-factual scenarios.
    In the first part of the paper we estimate the elasticity of substitution between foreign and U.S.-born workers
within education-experience cells using data from U.S. censuses from 1970 to 2000. Adopting an empirical
methodology similar to Borjas (2003) we find that the data support imperfect substitutability between the two
groups. In particular, among the college educated the elasticity of substitution between U.S. and foreign born
is around four, while among high-school dropouts it is around seven. This elasticity grows larger (around 10)
for intermediately educated groups. Using both these estimates, and previous estimates of the elasticity of
substitution between experience groups (Card and Lemieux 2001) and educational groups (Katz and Murphy
1992) we can calculate the eﬀects of immigration during the 1990s on relative wages, or on absolute wages by
education group, or on the average wages of U.S.-born workers. For our preferred parameter choice, we calculate
that the average wage of U.S. born workers experienced an increase between 2% and 2.5% in response to the
inflow of foreign-born workers in the 1990-2000 period (equal to 8% of the U.S. labor force in 1990). At the
same time, the inflow lowered the real wage of native workers without a high school degree by 1%, but increased
the real wage of native workers with at least a high-school degree as much as 3-4%. We then compare these
elasticities (calculated using the CES production and structural parameters) with direct empirical estimates
(either produced originally or taken from the literature) that use reduced-form regressions of U.S. wages on
immigration flows. We use national data to estimate the eﬀects of relative immigration by skill-group on relative
U.S. wages (reproducing the results of Borjas 2003) and metropolitan-area data to estimate the absolute eﬀect of
immigration on the wages of each educational group. These direct estimates match rather closely the elasticities
calculated using the CES production function for each education group.
    Because these large positive eﬀects from immigration on average U.S. wages we obtain from CES-based
calculations are novel to the literature, and as such are likely to be controversial, we analyze them further.
As mentioned above the average eﬀect of immigration on the marginal productivity of U.S.-born workers is
impossible to isolate from aggregate data. So continuing our empirical and theoretical analysis, we concentrate
   2 Constant real returns to capital (in the long run) is an implication from classical growth models such as Solow (1956) or Ramsey

(1928) as well as open economy macro models.



                                                                 4
on the panel variations across U.S. metropolitan areas over time, and exploit the diﬀerences in migration inflows
and growth rates of the average wage of U.S. born residents. We first present evidence (referring to previous
work of ours such as Ottaviano and Peri 2005, and Ottaviano and Peri, forthcoming) that both the average wage
and the value of housing for U.S. born residents were positively associated with inflows of foreign-born workers
across metropolitan areas. This positive and significant eﬀect survives 2SLS estimation, using instruments which
should be exogenous to city-specific unobservable productivity shocks that might bias OLS estimates. We build
this instrument by using the initial share of foreign-born workers in a city, grouped by country of origin, and
attributing to each group the average immigration rate for that nationality during each decade in the period
(1970-2000). First introduced by Card (2001), this instrument will be correlated with actual immigration in the
metropolitan area if new immigrants tend to settle prevalently where fellow countrymen already live. On the
other hand this constructed variable is independent of any city-shock and, in particular, totally orthogonal to
any economic determinant of immigration into the city during the considered decades.
   The empirical strategy of using cross-city variations in the relative wages of native workers to estimate the
impact of the relative supplies of immigrants has been widely used in the literature (Card 1991, Butcher and
Card 1991, Card and Di Nardo 2000). However it has also been widely criticized (Borjas, Freeman and Katz
1997) on the grounds that U.S. born workers can simply move across cities, thus arbitraging away any wage
diﬀerences generated by diﬀerential immigration flows. While labor is not perfectly mobile, surely large real
wages diﬀerentials will be arbitraged away in the long run, particularly given the high degree of mobility of
U.S. workers. To justify our empirical findings using metropolitan data, and to further corroborate the positive
eﬀects of immigration on the average wage of U.S.-born workers, we embed our original CES production function
into a model that also includes consumption and housing decisions in an open city, and assumes the perfect
mobility of U.S.-born workers and firms into and out of the city. Due to the mechanisms of complementarity
and endogenous capital accumulation (operating through the CES function), an inflow of foreign-born workers
in a city increases the average wage of the U.S.-born. In an open city this would tend to attract more U.S.-born
residents, but the larger numbers of people and wages would generate upward pressure on the price of housing
(whose supply is constrained by land). A new equilibrium is reached when the local price index (driven by
housing prices) oﬀsets the nominal wage gains enjoyed by U.S.-born workers. Average real wages for U.S.-born
workers are equated between the immigration city and other cities after the immigration shock. Therefore
the equilibrium adjustment triggered by immigration at the city-level implies a positive average eﬀect on the
wages of U.S.-born workers that is not entirely eliminated by mobility, for a large part of this adjustment takes
place in the form of higher prices for housing (which equalize real wages across cities) rather than migration
(which equalize nominal wages across cities). The model thus allows us to simulate the eﬀects that an inflow of
foreign-born have on the average wages of and the average value of housing for American-born residents. Using



                                                       5
immigrant inflows which simulate the experience of the average U.S. metropolitan area in the 1990s (in terms
of magnitude and skill composition), we generate eﬀects on wages and housing values very similar to those
estimated above using data from these metropolitan areas.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2 we introduce the aggregate CES production
function in order to estimate the elasticities of substitution between U.S. and foreign-born workers within each
education group. Then, using structural parameters (from both our estimates and the literature) and this
production function, we calculate the impact of immigration in the 1990s on the relative, absolute and average
wages of U.S.-born workers. Section 3 presents direct estimates (again, both ours and those of previous studies)
of the impact of the relative skills of immigrants on relative U.S. wages using national data, and compares them
with the values obtained from the CES production function. We then concentrate on the eﬀect immigrants have
on average U.S. wages. Empirically we move to a cross-city panel analysis, exploiting the variation of immigrant
inflows and wage changes across US cities from 1970 to 2000. Both OLS and 2SLS estimates find positive and
significant eﬀects of immigration on the average wages and value of houses for the U.S.-born. These eﬀects
are entirely consistent with the positive aggregate eﬀects of immigration on the wages of U.S.-born workers
calculated in 2. Section 4 provides a model of production-consumption-housing in an open-city economy; we use
this to simulate the impact of immigration during the 1990s on the wages and housing values for U.S. workers.
Using plausible structural parameters, the model matches very closely the quantitative eﬀects estimated in the
previous section. Section 5 concludes the paper.



2     Production, Complementarities and Gains from Migration

Both U.S. natives and foreign born workers can be diﬀerentiated into several imperfectly substitutable skill
groups (classified by education and experience). Naturally one could directly estimate the partial elasticities of
substitution between groups even without an explicit production function. But without assuming a functional
form for production, it would be impossible to calculate the eﬀects of a change in the supply of immigrants
belonging to several diﬀerent skill groups on the marginal productivity (wages) of natives from diﬀerent skill
groups. Thus following Borjas (2003), we choose a nested constant elasticity of substitution (CES) production
function, in which physical capital and diﬀerent types of labor are combined to produce output. Labor types are
grouped according to education and experience characteristics. We impose lower substitutability between groups
of diﬀerent schooling levels than between groups of diﬀerent experience levels but with the same schooling. U.S.-
born and foreign-born laborers are allowed a further degree of imperfect substitutability even when they have
the same education and experience. Notationally the production function we use is the following:


                                                      e α K 1−α
                                                 Y = AC                                                       (1)

                                                        6
                                                                                       e is a CES aggregate of
where Y is aggregate output, A is total factor productivity, K is physical capital and C
several, imperfectly substitutable types of workers. The production function described above exhibits constant
                                              e It describes production in the aggregate U.S. economy. In
returns to scale (CRS) in capital K and labor C.
this section we will use this function to analyze the behavior of the national wages of U.S.-born residents in
response to migration. However we can think of the nation as an aggregate of several cities with similar (CRS)
production functions. In section 4 we use the same function (1) to represent the production of the average U.S.
                                                                  e is defined as:
city. The elasticity of output to the labor aggregate is α, while C

                                                    " 4 µ ¶ δ−1 # δ−1
                                                                   δ
                                                     X Ck δ
                                              e=
                                              C                                                                    (2)
                                                           τk
                                                     k=1


                                                                        1
   Ck is an aggregate measure of labor with educational level k;       τk   are group-specific productivity levels. As
is standard in the labor literature (see Borjas 2003; Card and Lemieux 2001) we group educational achieve-
ments into four categories: High School Dropouts (denoted as HSD) , High School Graduates (HSG), College
Dropouts (COD) and College Graduates (COG), so that k = HSD, HSG, COD, COG. The parameter δ
measures the elasticity of substitution between workers with diﬀerent educational achievements. Within each
educational group we assume that workers with diﬀerent experience levels are also imperfect substitutes. In
particular, following the specification used in Card and Lemieux (2001) we write:


                                                 ⎡                 ⎤ θ−1
                                                                      θ

                                                  X 8 µ      ¶ θ−1
                                             Ck         Ckj     θ
                                                =⎣                 ⎦                                               (3)
                                             τk    j=1
                                                        τ kj


   where j is an index spanning experience intervals of five years between 0 and 40 years, so that j = 1 captures
workers with 0 − 5 years of experience, j = 2 those with 6 − 10 years, and so on. The parameter θ measures the
elasticity of substitution between workers in the same education group but with diﬀerent experience levels. As
we expect workers within an education group to be closer substitutes than workers across them, our parameter
choice (consistent with the findings of the general literature) implies θ > δ. Finally, distinct from the recent
                        Ckj
literature, we define   τ kj   as a CES aggregate of home-born and foreign-born workers with schooling k and
experience j, (denoted, respectively, as Hkj and Fkj ) in the following way:


                                           ⎡                                 ⎤ σk−1
                                                                                σk
                                            µ       ¶ σk−1
                                                       σk    µ        ¶ σk−1
                                                                         σk
                                     Ckj      H  kj             F kj
                                          =⎣               +                 ⎦                                     (4)
                                     τ kj     τ Hkj            τ F kj

   Since foreign-born workers receive part of their education abroad, they are likely to retain diﬀerent abilities
pertaining to language, quantitative-skills, and so on. Therefore they should be diﬀerentiated enough to be

                                                           7
treated as imperfect substitutes for U.S.-born workers, even within the same education and experience group.
Ultimately we allow the empirical analysis to reveal whether their elasticity of substitution with U.S.-born work-
ers in the same education-experience group, σ k , is finite (imperfect substitutes) or infinite (perfect substitutes).
As indicated by the subscript k we allow the elasticity of substitution between the U.S. and foreign born to
diﬀer across schooling groups (more on this below). The terms 1/τ F kj and 1/τ Hkj measure the respective
productivity levels of foreign workers and home-born workers.
    Since we use decennial data to evaluate the impact of immigration on U.S. wages, it seems reasonable to treat
physical capital as endogenously accumulated, rather than fixed. If we assume international capital mobility or,
alternatively, accumulation of capital following the Ramsey (1928) or Solow (1956) models, then in the long run
(that is, on the balanced growth path) both the real interest rate r and the aggregate capital-output ratio K/Y
will be constant. Given that the American economy has not exhibited any permanent trend in real interest
rates and has exhibited a roughly constant capital-output ratio for the last century, we make the assumption
that the U.S. is on its BGP on solid empirical ground. Since physical capital adjusts in order to maintain a
constant interest rate (i.e. towards the BGP) we can solve K out of the production function, and hence write
output as a linear function of the labor composite:

                                                        µ         ¶ 1−α
                                                            1−α      α
                                                                           e=A
                                                                             bCe
                                                 Y =                      AC                                                       (5)
                                                             r
             ¡ 1−α ¢ 1−α
      b=
where A               α
                           A absorbs a constant into the TFP factor. Expression (5) shows that income per worker
                r



grows at the rate of exogenous technology, A (as in any neoclassical growth model) and therefore, in the long-
                                                     e is one. When calculating the long-run elasticities of wages
run, the elasticity of income to the labor composite C
to the supply of diﬀerent kinds of workers, we will use the production function in (5).3


2.1     Partial Wage Elasticities

Using the production function (5) and the definitions (2), (3) and (4) we can obtain the (natural logarithm
of) the marginal productivity of U.S.-born workers in group kj, which in a competitive market will equal their
(logged) wage, wHkj :



                                            µ           ¶                        µ           ¶
                e + 1 ln(C)
 ln(wHkj ) = ln A        e + ln Φk −            1 1
                                                  −         ln(Ck ) + ln Φkj −
                                                                                     1
                                                                                       −
                                                                                         1
                                                                                                 ln(Ckj ) + ln ΦkjH −
                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                           ln(Hk ) (6)
                    δ                           δ   θ                                θ σk                               σk

    The term Φk contains all terms in τ k , Φkj contains the term τ kj and ΦkjH contains τ kjH . Expression (6) can
  3 This highlights one important diﬀerence with Borjas (2003) who, in calculating the long-run elasticities of wages to inflows of

immigrants over twenty years, assumes a constant stock of capital.



                                                                   8
be used to derive several wage elasticities, i.e., percentage variations of the wages of U.S. workers in response
to percentage variations in the supply of foreign-born workers, keeping the eﬃciency terms fixed. The first
elasticity considered is the percentage change in the wage of U.S.-born workers of skill group kj in response to
a percentage change of foreign-born workers in the same skill group kj, keeping supply of other factors fixed.
We call this elasticity γ own
                          wkj , with the subscript indicating that we are focusing on the wage (w) of skill group

kj of home-born workers, and the superscript emphasizing the fact that we are changing the supply only of
foreign-born workers of the same skill group. It is straightforward to show that this elasticity can be calculated
as:

                                            ∙     µ     ¶µ ¶ µ        ¶µ     ¶¸
                              ∆wHkj /wHkj     1     1 1   1    1    1     1     sF kj
                    γ own
                      wkj =               =     +    −       +    −                   κkj                                      (7)
                               ∆Fkj /Lkj      δ     θ δ   sk   σk   θ    skj    κF kj

where we express, as customarily done in the empirical analysis, the (decennial) change in foreign-born ∆Fk as
                                                                                              ∆Fkj
a percentage of the total initial supply of labor in skill group kj, Lkj , namely             Lkj    = (Fkjt+10 − Fkjt )/(Fkjt +
Hkjt ). The variable sF kj is equal to the share of overall wages paid to foreign workers in skill group kj,
S     S     wF kj Fkj                                                  S   S Fkj
                                   , while the variable κF kj equals                      ,   the share of total employment
  m     i (wF mi Fmi +wHmi Hmi )                                       m    i (Fmi +Hmi )

                                                                                        S     (F
                                                                                              Skj +Hkj )
represented by foreign-born workers in skill group kj. Analogously κkj =                                         denotes the share
                                                                                          m      i (Fmi +Hmi )

of total employment accounted for by workers (both foreign and U.S. born) in skill group kj. An interesting
variation of the above partial elasticity can be calculated and compared with several existing estimates from
the applied literature (see below). The elasticity of wage wHkj to a change in the supply of Fkj , keeping total
production and the intermediate labor composite Ck fixed, is given by:

                                   ¯             ¯                  µ        ¶µ       ¶µ       ¶
                                   ¯ ∆wHkj /wHkj ¯                    1    1    sF kj    κkj
                           γ own = ¯             ¯                =      −                                                     (8)
                             wkj   ¯ ∆Fkj /Lkj ¯ h                    σk   θ     skj     κF kj
                                                   Ck ,C constant

                                                                                  e and ln(Ck ) constant and
      The elasticity in (8) is obtained from equation (6) by keeping the terms ln(C)
computing only the partial variation of (log) wage wHkj in response to a variation in Fkj that operates through
         ¡       ¢
the term 1θ − σk
               1
                   ln(Ckj ). Its empirical equivalent is the elasticity obtained (for instance in Borjas 2003),
by regressing the (log) wages of home-born workers on the change in supply of foreign-born workers in the
same education-experience group, absorbing through time and education by time fixed eﬀects the variations
                           e and ln(Ck ). The elasticity γ own has been considered particularly interesting,
operating through terms ln(C)                              wkj

for if U.S.-born and foreigners within each skill group kj were perfect substitutes in proportions of one-to-one,
                                                          ³    ´³        ´
                                                            s      κ kj
then 1/τ F kj = 1/τ Hkj = 1 and σ1k = 0, implying that sFkjkj     κ F kj   = 1 and that the elasticity is equal to
− 1θ , which is simply the inverse of the elasticity of substitution between two groups with diﬀerent experience
levels within an education group. While in this case γ own
                                                       wkj would be equal to a “structural” parameter of the

production function, under our more general assumption it is not. Moreover, imperfect substitutability between



                                                               9
U.S. born and foreign born workers implies that γ own
                                                  wkj , while generally still negative, is smaller in absolute value

than θ1 .
    A third interesting partial elasticity, also comparable with existing empirical estimates in Borjas (2003) (and
partially with Card 2001), is the wage elasticity for U.S. born workers of skill-group kj to the total inflow of
foreigners within education group k (of any experience level), keeping total production constant. We define
this elasticity as γ own
                     wkj
                         edu , where the superscript indicates that we are only changing the supply of foreign born


workers in the same education group k, the subscript refers to the wage (w) of skill group kj, and the upper
bar reminds us that total production remains constant. Its expression is:



             ¯             ¯                        µ              ¶µ             ¶µ               ¶         µ     ¶µ ¶X
             ¯             ¯
 γ own edu = ¯ ∆wHkj /wHkj ¯                   =
                                                         1
                                                            −
                                                              1              1         sF kj           ∆Fkj
                                                                                                            +
                                                                                                               1 1
                                                                                                                −
                                                                                                                     1    sF ki ∆Fki
                                                                                                                                     (9)
   wkj       ¯ ∆Fk /Lk ¯ h                               σk   θ             skj        κF kj            Lk     θ δ   sk   κF ki Lk
                              C constant                                                                                i


    The first portion of the summation on the right hand side captures the eﬀect on wHkj from a change in
the supply of foreign-born in the same education-experience group, keeping Ck constant. The second portion
captures the eﬀect of changes in the supply of foreign-born in each experience group within education group k.
These eﬀects operate through changes in the term ln(Ck ) (see equation 6).


2.2     The Impact of Immigration on Wages

While the partial elasticities γ own     own       own edu each provide important information concerning the move-
                                 wkj , γ wkj and γ wkj

ment of wages of U.S.-born workers within each skill group in reaction to immigrant inflows from that group,
they do not tell us much about the total eﬀect of immigration on the wages of native workers. Total immigra-
tion will aﬀect wages (of U.S. born workers) through both “own” and “cross” elasticities. In fact presumably,
due to complementarities, cross eﬀects are likely to be positive even while own elasticity eﬀects on wages are
negative. Using equation (6) we can define and calculate γ total
                                                           wkj ; this is the net percentage change in the wages

of U.S.-born workers within skill group kj in response to an increase in the supply of foreigners from all skill
groups, j = 1, 2...8 and k = 1, 2..4. The elasticity is equal to:



                             ³                ´³         ´³            ´              ¡1           ¢³        ´X                        XX
                                  1       1         1         sF kj        ∆Fkj                1         1        sF ki ∆Fki       1           sF mi ∆Fmi
                                 σk   −   θ        skj        κ F kj        L     +    θ   −   δ        sk        κ F ki L     +   δ           κ F km L
            ∆wHkj /wHkj                                                                                       i                        m   i
  γ total
    wkj =               =
              ∆F/L                                                                             ∆F/L
                                                                                                                                                       (10)
                 XX
                          ∆Fmi
where ∆F/L =               L ,    L is the total initial employment, and the other variables are defined as above.
                  m   i


The numerator of (10) contains three terms added together. The last term (double summation) captures the


                                                                             10
positive eﬀect from immigration in all education and experience groups due to complementarities with U.S.-
born workers, the intermediate term captures the additional (negative) impact of immigration within the same
education group only (due to closer substitutability with the home born in group kj), and the first term captures
the additional (negative) impact of immigration within the same education-experience group (due to even closer
substitutability with home workers in group kj). Each term depends on combinations of the elasticities and on
the number of immigrants from each group ( ∆F
                                            L ). Finally, aggregating the changes in wages of all U.S.-born
                                             ki



workers from migration, and weighting them according to the wage share of their respective skill-group, we
obtain the elasticity of the average wage of U.S.-born workers to the total change in supply due to immigration.
This elasticity, denoted as γ w , measures in percentage terms the overall gain (if positive) or loss (if negative)
accruing to U.S. labor income as a consequence of immigration. This elasticity is obtained as follows:


                                           ∆wH /wH   XX     ∆wHkj /wHkj
                                    γw =           =    skj                                                        (11)
                                            ∆F/L      j
                                                              ∆F/L
                                                            k


2.3      Estimates of Substitutability between U.S.-born and Foreign-born

In order to calculate the partial elasticities γ own     own       own edu
                                                 wkj , γ wkj and γ wkj     together with the total eﬀects γ total
                                                                                                            wkj

and γ w , we require only three sets of parameters: δ, θ, σ k .4 The parameter δ is the elasticity of substitution
between groups of workers with diﬀerent educational attainment levels. Several existing empirical studies have
estimated this parameter using either only micro data on U.S. native workers or aggregate data.5 Most of
the existing estimates cluster between 1.5 and 2. The substitutability between workers of diﬀerent experience
levels, θ, has also been estimated in recent articles; perhaps most notably, Card and Lemieux (2001) produce
estimates in the range between 3 and 4. We will use these values in our calculations. The parameters σ k ,
(k = HSD, HSG, COD, COG), which capture the imperfect substitutability between the U.S. and foreign
born in the same skill group, have never before been estimated. Our production function, however, provides a
convenient framework to estimate these parameters. Taking the ratio of the logged wages of U.S. and foreign-
born workers within the same skill group, we obtain the following relation:


                                                  1                    σk − 1
                         ln(wHkjt /wF kjt ) = −      ln(Hkjt /Fkjt ) −        ln(τ Hkjt /τ F kjt )                 (12)
                                                  σk                     σk

   Equation (12) provides the basis necessary to estimate the parameters σ k . We wish to identify some variation
in the relative employment of U.S. and foreign born workers of skill-group kj in year t, Hkjt /Fkjt , which is driven
by exogenous (supply) shifts and is orthogonal to changes in relative productivity τ Hkjt /τ F kjt . We can then use
this variation as an instrument in the 2SLS estimation of the coeﬃcient − σ1k in equation (12). Following Borjas
  4 Of
     course we also need the shares of employment and total wage payments for each skill group.
  5 Katz
       and Murphy (1992), Angrist (1995), and Ciccone and Peri (2005) are among recent works estimating this elasticity.
Hamermesh (1992) Chapter 3 reviews estimates in earlier literature.


                                                            11
(2003), we assume that once we control for education by year (Dkt ), experience by year (Djt ), and experience
by education fixed eﬀects (Dkj ), the inflow of foreign-born workers within a particular skill-group provides an
exogenous shift in supply. The idea here is that the distribution of an influx of immigrants across experiences
groups but within an education group is exogenous to U.S. productivity shocks. As such we run the regression:



                                                                         1
                            ln(wHkjt /wF kjt ) = Dkj + Dkt + Djt −          ln(Hkjt /Fkjt ) + εkjt                          (13)
                                                                         σk

and use the variable ln(1/Fkjt ) as an instrument for ln(Hkjt /Fkjt ). We use country-level data from IPUMS

1970, 1980, 1990 and 2000, and divide groups based on education and experience as described above.6 This
generates 128 observations of skill by year, relative wages and relative supplies. We pool all four schooling
groups together, and assume either equal elasticities across schooling groups, σ k = σ, or diﬀerent σ k ’s for each
group. The regressions produce estimates for −1/σ k and their standard errors. We use the delta-method (e.g.
Ruud 2000, page 367) to calculate both σ k and their relative standard errors, reporting these in Table 1. First
let us notice that in spite of relatively large standard errors (due to few degrees of freedom since we control
for 80 fixed eﬀects) each estimated coeﬃcient −1/σ k is significantly diﬀerent from 0 (with the exception of
−1/σ COD , from the second column of Table 2). This suggests that foreign-born workers within a skill group
are indeed not perfect substitutes for U.S.-born workers, contrary to what is assumed in the literature. Second,
while the average elasticity of substitution is 7.7, the estimates in column 2 show remarkably diﬀerent elasticities
for diﬀerent skill groups. In particular, foreign-born college graduates are the hardest to substitute with U.S.
born college graduates (here the elasticity of substitution is around 4). Among high-school dropouts foreigners
are somewhat more substitutable for natives (elasticity of 7) while among the intermediate education groups
(high school graduates and college dropouts) they are highly substitutable (elasticities range between 10 and
16, although they are very imprecisely estimated).
   One might ask if these estimates are reasonable? One might further ask why U.S. and foreign-born workers
with similar human capital characteristics are not perfectly substitutable (particularly among the highest and
lowest educational groups)? When compared to existing estimates of substitutability of U.S.-born workers across
experience groups within a particular education group, we find our estimates very reasonable (which according
to Card and Lemieux 2001 should range between 3 and 4). Conceivably native and foreign-born workers should
not be much easier to substitute in production than two U.S. born workers with 5 years of experience diﬀerence.
One reason for this imperfect substitutability is that, for given skills, U.S. and foreign born workers often choose
diﬀerent occupations (see Card 2001 for more detail). This is particularly true for workers with high and low
levels of education (rather than with intermediate levels). For instance among the lowly-skilled (HSD), foreign
   6 Integrated Public Use Microdata Sample, Ruggles et al. (2005). For a detailed description of how we aggregate the individual

data and how we control for personal characteristics see the Appendix.


                                                               12
born workers are highly represented in occupations like tailoring (where 54% were foreign born in 2000) and
plaster-stucco masoning (where 44% were foreign-born in 2000), while U.S.-born workers are highly represented
among, say, crane operators (where less than 1% was foreign-born in 2000) and sewer-pipe cleaners (where less
than 1% foreign-born). Since one would be hard pressed to call these services perfectly substitutable, there is
no reason to believe that payments for such services should be equalized. A similar argument applies for the
highly-skilled (COG). For instance foreign-born workers are highly represented in scientific and technological
fields (45% of medical scientists and 33% of computer engineers are foreign-born) while U.S.-born workers are
highly represented among lawyers (less than 4% are foreign-born) or museum curators and archivists (less than
3% are foreign-born). Moreover, even within the same profession, often the U.S. and foreign-born provide
diﬀerent services, and hence benefit from complementing each other, regardless of education level. For instance,
Chinese and American cooks do not produce similar meals, nor do Italian and American tailors provide identical
types of clothes. Similarly, a European-trained physicist (more inclined towards a theoretical approach) is not
perfectly substitutable with a U.S.-trained one (more inclined towards an experimental approach), and a French
architect will likely create a starkly diﬀerent building than an American one. All in all, our empirical method
produces precise estimates for the imperfect substitutability between U.S. and foreign born workers in both
high and low education groups, and these estimates are bourn out by anecdotal evidence. We therefore take
the above estimates seriously and use them in our calculations.
   One final remark. If immigration has an endogenous component that responds to the relative productivity
of skills, a positive correlation would exist between the term τ Hkjt /τ F kjt , which is in the residual of regression
(13), and the instrument ln(Fkjt ). This correlation would then bias the estimates of − σ1k towards 0, and thus
bias the value of σ k upwards. In our calculations below we therefore consider the estimates of σk as a likely
upper bound of the relevant elasticities; consequently we experiment with smaller values.


2.4    Calculated Eﬀects of Immigration on Wages and Some Counterfactual Exper-
       iments

Table 2 shows the calculated eﬀects of an increase in foreign-born workers on the wages of U.S.-born workers.
The elasticities are obtained using formulas (8), (9), (10) and (11), and data on wages and employment shares
relative to 1990, together with changes in the supply of skills from immigration during 1990-2000, are from the
IPUMS of Ruggles et al. (2005). Column (a) reports the calculated partial elasticity of the wages of U.S.-born
workers to an immigrant inflow of the same education-experience group, γ own
                                                                         wkj , while column (b) reports the

partial elasticity of U.S.-born wages to immigrants only in the same education group, γ own
                                                                                        wkj
                                                                                            edu . The total eﬀect


of immigration on the wages of U.S.-born workers of each skill group, γ total
                                                                        wkj is shown in column (c), while

the elasticity of the average wage of U.S.-born workers to total immigration, γ w , is reported in column (d).


                                                          13
The final column (e) reports the calculated percentage change in the average wages of U.S.-born workers as
                                                                                  own edu
a consequence of the 1990-2000 inflow of immigrants. While we calculate γ own
                                                                          wkj , γ wkj     and γ total
                                                                                                wkj for each

education-experience combination, the table only reports the average by education groups (across experience
groups). The first three rows of Table 2 show the calculated impact (for diﬀerent parameter values) of the actual
immigration increase in the 1990s. This increase, expressed as the change of foreign-born in each skill-group
relative to total initial employment (1990) was: ∆fHSD = 1.9%, ∆fHSG = 1.5%, ∆fCOD = 1.6% ∆fCOG =
3.0%. While we choose 1.5 and 3 as the consensus values for the parameters δ and θ respectively, we show the
results for diﬀerent choices for parameters σ k . By way of contrast, the last three rows of the table present the
eﬀects of some counterfactual immigration flows.
   Let us describe these results in turn. Specification 1, reported strictly as a benchmark for comparison,
assumes that U.S. and foreign born workers of the same skill group are perfect substitutes. Our estimates of
course contradict this assumption that nonetheless is used as the standard one in the literature; it therefore
serves as a useful reference. Under this assumption the overall eﬀect on average U.S. wages from the 1990-2000
migratory inflow is very small (elasticity of 0.09) but positive. This result is in contrast with the results of Borjas
(2003) who finds a strong negative eﬀect of total immigration on average U.S. wages (elasticity -0.3). Borjas’
eﬀect is entirely due to his assumption of a fixed capital stock (rather than an endogenously accumulated one,
as in our model) which seems extreme for a ten-year span. The small eﬀect on average wages is accompanied,
however, by a strong redistributive eﬀect. “Own” elasticities are negative and large: they average around -0.3
for an increased relative supply of foreign-workers in the same education-experience group, and -0.62 for an
increased relative supply in the same education group overall. Therefore the relative size of immigrant groups
across skills heavily aﬀects the relative wage eﬀects. Converting the elasticities γ total
                                                                                     wkj into percentage eﬀects of

immigration on U.S. wages, the first row of Table 2 implies that the real wages of high-school dropouts decreased
by 4.5%, the wages of workers with a high-school degree increased by 2%, and the wages of college graduates did
not change. These diﬀerences stem from the fact that immigrants are over-represented among the lowly-skilled,
under-represented among the intermediately-skilled, and proportionally represented among the highly-skilled.
This U-shaped skill distribution for foreign-born workers generates the relative wage changes calculated in the
first row.
   Specification 2 calculates the eﬀects of immigration when we use the values of σ k estimated in Table 2. We
use values of seven and four (very close to our point estimates) as the elasticities of substitution within the lowest
and highest education groups, respectively, and a value of ten for the two intermediate groups. Both the eﬀects
on the average wage of U.S.-born workers and the eﬀects on the distribution change quite dramatically. First of
all, the elasticity of average wages to immigration becomes large and positive. The 8% increase in foreign-born
workers increases the average U.S. wage by 2.2%. Moreover the three top education groups (HSG, COD and



                                                          14
COG) all gain by significant amounts (around a 2.4% real wage increase for each in response to this immigration)
while only the low-skill group looses (around a 2.4% wage decrease). A critical thing to note is that while the
gains for the intermediately-educated are still driven by the relative supplies of the foreign-born (who are scarce
in these groups), the gains for the college educated stem from the lower degree of substitutability between U.S.
and foreign-born laborers in this group. Notice however that the own elasticities (γ own       own edu ) are still
                                                                                     wkj and γ wkj

significantly negative for each group. Averaging across groups, γ own                       own edu is around -0.5
                                                                  wkj is around -0.18 and γ wkj

(more on this below). Finally, specification 3 assumes an elasticity of substitution somewhat lower than our
point estimate from Table 1. This is done in order to account for a potential upward bias that may arise from
any endogeneity in the skill composition of immigrants. The chosen values are, however, within two standard
deviations from the estimates of Table 1. As we can see, the eﬀect of immigration on average wages here is even
more dramatic. Converting elasticities into actual changes, the average wage of U.S. born workers increases by
2.7%, and the most dramatically aﬀected group is that of U.S.-born college graduates, whose wage increases by
3.5%! We label this specification as our “preferred” one for reasons that will become clear in the next section,
when we compare the calculated elasticities to those empirically estimated from the data in a reduced-form
equation.
   The last three specifications in Table 2 use our preferred parameter combination to evaluate the eﬀects
of some “counterfactual” migratory flows. Focusing briefly only on the overall average eﬀect on the wages
of U.S.-born laborers, a few interesting indications emerge. First, if the U.S. were to completely eliminate
the immigration of low skilled workers (HSD) and replace them with an equal number of immigrants among
the intermediately skilled (HSG), so that total migration remains unchanged, the overall beneficial eﬀects of
immigration on the average U.S. wage would decline slightly (it would increase by 2.6% rather than by 2.7%).
This results from the relative scarcity of U.S.-born high school dropouts and the higher substitutability between
natives and foreigners in the intermediate education groups. Conversely, specification 5 eliminates the inflow
of high school graduates in favor of an equal increase in high school dropouts (making even more extreme the
over-representation of foreign-born among the group of low educated workers). This move slightly increases the
average marginal benefit accrued to U.S. workers via their wages (to 2.75%). Of course these two policies would
generate large eﬀects on relative wages, with the second move exasperating the negative impact on the wages
of lowly-skilled U.S. natives (a decrease by over 8% as result of immigration). The most harmful scenario for
average U.S. wages, however, is the one reported in specification 6, in which the inflow of college graduates
is eliminated in favor of an equal increase in college dropouts. In this case the eﬀect of immigration descends
from large and positive to essentially 0. Clearly the high complementarities of foreign-born workers in high-skill
professions is a key element of the overall gains from migration generated by our model.




                                                        15
3      Empirical Estimates

3.1       Own Skill-Group Eﬀects: Labor Demands Are Downward Sloping

The calculations presented in Table 2 show very clearly that it is not only feasible, but it is highly likely, that
negative wage elasticities to the supply of foreign workers in the same skill group, γ own       own edu , coexist
                                                                                       wkj and γ wkj

with positive overall average eﬀects of this supply on U.S. wages (γ w ), along with positive total eﬀects on the
wages of U.S.-born workers in certain skill groups (γ total                     own       own edu are measures
                                                      wkj ). The elasticities γ wkj and γ wkj

of how the relative supply of foreign-skills aﬀects the relative wages of U.S. workers with the same observable
skills, keeping total production and total intermediate labor composition constant. They are negative in most
reasonably-specified production functions, but cannot be used to evaluate the absolute eﬀects of immigration on
the wages of U.S.-born workers unless we embed them into a production function that accounts for substitution
and complementarity eﬀects. The above-mentioned empirical literature mostly dismisses the aggregate eﬀects
of migration as hardly relevant, and thus has concentrated on the redistributive eﬀects and the estimates of
these elasticities. Typically the analysis on the eﬀects of immigration on relative U.S. wages, considering the


U.S. as an integrated labor market segmented by skills, involves estimating a regression such as:


                                    ∆ ln wkjt = αkj + β kt + β jt + (γ own
                                                                       wkj )∆fkjt + εkjt                                     (14)

     In (14) the change in wages for U.S.-born workers in skill group kj, ∆ ln wkjt , depends (once we account
for education by time, experience by time, and experience by education eﬀects) on the change in the supply
of workers in skill group kj caused by immigration (∆fkjt ). This is, for instance, the regression that is run in
Borjas (2003) page 1363. We denote the coeﬃcient on ∆fkjt as γ own
                                                               wkj because the above regression provides an

estimate of the elasticity defined by expression (8). Alternatively, economists have used cross-city variations
in the relative supply of foreign-born laborers to identify the eﬀects of this supply on the relative wages of
U.S.-born laborers (e.g. Card 2001). Usually in this case the number of skill groups is reduced (to educational
groups only) and an accompanying regression is run to check whether changes in the relative employment of
U.S.-born workers compensate (and to what extent) for the relative supply shifts due to immigration.7 As
these regressions typically use the relative changes across educational groups, they provide estimates for the
parameter γ own
            wkj
                edu .


     The first column of Table 3 presents a sample of some recent influential estimates for the parameters γ own
                                                                                                             wkj

and γ own
      wkj
          edu , together with our estimates of these coeﬃcients. By way of comparison, the second column of

    7 Typically a supplemental regression such as ∆nckt = αck + β ct + (γ Ek )∆fckt + εEckt is run.
   ∆nckt is the change in employment of U.S.-born workers of skill k in city c. Once we account for city-by-year fixed eﬀects and
city-by-skill fixed eﬀects, γ Ek , captures the impact of an inflow of foreign-born workers on the employment of U.S.-born workers
within a particular skill group in a city.



                                                               16
the table shows the calculated values for these elasticities using expressions (8) and (9). The first row of Table
3 shows the estimate of γ own
                          wkj from Borjas (2003), while the second row reports the estimate we obtain when

we replicate Borjas’ regression using a slightly diﬀerent sample (1970-2000) and a diﬀerent definition of wage
(hourly rather than weekly). Our estimate is somewhat smaller in absolute value (-0.15 vs. -0.29) and more
precise than Borjas’, but remains within two standard deviations from his. Both coeﬃcients are estimated
using national data in a regression as (14), assuming that the distribution of immigrants across skill groups
is exogenous. Our point estimate for the elasticity γ own
                                                      wkj lands right in the middle of the range calculated in

the previous section (between −0.13 and −0.18 choosing specification 2 and 3 of Table 2). Borjas’s estimate is
outside this range, although because of a large standard error one cannot reject a value from this range.
   Specification 3 of Table 3 reports the range of wage elasticities from immigration in workers’ “own” skill
group, taken from Card 2001. This elasticity is smaller but not far from those illustrated in the previous two
rows. Card’s estimate cannot, however, be directly compared with the two previous estimates. First, the skill
groups chosen by Card are not education-experience-based but occupation-based. Workers are grouped into 6
skill categories, each one defined by the probability of being in a group of occupations; as such our production
function would not have a clear prediction on the estimated elasticity. Second, Card (2001) uses only data from
the 1990 Census (for 175 metropolitan areas); by experimenting with our data-set we find that these estimates are
rather sensitive to the sample specified. While we think that the choice of skill groups and samples may matter,
we do not believe that the two common criticisms (proposed by Borjas among others) to city-based elasticity
estimates apply here. The first criticism is that internal migration by U.S.- born workers would arbitrage wage
diﬀerences away. This mechanism, however, would entail a significant association between outflows of U.S.-born
workers from a city and inflows of foreign-born workers into the same city. But to the contrary, the most careful
studies of the response of native workers to immigration (e.g. Butcher and Card 1991, Card and Di Nardo 2000,
Card 2001) show that an inflow of native workers is associated with higher immigration in cities.8 Moreover,
our model of section 4 shows an alternative mechanism that establishes equilibrium across cities following an
inflow of foreign-born workers and allowing for the free mobility of U.S.-born workers. This mechanism does not
imply wage equalization as long as there can be changes in city-level prices (i.e. values of housing). The second
criticism is that immigration in cities is correlated with city-specific productivity shocks, inducing a correlation
between explanatory variables and residuals that biases the estimated elasticity. To address this issue Card
(2001) constructs reasonable instruments. Specifically, in order to produce estimates that are less likely to
suﬀer from omitted variable bias, Card considers the initial share (in year 1985) of foreign-born workers in each
metropolitan area, using 17 nationality-of-origin groups. For each nationality group he calculates the share of
workers within each skill group. He then imputes to each nation-of-origin-by-skill group in each metropolitan
  8 There are some early estimates (notably Filer 1992 and Frey 1995) that report the association between native outflows and

immigrant inflows in cities. These however are based on restricted samples and less careful empirical strategies.



                                                             17
area the overall immigration rate for that group into the U.S. Aggregating across national groups in each city,
this procedure produces a “constructed” increase in the number of foreign-born workers within each skill group
in each city. These constructed values are good predictors for the actual values if, as argued by Card (2001),
new immigrants settle where people of the same nationality already live. Since the instrument uses only the
initial composition of foreign-born residents in a city and subsequent average immigration rates in the U.S. by
nationality, it is not correlated with any city-specific factor that would aﬀect actual immigration in the city
during the decade. As a consequence it is by construction orthogonal to any city-specific shock to productivity,
amenities and labor market conditions.
   Row 4 of Table 3 shows the estimates of γ own
                                             wkj
                                                 edu from Borjas (2003). Since national data are used (5 census


years and only 4 education groups) the reported elasticity is estimated with only 20 observations and is therefore
quite imprecise. However, what makes it appealing is that it is not far from existing estimates of the relative
wage elasticity to changes in the relative supply of workers in diﬀerent educational groups (Johnson 1970, Fallon
and Layard 1975, Katz and Murply 1992, Angrist 1995, Ciccone and Peri 2005) which range between 0.5 and
0.76. The standard error, however, is so large that even the null hypothesis γ own
                                                                               wkj
                                                                                   edu = 0 cannot be rejected.


To improve on the precision of these estimates our procedure (in row 5) relies on cross-city regressions, and
uses instruments built similarly as those in Card (2001) described above.9 We regress the change in wages
of U.S.-born workers in the usual four education groups across 86 U.S. cities over 3 decades on changes in
employment due to inflows of immigrants. We control for city-by-time and education-by-time fixed eﬀects, and
instrument the supply of foreign-born workers using the “constructed” supply. We obtain a point estimate of
-0.45 with a standard error of 0.25, reported in specification 5 of Table 3. Again our estimate is within two
standard deviations of Borjas’s; moreover it lies precisely within the range calculated for γ own
                                                                                              wkj
                                                                                                  edu in Table 2


(between -0.50 and -0.45 using specification 2 and 3). Further, both estimates of specifications 4 and 5 mirror or
approximate the existing range of estimates for the elasticity of relative wages to the relative supply of workers
in diﬀerent education groups, found in the literature (see Ciccone and Peri 2005 for a survey of those estimates).


3.2    Total Eﬀects of immigration on wages of diﬀerent Skill Groups

Encouraged by the remarkably good match between our calculated “own-skill group” elasticities and those
estimated by a “reduced-form” approach in the existing literature, we proceed to compare the calculated eﬀects
of Table 2 with direct estimates of the overall eﬀect of immigration on the absolute wages of each skill group,
namely the elasticity γ total
                        wkj . As we illustrated above, these overall eﬀects depend on negative “own-skill-group”

eﬀects as well as on positive (complementarity) eﬀects from changes in the supply of other skills. Empirically,
we can run the following four regression:
  9 Details   on the construction of this instrumental variable are in the Appendix 6.




                                                                  18
                        ∆ ln wckt = αc + β t + γ total
                                                 wk ∆fct + εct , for k = HSD, HSG, COD, COG                                     (15)

where wckt is the wage of U.S. born workers in education group k for city c and period t, while ∆fct is the total
number of foreign-born workers (relative to initial employment) in city c and period t. The existing empirical
literature has been hesitant to perform an estimation such as (15) because it is clear that the coeﬃcient γ total
                                                                                                            wk is

not a structural parameter and may vary with the skill-composition of foreign-born workers. In this case however
we have a prediction of what γ total
                               wk should be, given the observed distribution of U.S.-born and immigrant workers

by skill (1990-2000). Using the constructed share of foreign-born described in appendix 6 as an instrument,
and controlling for city and year fixed eﬀects, we can obtain unbiased estimates of γ total
                                                                                      wk    for each education
group. These estimates, reported in Table 4, capture the average (across cities) eﬀect of a 1% increase in the
total supply of foreign-born workers on the wages of U.S. born workers in each group. This elasticity captures
directly the eﬀects calculated in column (c) of Table 2. Specification I reports the estimated coeﬃcients using
a panel of 86 cities for the censuses between 1970 and 2000. Column II shows the estimates using 113 cities
over the censuses 1970-1990.10 Column III reports the range of the calculated elasticity from Table 2, column
(c), specifications 2 and 3. Each coeﬃcient (cell) in columns I and II of Table 4 is estimated in a separate
regression. While the estimates are not very precise, the values of each estimate for each sample are similar.
Moreover the estimated coeﬃcients are consistent with those calculated using the CES function. The impact on
high school dropouts is estimated to be between -0.10 and -0.20. The corresponding value calculated using CES
production, reported in column III, is -0.30. The impact on both high school graduates and college dropouts
is estimated to be around 0.2, while the corresponding calculated elasticities are between 0.28 and 0.33. The
estimated eﬀect on college graduates is the only one significantly positive, estimated to be around 0.40, while
the corresponding calculated parameter lies between 0.33 and 0.44. Again, given the simplification involved in
the reduced-form estimation, it is remarkable that the coeﬃcients match up so closely with those calculated
using our production function. Two remarks are perhaps in order. First, the positive and significant eﬀect of
immigration on U.S.-born college graduates is by itself a sign that within this group complementarities must be
strong. In fact, in the context of perfect substitutability and due to relative scarcity alone, we should expect an
eﬀect on college graduate wages close to zero (as in the first row of Table 2). Second, by focusing on total eﬀects
by skill group, it is already clear that an inflow of foreign born workers has mostly positive eﬀects on the wages
of U.S.-born workers. In particular recall that the three groups that benefit from immigration (HSG, COD and
COG) account for 92% of the total U.S.-born labor force in 2000. The losses from migration are concentrated
on a very small group which, moreover, has been dramatically shrinking for U.S. natives for the last 30 years.
 1 0 The   reduced number of cities for the longer panel is due to the limited availability of the MSA identifier in the IPUMS 2000.




                                                                  19
3.3    Average Eﬀects of Immigration Across Cities: Wages, Value of Housing and
       Employment

The previous two sections show that the relative and absolute eﬀects of immigration on the wages of natives
obtained using the CES production function match rather well the estimates from reduced-form regressions.
The most striking and potentially controversial finding of Table 2 is, however, the large positive overall gains
for U.S.-born labor. Since this aggregate eﬀect is impossible to detect from national aggregate data, we aim to
measure it by using cross-city variations. Indeed we intend to provide not only empirical evidence in favor of
this positive aggregate eﬀect, but also a detailed account of how such an eﬀect can be produced and maintained
in a long-run equilibrium. Hence we accompany wage regressions with regressions of cross-city values of housing
and changes in employment: as we will show in section 4 a simple general equilibrium model should account
for the behavior of wages, rents and employment levels of U.S.-born workers in an open city in response to
immigration.
   In prior work (Ottaviano and Peri 2005; Ottaviano and Peri, forthcoming) we have detected a positive and
very robust relationship between the average wages of U.S.-born workers and the share of foreigners across U.S.
cities. These articles separately analyze the wage-rent equilibrium (Ottaviano and Peri 2005) and the wage-
employment equilibrium (Ottaviano and Peri, forthcoming), concluding that the simultaneous positive eﬀects of
immigration on all the variables analyzed (concerning U.S.-born workers) can only be reconciled with the idea
that immigrants tend to provide a positive influence on the productivity of native workers. We have illustrated
in section (2) how the overall positive eﬀects on the U.S.-born emerge from the various complementarities of the
foreign-born across skills. Here we reproduce some of the wage-employment-rent estimates across cities which
confirm these positive eﬀects from immigration on each variable, while in the next section we quantitatively
match these estimates with a simple general equilibrium open-city model that incorporates the production
function developed above.
   Figures 2, 3 and 4 illustrate the correlations between the change in foreign-born workers (as a percentage
of total initial employment) and the percentage increase of the average wage of U.S.-born workers (Figure 1),
the percentage increase of the average rent per room paid by U.S.-born residents (Figure 2) and the percentage
increase in the employment of U.S.-born workers (Figure 3), across the 86 largest metropolitan areas in the
United States for the 1970-2000 period. The visual impression here suggests a strong positive correlation
between the worker-share of foreign-born and each of the three variables. Metropolitan areas where foreign-
born workers abound exhibit faster growth in the average wages, employment, and property values of U.S.-born
workers. Without yet suggesting the direction of causality, the described statistics show that more immigrants
are associated with all the characteristics of a booming metropolitan economy. For the remainder of this section
we analyze more formally these positive correlations in order to understand whether they are likely to be spurious


                                                       20
or due to omitted variables.
    Using the Integrated Public Use Microdata Samples of the U.S. censuses of 1970, 80, 90 and 2000 for
individuals in 86 metropolitan areas, we estimate the following three panel regressions:11


                                                 ∆nct = αc + β t + γ E ∆fct + εE
                                                                               ct                                                  (16)



                                               ∆ ln wct = αc + β t + γ w ∆fct + εw
                                                                                 ct                                                (17)



                                                ∆ ln rct = αc + β t + γ r ∆fct + εrct                                              (18)



    Each of these regressions (16)-(18) consider as an explanatory variable ∆fct , which is the percentage increase
of the total employment of city c in decade t due to immigration, defined as the percentage change in employment
due to an influx of foreign-born workers (15). Once we control for city fixed eﬀects αc and period fixed eﬀects
β t , and if ∆fct is exogenous to the economic conditions of city c, then regression (16) estimates the eﬀect of this
increase on the increase in employment of U.S.-born workers in city c and decade t, as a percentage of the total
initial employment, namely ∆nct = (Hct+10 − Hct )/(Fct + Hct ). The coeﬃcient γ E captures the elasticity of
U.S.-born employment to an increase of foreign-born workers. The coeﬃcient γ w in regression (17) quantifies the
percentage increase in the average real wage (in 2000 constant dollars) of U.S.-born workers in city c and decade
t from an increase in foreign-born workers.12 Finally coeﬃcient γ r in regression (18) quantifies the percentage
increase in the real average house value (in 2000 constant dollars) for U.S.-born workers in city c and decade t in
response to an increase in foreign-born workers relative to total employment.13 Due to city-specific productivity
shocks, the variables εE     w       r
                       ct , εct and εct are likely to be correlated with migration flows ∆fct . We can however use

the constructed shares of foreign-born as an instrument, based on the Card (2001) method and described in the
appendix 6. This instrument is very eﬀective in these regressions. The partial R2 of the first stage regression
is 0.25 and the F-test for excluding the instrument is above 100 for each regression. Table 5 reports the 2SLS
estimates of the coeﬃcients γ E , γ w , and γ r . Column I reports those obtained with the panel of 86 cities over
4 census years and column II reports those based on 117 cities over 3 census years. Before commenting on the
coeﬃcients in detail let us make two general remarks. First the OLS estimates (not reported but available from
the authors upon request) are not far from the 2SLS estimates. They are however somewhat larger, implying
  1 1 Detailson data and the construction of variables are reported in the Appendix 6.
  1 2 Inorder to control for city composition, the value ln wct is calculated as the city-specific intercept of a Mincerian regression of
log hourly (or yearly) wage of U.S. born workers (in constant 2000 prices) on personal characteristics (years of schooling, experience
dummies, a gender dummy, race dummies, and a marital status dummy). The regressions are run separately for each census year.
Details are reported in Appendix 6.
  1 3 The value ln r
                     ct is calculated as the average value of houses occupied by U.S.-born people (in constant 2000 prices) divided by
the number of rooms in city c and year t. An alternative measure is the gross rental value per room. Details are in the Appendix 6


                                                                   21
the potential existence of an upward OLS bias. Second we do not include any controls (besides city and time
fixed aﬀects) in the regression to eliminate any endogeneity in the regressor that we cannot solve with an IV
strategy. Our previous work (Ottaviano and Peri 2005, forthcoming) introduces a series of potential controls
and checks. The interested reader may check that the estimated positive coeﬃcients are rather robust to most
controls.
    The first row of Table 5 shows the estimated impact of immigration on the employment of native workers, γ E .
This eﬀect is positive but quite imprecisely estimated. No evidence exists that increasing aggregate emigration of
U.S.-born workers from cites attracts larger number of immigrants. The impact of immigration on wages (rows
2 and 3) and on the value of housing (rows 4 and 5) of U.S.-born residents is significantly positive. Alternatively
we use yearly or hourly wages of U.S.-born workers (rows 2 and 3) and control for individual characteristics
in a first-stage regression. The estimates in row 2 and 3 imply that a 1% increase in the share of foreign-born
workers in total employment raises average wage of U.S. workers by between 0.35 to 0.46 percentage points. The
last two rows calculate the impact of foreign-born workers on the value of housing for U.S.-born residents. We
use gross rents (for leased properties) and values of housing (for owner-occupied ones) as alternative measures
of the value of housing. The estimated coeﬃcients imply that an increase of foreign workers by 1% of the initial
employment causes an increase in the value/price of housing for the U.S.-born by 1.1 to 1.6 percentage points.14
These estimates imply a strong positive impact from foreign-born workers on city economies, which put upward
pressures on wages and housing prices, and attract (or at least do not push away) native workers. Remarkably
the average eﬀect from immigrants on U.S. wages (mostly between 0.35 and 0.38) is very close to the eﬀect of
immigration on the average wages calculated in Table 2, row 3, equal to 0.34. Our production function seems
to match quite well the aggregate eﬀects on wages when we estimate them using their cross-city variations. In
the next section we also account for the observed elasticities of housing prices and of internal migration.



4      An Open City Model

4.1     Description of the Model

To simulate the reactions of wages, rents and location decisions for U.S.-born workers to foreign immigration,
we embed the aggregate production function (1) into a simple model of a small city within an open city system.
Specifically, consider a city with land area equal to T inhabited by L workers. To reduce the complexity of
the extended set-up, we neglect diﬀerences in experience across workers, and focus instead only on diﬀerences
in education. Accordingly, workers are diﬀerentiated into four education groups (HSD, HSG, COD, COG) as
well as between home and foreign born (H and F ). This produces eight groups, whose supplies are denoted as
 1 4 These   estimates are virtually identical to those in Saiz (2003).




                                                                    22
in the following matrix:
                                             Skill     Home         Foreign         Total
                                            HSD        HHSD         FHSD            LHSD
                                             HSG       HHSG          FHSG           LHSG
                                            COD        HCOD         FCOD            LCOD
                                             COG       HCOG          FCOG           LCOG
                                             Total          H           F             L

   All workers share the same preferences which are defined over three goods: the freely tradable good Y ,
non-tradable services X, and housing Z. The corresponding utility function is:


                                                      U = Y α X β Z 1−α−β                                                 (19)


with
                                               "µ           ¶ γ−1       µ          ¶ γ−1 # γ−1
                                                                                            γ

                                                     XH        γ
                                                                            XF        γ
                                         X=                         +                                                     (20)
                                                     τ XH                   τ XF

where Y is the consumption of the tradable good and Z is the consumption of housing. Services come in two
varieties that are horizontally diﬀerentiated in terms of “ethnicity,” with the elasticity of substitution equal to
γ > 1. The idea we wish to capture is that the ethnic diversity of local services may produce urban amenities.
Accordingly, XH and XF denote consumption levels of home and foreign varieties respectively. Sub-utility (20)
exhibits a ‘love for variety’: workers prefer a balanced consumption of both ethnic varieties.
   Home-born workers are freely mobile among cities.15 They consume and supply labor only in their city
of residence. This requires cities to be suﬃciently far apart to prevent cross-city commuting. Each worker
inelastically supplies one unit of labor to the production of the tradable good Y and one unit of labor to the
production of her own ethnic variety of non-tradable services X (this can be considered ‘backyard production’).
All markets are perfectly competitive. The production of the tradable good Y is identical to the one defined
in (5) with the sole simplification that within the labor composite defined in (2) we do not subdivide each
education group into experience cells (that is, we let θ in expression 3 be ∞). Housing production requires one
unit of land per unit of output. Lot-size is normalized to unity so that in the city total housing supply equals T .
The production of variety h of non-tradable services X requires one unit of labor of type h per unit of output.
Hence, XH = H and XF = F . What we are trying to capture is the utility-enhancing diversity of restaurants,
specialty food shops and entertainment opportunities aﬀorded to a city with more foreign-born residents. For
example, Chinese, Italian, and Brazilian restaurants, along with Spanish opera singers, Russian dancers and
Ukrainian ice skaters, all provide specific services that simply cannot be replicated by U.S.-born competitors.
  1 5 We assume that the distribution of foreign born is exogenously given, and that a change in their supply is an immigration

shock.


                                                                23
Thus, the home and foreign born may complement each other not only in terms of tradable production (see 5)
but also in terms of non-tradable consumption (see (19) and (20)). Finally, we call 1/τ Xh the eﬃciency units
of a worker born in h in the production of her group-specific services Xh (1/τ Xh can be also interpreted as a
quality parameter).
   In equilibrium workers maximize utility, firms maximize profits and all markets clear. Since U.S.-born
workers are free to move across cities, workers within the same skill group reach the same level of utility
everywhere. Similarly, since firms are free to enter and exit, their profits are equal to zero everywhere. As the
formal equilibrium conditions are fairly standard, we prefer to relegate them and their derivation to Appendix
7, and focus instead on the logic of our simulation experiment.


4.2    Parametrization and Calibration

Our city is a small-open economy in which U.S.-born workers move in and out in order to equate their indirect
utility (‘real wage’) in the city to the real wage perceived in the rest of the economy. We wish to calibrate this city
as the average U.S. city in order to simulate the eﬀects of foreign immigration from 1990 to 2000 on the average
wages, rents and location decisions of U.S.-born workers. In so doing, we compare this city equilibrium before
and after the migratory shock captured by the change of the supply of foreign-born workers in each of the four
education groups (∆FHSD , ∆FHSG , ∆FCOD , ∆FCOG ). We model this shock as exogenous to any city-specific
event. Variables with a 0 subscript are associated with the pre-shock equilibrium (1990), while a subscript of
1 denotes post-shock values (2000). This is therefore a comparative statics exercise, since we consider what
happens to the variables of interest once the new equilibrium is reached. However, in order to understand the
mechanisms that drive the migration of workers between the initial shock and the new equilibrium, we also
report the “eﬀect on impact” of the immigration of foreign-born, that is, what happens to wages and the values
of houses before the migratory response of U.S. citizens takes place.
   The initial equilibrium is calibrated on the average U.S. metropolitan area in 1990. We standardize both
its initial total employment and its land endowment to 1. Accordingly, the vector of initial endowments of
U.S.-born workers (HHSD0 , HHSG0 , HCOD0 , HCOG0 ) is (0.084, 0.257, 0.294, 0.264) while the vector of the
initial endowments of foreign-born workers (FHSD0 , FHSG0 , FCOD0 , FCOG0 ) is (0.031, 0.02, 0.024, 0.029).
This implies that foreign-born workers as a whole equal 10.6% of U.S. employment, which corresponds to the
aggregate figures for metropolitan areas in the year 1990. Their distribution was unequal across skill groups as
they were over-represented among the low skilled (26% of high-school dropouts), under-represented among the
medium skilled (7.5% of high school graduates and college dropouts) and proportionally represented among the
high skilled (10% of college graduates).
   The magnitude of the immigration shock during the 1990s was quite large, as the foreign born population



                                                          24
almost doubled in the U.S., going from 7% to 13.5% of total employment. Our experiment maintains the
employment and distribution of U.S.-born workers as in 1990, and increases foreign-born workers by the amount
experienced by the average U.S. metropolitan area during the 1990-2000 period. The resulting shock is (∆FHSD ,
∆FHSG , ∆FCOD , ∆FCOD )=(1.9%,1.5%,1.5%,3.0%). The total increase in foreign employment is therefore 8%
of initial U.S. employment. Notice that the values used for both the initial conditions and for the shock are
exactly the same as those used in the calculations in section 2.4.
   We obtain some of the parameter values required to simulate the model either directly from the literature
or from simple calculations. Others are instead estimated. We also provide several robustness checks of our
simulation results using diﬀerent values for these parameters. The parameters of the utility function have been
obtained using the share of household expenditures on housing services to obtain (1 − α − β) and on local
food and entertainment services (X) to obtain β. These data are from the Consumer Expenditure Survey,
available at Bureau of Labor Statistics (2005). The share of expenditures in housing services for the 1999-
2002 period was slightly larger than 0.20. We choose 1 − α − β = 0.20 as a base-value, and test the eﬀect of
assuming 1 − α − β = 0.25. As for the share of expenditures on local service X, we include expenditures for
food in restaurants, food in specialty shops, and entertainment. This share ranges between 0.15 and 0.20 of
the expenditures of the average U.S. household. We choose β = 0.2 as base-value and also test the eﬀect of
the assumption β = 0.15. As for the substitutability between the non-tradable services provided by the U.S.
and foreign born, we assume a conservatively high elasticity (6 − 7). Considering that the median elasticity of
substitution between goods within five-digit SITC sectors has been estimated by Weinstein and Broda (2004)
as 4.7, our values certainly fall on the high side.16 Our choice of using a high elasticity limits the importance of
ethnic diversity in making a location attractive, therefore biasing the results against us.
   In the production of the traded good (5) we assume an elasticity between skill groups of δ = 1.8 (experi-
menting also with 2), which is consistent with our choice in section 2. The relative eﬃciencies of the factors
(1/τ k ) are chosen to match the national wage premia between education groups, given their relative supplies
and the elasticity of substitution δ. Standardizing the eﬃciency of HSD workers (τ HSD = 1) we can obtain
                                          ³      ´       h ³       ´        ³      ´i
                                                               wk              Ek
the other values by using the formula: ln τ HSD
                                             τk    =  δ
                                                     δ−1  ln wHSD    + 1
                                                                       δ ln   EHSD   , where wk is the average
national wage for workers of education k, and Ek is the total supply of workers of education group k. The
relative eﬃciency of the foreign born to U.S.-born both in any skill group and in the production of local services
has been set equal to 1.
   After the exogenous immigration shock, the new equilibrium is established when the supply of U.S.-born
workers in the city is adjusted so that the utility they enjoy in the city is the same they would enjoy anywhere
else. Under the small economy assumption, the utility levels for natives who reside elsewhere are kept constant
 1 6 For   instance a narrow SITC-5 digits category such as “cheese” has an elasticity of 4.5 among its varieties.




                                                                   25
at their initial values (V HSD , V HSD , V COD , V COG ). These of course are unobservable, and are calculated as
the implicit values that make the equilibrium supply of the U.S.-born predicted by the model match their actual
supply in 1990 (HHSD0 , HHSG0 , HCOD0 , HCOG0 ) for the given initial distribution of foreign-born residents
(FHSD0 , FHSG0 , FCOD0 , FCOG0 ).17 This completes the parametrization of the model. In the next section we
describe the results of this simulation.


4.3        Simulation Results

Table 6 summarizes the results of our simulations. Maintaining the common average shock that mirrors the
actual increase in foreign-born workers during the 1990s, the seven columns correspond to simulations for
diﬀerent combinations of parameter values. While we are mainly interested in the long-run (equilibrium) eﬀects
in order to match our estimated eﬀects across decades, the first two rows (below the parameters values) report
the short-run eﬀects from immigration on the average wages and housing values for U.S.-born workers. The
following three rows report the eﬀects on the average variables for U.S.-born individuals (i.e., the percentage
change in average wage, the percentage change in the value of housing, and in- or out-migration), all calculated
in the new ‘long-run’ equilibrium, after internal migration takes place and the new equilibrium is reached.
The last three rows report the implied elasticities of wages, rents and internal migration from the inflow of
foreign-born, and are directly comparable with the estimated coeﬃcients γ w , γ r , γ E reported in Table 5.
   The first column of Table 6 (specification I) shows results from the main simulation that uses the baseline
choices for the parameters as described in the previous section. In particular note that the ‘preferred’ values
for the parameters σ k (equal to 6, 7, 7, 3) are used. Specification II employs the parameter values for σ k ’s
that are closer to the point estimates of Table 1 (equal to 7, 10, 10, 4). The remarkable feature of these two
specifications is that they generate long-run elasticities of average wages and rents that match very closely the
estimated range of elasticities in Table 5. In particular, γ w is simulated to be between 0.35 and 0.42 while γ r
is between 1.18 and 1.58. The corresponding estimated ranges are (0.35 − 0.46) and (1.11 − 1.61) for γ w and
γ r respectively. The parameter γ E is more variable and not far from 0. Its variability in the simulation derives
from the fact that diﬀerent skill groups have diﬀerent migration behavior (native HSD always move out while
the other groups move in) so that the overall eﬀect is uncertain. This has a correspondence, however, in the
very large variability and imprecision of the estimated eﬀect that was often not significantly diﬀerent from 0
in Table 5. Specification III is shown purely for reference as it assumes very high values for the elasticity of
substitution between U.S. and foreign born (not supported by the evidence). It is clear that the large positive
eﬀect on average wages and rents depends heavily on the imperfect substitutability between the U.S. and foreign
born. If, as in this specification, natives and foreigners are close to perfect substitutes, then the eﬀect on wages
 1 7 See   appendix 7 for details on the calibration of these initial utility levels.




                                                                      26
and rents is smaller, and is accompanied by a net out-migration of U.S.-born workers.
    Specifications IV to VII show the robustness of the simulated elasticities (especially γ w and γ r ) to changes in
the other parameters. Specification IV increases the elasticity of substitution between local services (produced
by U.S. and foreign born workers) to 7; specification V increases the share of total expenditures on housing
services to 25%; specification VI reduces the share of spending on food-entertainment to 15%; and specification
VII increases the elasticity of substitution between schooling groups to 2. Each specification produces values
of γ w and γ r within our estimated range (Table 5) and values of γ E that are either positive or very close to
0, confirming that there seem to be no strong tendencies for U.S.-born residents to leave cities that experience
migration.
    Thus, for plausible parameter values, our simple (and quite standard) model finds significant positive eﬀects
of immigration on the average wages and rents of U.S.-born workers. Quite remarkably, the magnitude of this
eﬀect is equal to what our IV estimates produce across U.S. cities.



5     Conclusion

Along with goods and capital, the increased movement of people across countries has been a prominent feature
of the last few decades. While in general economists are among the staunchest supporters of freer trade and
capital movement, they have primarily argued that migration hurts U.S. native workers, in particular those
with low skills. Whereas it is hard to deny that in any reasonable model, the relative increase of low skilled
workers will cause a decrease in their relative wage, this study is interested primarily in determining the overall
(average) eﬀect of immigration, aggregating across groups of U.S.-born workers. It turns out both empirically
and theoretically that immigration, as we have known it during the nineties, had a sizeable beneficial eﬀect on
the wages of U.S.-born workers. For a flow of migrants that increases total employment by 10% and a skill
distribution that mirrors the one observed in the nineties, U.S.-born workers experience a 3-4 percentage point
increase in their wages. This results because U.S. and foreign-born workers are not perfectly substitutable, even
when they have similar observable skills. Workers born, raised and partly educated in foreign environments are
not identical to workers born and raised in the U.S. This set of diﬀerences that we might label ‘diversity’ is
the basis for the gains from immigration that accrue to U.S.-born workers. Even a small degree of diﬀerence,
captured by a relatively high elasticity of substitution between U.S. and foreign-born workers (between 4 and
7), is enough to generate the average wage gains that we estimate from U.S. metropolitan data using a reduced-
form equation. We believe that sharpening our understanding of the complementarities and substitutability
between the U.S. and Foreign born in diﬀerent sectors and skills, along with using an aggregate production
function approach, are crucial steps in quantifying the benefits of immigration to the U.S. economy. We hope
that this article may encourage a line of research into such “gains” from immigration, rooted in production

                                                         27
complementarities (between workers and with physical capital) that may account for these important and thus
far neglected eﬀects from immigration.




                                                    28
References

 [1] Angrist, Joshua (1995) “The Economic Returns to Schooling in the West Bank and Gaza Strip,” American
    Economic Review 85 (1995), 1065-1087.

 [2] Altonji, Joseph J. and David Card (1991) “The eﬀects of Immigration on the Labor Market Outcomes
    of Less-Skilled Natives ”in John M. Abowd and Richard Freeman eds, Immigration, Trade and the Labor
    Market, Chicago, the University of Chicago Press.

 [3] Borjas, George J. (1987) "Immigrant, Minorities and Labor Market Competition" Industrial and Labor
    Relations Review, 40, 382-392.

 [4] Borjas, George J. (1994) “The Economics of Immigration” Journal of Economic Literature 32, 1667-1717.

 [5] Borjas, George J. (1995) "The Economic Benefits from Immigration" Journal of Economics Perspectives,
    9 (2), 3-22.

 [6] Borjas, George J. (1999) “Heaven’s Door” Princeton University Press, Princeton and Oxford, 1999.

 [7] Borjas, George J. (2003) “The Labor Demand Curve is Downward Sloping: Reexamining the Impact of
    Immigration on the Labor Market” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXVIII (4), 1335-1374.

 [8] Borjas, George J., Freeman, Richard and Katz, Larry (1997) “How Much do Immigration and Trade Aﬀect
    Labor Market Outcomes?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1997 (1), 1-90

 [9] Bureau of     Labor Statistics    (2005) “   The Consumer Expenditure Survey”        year   1999-2002,
    http://www.bls.gov/cex/home.htm#tables.

[10] Butcher, Katrin C. and Card, David (1991) “Immigration and Wages: Evidence from the 1980s” American
    Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 81 (2), 292-296.

[11] Card, David (1990) “The Impact of the Mariel Boatlift on the Miami Labor Market” Industrial and Labor
    Relation Review, XLIII, 245-257.

[12] Card, David (2001) “Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local labor Market Impacts of Higher
    Immigration” Journal of Labor Economics, XIX (2001), 22-64.

[13] Card, David and Di Nardo, John (2000) “Do Immigrants Inflow Lead to Native Outflows?” NBER Working
    Paper n. 7578.

[14] Card, David and Lemieux, Thomas (2001) “Can Falling Supply Explain the Rising Returns to College for
    Younger Men? A Cohort Based Analysis” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. CXVI, pag. 705-746.


                                                     29
[15] Ciccone, Antonio and Peri, Giovanni (2005) “Long-Run Substitutability between More and Less Educated
    Workers: Evidence from US States 1950-1990” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 87, Issue 4.

[16] Fallon, P.R. and Layard P.R.G. (1975),“Capital-Skill Complementarity, Income Distribution, and Output
    Accounting,” Journal of Political Economy 83, 279-302.

[17] Filer, Randy (1992) “The Impact of Immigrant Arrivals on Migratory Patterns of Native Workers” in
    Immigration and the Work Force: Economic Consequences for the United States and Source Areas edited
    by Borjas and Freeman. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

[18] Frey, William H.(1995) “Immigration Impact on Internal Migration of the Poor: 1990 Census Evidence
    from US States” International Journal of Population Geography 1, 51-67.

[19] Grossman, Jean B. (1982) “The Substitutability of Natives and Immigrants in Production” Review of
    Economics and Statistics, 64, 596-603.

[20] Hamermesh, Daniel (1993), Labor Demand, (Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.

[21] Johnson, Gary. (1970), “The Demand for Labor by Educational Category,” Southern Economic Journal,
    37, 190-203.

[22] Katz, Larry and Murphy, Kevin (1992) “Change in Relative Wages 1963-1987: Supply and Demand Fac-
    tors,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, 35-78.

[23] Lewis, Ethan (2003) “Local Open Economies within the US. How do Industries respond to Immigration?”
    Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, Working Paper 04-1.

[24] National Research Council (1997) “The New Americans: Economic, Demographic, and Fiscal Eﬀects of
    Immigration” National Academy Press, Washington D.C..

[25] Ottaviano, Gianmarco I.P. and Peri Giovanni (2005) “The Economic Value of Cultural Diversity: Evidence
    from U.S. cities” Journal of Economic Geography, Advance Access published on June 22, 2005, DOE
    10.1093/jeg/lbi002.

[26] Ottaviano, Gianmarco I.P. and Peri Giovanni (forthcoming) “Cities and Cultures” Journal of Urban Eco-
    nomics, forthcoming

[27] Park, Jin Huem (1994) “Estimation of Sheepskin Eﬀects and Returns to Schooling Using the Old and New
    CPS Measures of Educational Attainment”, Princeton University Industrial Relation Section, Working
    Paper No. 338.

[28] Ramsey, Frank.P. (1928) “A Mathematical Theory of Saving” Economic Journal, 38, 543-559.

                                                    30
[29] Ruud, Paul A. (2000), An Introduction to Classical Econometric Theory, Oxford University Press, Oxford.

[30] Ruggles Steven , Matthew Sobek, Trent Alexander, Catherine A. Fitch, Ronald Goeken, Patricia Kelly
    Hall, Miriam King, and Chad Ronnander (2005). Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 3.0
    [Machine-readable database]. Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota Population Center [producer and distributor],
    2004. http://www.ipums.org.

[31] Saiz, Albert (2003) “Room in the Kitchen for the Melting Pot: Immigration and Rental Prices.” Review of
    Economics and Statistics, 85, 502-521 .

[32] Solow, Robert (1956). “A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
    nomics, 70, pp. 65-94.

[33] Weinstein, David and Broda, Christian (2004) “Globalizatoin and the Gains from Variety” NBER Working
    Paper n. 10314.




                                                    31
6     Appendix: Data and Definition of the Variables

6.1    Construction of Average Wage and Average House Values

The value of ln wct used in Section 3.3 to calculate ∆ ln wct is obtained separately for each census year as the
MSA-specific intercept of the following Mincerian regression on individual data, after having separated U.S.-born
individuals from individuals that were born abroad but have since become U.S. citizens:


           ln wict = ln wct + α(School)i + β(Experience)i + γ(Sex)i + δ(Race)i + θ(M arital)i + εict

    The variable ln wct captures 84 (or in the 1970-1990 sample 117) MSA-specific dummies. The variable
School represents four dummies corresponding to the following groups: High School Dropouts, High School
Graduates, College Dropouts and College Graduates. This variable is constructed using the variable “highest
grade attended” (HIGRADEG) for the 1970 and 1980 censuses, and the categorical variable (defined as educ99
in the IPUMS files). This variable has been converted into years of schooling using the correspondence developed
in Park (1994). The variable Experience represents eight dummies for five-year groups of experience between
0 and 40 years. It is calculated as potential experience, namely, Age - Years of Schooling - 6. The variable
Sex is a dummy equal to 1 when the worker is a woman and 0 otherwise. The variable Race stand for five
dummies corresponding to White, Black, Hispanic, Native and Asian. The variable M arital identifies three
dummies corresponding to being single, being married or being divorced. The omitted dummies are such that
the intercept captures the value for the reference group of high school graduates with 15-20 years of experience,
white, male and married. When we use hourly wages as the measure of wict we obtain it by dividing the variable
“wage and salary income” (previously converted into 2000 USA $ using the CPI deflator) by the variable weeks
worked last year and then by “hours worked last week” (categorized in the 1970 and 1980 censuses) or by “hours
usually worked per week” (categorized in the 1990 and 2000 censuses). We selected people who were in the
labor force, worked at least one week during the census year and received a non-zero salary.
    The value of ln rct used in Section 3.3 to calculate ∆ ln rct is also obtained separately for each census year
as the average by MSA of monthly gross rent (RENTGRS) converted into 2000 US $ using the CPI deflator,
or of the value of the house (VALUEH), also converted into 2000 US $. Each value has been divided by the
number of rooms (ROOMS) in the house to standardize for the size of the house and obtain a value per room,
comparable across cities. Only U.S.-born heads of households have been included in the sample.


6.2    Construction of the Instrument

We first define 56 countries (or group of countries) of origin of foreign-born workers that can be tracked con-
sistently from the 1970 census to the 2000 census. Together they accounted for more than 98% of all foreign-


                                                        32
born. These countries are: Canada, Atlantic Islands, Mexico, Central America, Cuba, West Indies, SOUTH
AMERICA, Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden, England, Scotland, Wales, Ireland, Belgium, France,
Luxembourg, Netherlands, Switzerland, Albania, Greece, Italy, Portugal, Spain, Austria, Bulgaria, Czechoslo-
vakia, Germany, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Yugoslavia, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania,Russia, Rest of Europe,
China, Japan, Korea, Philippines, Vietnam, India, Iran, Israel/Palestine, Jordan, Lebanon, Syria,Turkey, Rest
of Asia, AFRICA, Australia and New Zealand, Pacific Islands, Abroad (unknown). From the 1970 census we
calculate the working population of skill group k (for k = HSD, HSG, COD, COG) in Metropolitan Area c (for
c = 1, ...117) from each of these nations and call it Lnkc1970 . Using the overall Census (1970-2000) we calculate
the overall growth rate of each skill by nation group (k by n = 1, ...56, 57) for the entire U.S.. Foreign-born
workers in diﬀerent skill groups grew because of diﬀerent amounts of immigrations from diﬀerent nations of
origin, as well as diﬀerent migration rates across skill groups. For each decade t = 1970, 1980, 1990 we define the
growth rate of a nation-skill group during that decade as gnkt = (Lnkt+10 − Lnkt )/Lnkt . We apply these nation-
skill growth rates for each decade to the initial population in a skill-nationality group for each city c to obtain an
                                                                 b nkct+10 = Lnkc1970 (1 + gnkt ) where the “hat”
imputed skill-nationality population of city c over the decades: L
indicates that the value is imputed. Finally using these imputed populations we can calculate the imputed
shares of foreign born in each city and skill group for each census year (1980-2000). As the imputed variables
are constructed using only national averages and the initial distribution of foreign-born, city-specific shocks that
occurred during the period (1970-2000) which aﬀected actual migration into a city should be uncorrelated with
them.



7     Appendix: Equilibrium of the City Model

Let us define wkh as the wage per worker born in h with skill level k, pY the price per unit of tradable good Y ,
pXh the price per unit of non-tradable service h, and r the land rent. Also define Γ ≡ {HSD, HSG, COD, COG}
as the set of education levels and Θ ≡ {H, F } as the set of birthplaces.


7.1     Equilibrium Conditions

If we call w the vector of wkh ’s and E the associated vector of labor endowments, then aggregate income can
be written as:
                                        I = w0 E + pXH XH + pXF XF + rT

Utility maximization and market clearing in all sectors imply:

                                                           w0 E
                                                      I=                                                         (21)
                                                            α


                                                         33
                                                                       1−α−β 0
                                                             rT =           wE                                                           (22)
                                                                         α

Given (5), profit maximization requires:
                                                                         b = PC
                                                                      pY A                                                               (23)

      b is a constant defined in Section 2 and:
where A

                                                                  Ã                          ! 1−δ
                                                                                                1
                                                                       X
                                                         PC =                 φk Pk1−δ
                                                                       k∈Γ


                                        h                                 i 1−σ
                                                                              1
                                                    1−σ k             1−σ       k
                                τ k Pk = φkH (wkH )       + φkF (wkF ) k          , k∈Γ

are the price indices associated with the quantity indices C and Ck /τ k respectively, φk ≡ (τ k )1−δ and φkh ≡
(τ kh )1−σk .
    The exact aggregation properties of the above quantity and price indices ensure that


                                                                      PC C = w0 E                                                        (24)

             P                               P
as well as      k∈Γ   Pk Ck = PC C and           h∈Θ   wkh kh = Pk Ck . Exploiting these properties, profit maximization also
implies:
                                                                          µ           ¶1−δ
                                                                              Pk
                                                        Pk Ck = φk                               PC C                                    (25)
                                                                              PC
                                                                         µ             ¶1−σk
                                                                              wkh
                                                      wkh kh = φkh                                  Pk Ck                                (26)
                                                                              Pk

for all k ∈ Γ and h ∈ Θ. These expressions can be easily manipulated to produce:

                                             µ        ¶1−δ               1     δ−1                           µ        ¶ δ−1
                                                 Pk                    φkδ Ck δ                          1       Ck      δ
                                       φk                    =P                1       δ−1       = φk    δ
                                                                                                                                         (27)
                                                 PC                                                              C
                                                                       k∈Γ φk Ck
                                                                            δ    δ




                                                                                   σ k −1
                                   µ         ¶1−σk                      σ
                                                                         1
                                                                                     σk                               µ        ¶ σkσ−1
                                       wkh                             φkhk kh                                    1
                                                                                                                 σk       kh       k
                             φkh                       =              σk −1                     σ k −1   = φkh                           (28)
                                       Pk                     1
                                                             σk        σk
                                                                                       1
                                                                                      σk          σk                      Ck
                                                           φkH kH             + φkF kF

where σ k is the elasticity of substitution between U.S. and foreign born workers within skill group k.
    Finally, we need to characterize the equilibrium prices of non-tradable services. To do this, we observe that
for utility we can exploit the same aggregation properties we used for tradable production. Specifically:

                                                                               1       γ−1
                                                                              γ
                                                                             φXh h      γ
                                                  pXh h =         1          γ−1            1        γ−1
                                                                                                             βI                          (29)
                                                               γ                        γ
                                                              φXH H           γ      + φXF F          γ




                                                                              34
for h ∈ Θ.


7.2      Labor Market Clearing

We can represent the equilibrium as the intersection of labor demand and supply curves as follows. Demand for
labor of skill group k and ethnic group h can be derived by considering (26), (25), (27), (28), and (24). This
gives:
                                                          1                     1          σ k −δ
                                                     1   σ            − σ1             −
                                   wkh = pY · C δ · φkhk (hk )           k   · φkδ (Ck )    δσ k
                                                                                                                    (30)

which depicts the (inverse) demand for workers born in h with skill level k as a negative relationship between
wkh and kh .
   At the free-mobility spatial equilibrium a worker must be indiﬀerent about her location irrespective of her
birthplace or skill level. This is the case if she achieves the same level of indirect utility V kh in all cities. Given
the utility function (19) this requires


                                                             β 1−α−β
                                              wkh = V kh pα
                                                          Y PX r                                                    (31)

where

                                        h                              i 1−γ
                                                                          1

                                    PX = φXH (pXH )1−γ + φXF (pXF )1−γ

is the exact price index associated with (20) such that PX X = βI. Thus, by (21) and (22), we have

                                                              µ       ¶β µ                 ¶1−α−β µ          ¶1−α
                                  β 1−α−β                         β          1−α−β                    w0 E
                   wkh = V kh pα
                               Y PX r     = V kh pα
                                                  Y
                                                                  X            T                       α

which, by (24) and (23), can be rewritten as:

                                                    ³ ´1−α                          (C)1−α
                                                     b
                                   wkh = pY · V kh · A     ·B·                                                      (32)
                                                                             (X)β (T )1−α−β
                  1−α     β               1−α−β
where B ≡ (1/α)         (β) (1 − α − β)           . Given the definition of the composite C, (32) depicts the (inverse)
supply of workers born in h with skill level k as a positive relationship between wkh and kh . With k ∈ Γ and
h ∈ Θ, (30) and (32) generate a system of eight demands and eight supplies for foreign- and home-born labor.
In the solution we choose good Y as numeràire (pY = 1).




                                                              35
7.3    Further Details on Calibration and Simulation
                            ³ ´1−α
                             b
We find the values of V kh · A     by assuming that the endowments of labor across skill and birthplace groups
in 1990 correspond to the equilibrium allocations predicted by the model. Accordingly, the 16-dimensional
system (30)-(32) can be solved in the following sixteen unknowns: eight wages wkh and eight ‘adjusted’ indirect
                ³ ´1−α
                 b
utilities V kh · A     . The latter are held constant in all simulations.
   The changes in foreign-born labor endowments from 1990 to 2000 are taken as exogenous. In evaluating the
eﬀects on impact, we also take U.S.-born labor endowments as given. With fixed labor supplies, we are left with
eight labor demands (30), which can be solved for eight wages. The final adjustment requires U.S.-born workers
to re-optimize in terms of location, taking into account exogenous foreign-born migration. This requires us to
add four U.S.-born labor supplies to the eight labor demands. The solution of this 12-dimensional system are
eight equilibrium wages and four equilibrium quantities for U.S.-born workers.




                                                      36
Figures and Tables

                                                                                                  Figure 1
                                                                       Percentage of Foreign-Born in US Population


                                       14

                                                                                                 Percentage of Foreign-Born in U.S.Population

                                       12



                                       10




                                       8
      percentag




                                       6




                                       4



                                       2




                                       0
                                              1960                    1970                1980                 1990                     2000              2003
                                                                                                     year




                                                                         Figure 2
                                              Change in Wage of US born and Change in Share of Foreign Born:
                                                            86 Metropolitan Areas, 1970-2000

                                                                     grow th w age US born 70-2000                                  Fitted values
                                                                                                                          Austin,
                                        -.031595

                                                                                                                                San Jose
                                                           Jackson,
                                                                                                             Ventura-
                                                               San Fran       Charlott                         Phoenix,
         growth wage US born 70-2000




                                                              Little R                                Dallas-F
                                                                Boston,
                                                                              Denver-B                                                              Fort Lau
                                                         Memphis,
                                                                Columbia             Tampa-St                                       Orlando,
                                                                      Jacksonv                                         Miami-Hi        West Pal
                                                                    Wichita, San Anto
                                                                                    Salt Lak                  Riversid
                                                         Birmingh Nashvill         New York          Los  Ange
                                                                           Albuquer                          Houston-
                                                                 Honolulu
                                                               Baton   Ro            Sacramen
                                                               Richmond Greensbo
                                                                   Minneapo   Portland
                                                                 Tulsa, O
                                                               Charlest                           Atlanta,
                                                             Spokane,                                      San Dieg
                                                           Philadel
                                                                Providen                     WashingtBakersfi
                                                              Oklahoma
                                                         Louisvil                               Fresno,
                                                             Baltimor
                                                           Lancaste
                                                      HartfordColumbusTacoma,                  Stockton
                                                             Omaha,
                                                            Kansas
                                                       Cincinna      C N              Seattle-
                                                           Knoxvill
                                                           New   Orle
                                                          Springfi        Chicago-                                                                                 Las Vega
                                                          Milwauke
                                                             Indianap
                                                                 Grand Ra
                                                           Allentow                                     El Paso,
                                                            Fort
                                                           St.   Way
                                                            Harrisbu
                                                               Loui                         Tucson,
                                                                   Norfolk-

                                                         Albany-S
                                                       Akron, O
                                                       Syracuse
                                                      Canton,
                                                         Toledo,
                                                      Clevelan
                                                          Detroit,
                                                     Buffalo-
                                                     Gary-Ham
                                                   Rocheste
                                                     Youngsto
                                                       Dayton-S
                                                     Pittsbur
                                        -.346953
                                               -.035463                                                                                                          1.11614
                                                                                         grow th empl. Foreigners 70-2000




                                                                                                    37
                                                                                   Figure 3
                                                        Change in Rent of US born and Change in Share of Foreign Born:
                                                                       86 Metropolitan Areas, 1970-2000


                                                                                       grow th rent US born 70-2000                                Fitted values
                                                                                     San Fran
                                                             .718135                                                                             San Jose
                               growth rent US born 70-2000




                                                                                                  Charlott                     Ventura-
                                                                                                                       Los Ange         Austin,
                                                                                  Charlest
                                                                                   Honolulu              New
                                                                                                          Salt York
                                                                                                            Seattle-
                                                                                                               Lak       Dallas-F Dieg
                                                                                                                             San
                                                                                                    Portland
                                                                                      Grand Ra                                    Riversid
                                                                                            Nashvill
                                                                                       Boston,                          Atlanta,                    Orlando,
                                                                                     Columbia
                                                                                LancasteJacksonv    Denver-B              BakersfiHouston-
                                                                                                   San AntoSacramen Fresno,
                                                                                Allentow
                                                                                     Providen Albuquer
                                                                              Birmingh                               Stockton                          West Pal
                                                                              Memphis, Greensbo
                                                                                              Tacoma,
                                                                                Knoxvill
                                                                                Philadel
                                                                                 Jackson,                         Tucson,            Phoenix,
                                                                                                                   Washingt El Paso,
                                                                              Albany-S   Norfolk-
                                                                                  Spokane,
                                                                                    Richmond
                                                                                    Little R
                                                                                  Baltimor                 Tampa-St
                                                                                New   OrleWichita,
                                                                                      Tulsa,  O
                                                                                   Oklahoma
                                                                                   Columbus
                                                                          Buffalo-       Minneapo
                                                                                    BatonCRo
                                                                                 Harrisbu
                                                                                 Kansas        Chicago-
                                                                               Springfi                                                                             Fort Lau
                                                                               Milwauke                                                    Miami-Hi
                                                                                  Indianap
                                                                            Cincinna
                                                                              Louisvil                                                                                               Las Vega
                                                                           Canton,Omaha, N
                                                                             Toledo,
                                                                                Detroit,
                                                                           Hartford
                                                                                St. Loui
                                                                           Clevelan
                                                                          Gary-Ham
                                                                            Dayton-S
                                                                          Pittsbur
                                                                        Rocheste
                                                                            Akron, O
                                                                                Fort Way
                                                                            Syracuse
                                                                          Youngsto
                                                             -.055603
                                                                    -.035463                                                                                                       1.11614
                                                                                                             grow th empl. Foreigners 70-2000



                                    Figure 4
       Change in Employment of US born and Change in Share of Foreign Born:
                        86 Metropolitan Areas, 1970-2000

                                                                                   grow th empl. US born 70-2000                                       Fitted values
                                                                                                                                                                                          Las Vega
                                3.54342

                                                                                                                                                       Orlando,
growth empl. US born 70-2000




                                                                                                                                             Austin,
                                                                                                                                  Phoenix,
                                                                                                                                                         West Pal
                                                                                                   Salt Lak      Atlanta,
                                                                               Baton Ro             Tampa-St
                                                                                                           Tucson,


                                                                                     Jacksonv                                                                           Fort Lau
                                                                                GrandGreensbo
                                                                                        Ra
                                                                              Little R Albuquer Sacramen
                                                                           Jackson,                                         Riversid
                                                                           Fort Way                                          Ventura-
                                                                               Columbia
                                                                                      Nashvill       Seattle-
                                                                                        Tacoma,Charlott               Dallas-F
                                                                                                                          San  Dieg
                                                                                                                           Houston-
                                                                                             Denver-B
                                                                                   Minneapo
                                                                            Spokane,
                                                                              Charlest                             Bakersfi
                                                                                                               Fresno,
                                                                          Lancaste
                                                                           Harrisbu     O San
                                                                                   Norfolk-
                                                                                Tulsa,          Anto
                                                                                             Portland         Stockton
                                                                                    Wichita,
                                                                          Knoxvill
                                                                          St. Loui                         Washingt El Paso,
                                                                     Canton, Columbus
                                                                            Omaha,
                                                                           Kansas
                                                                      Syracuse
                                                                            IndianapCN
                                                                          Allentow                                                           San Jose
                                                                     Clevelan
                                                                      Akron,  O
                                                                         Milwauke
                                                                              Richmond
                                                                        Albany-S
                                                                            Baltimor
                                                                         Springfi
                                                                          Detroit,
                                                                    Youngsto             Chicago-
                                                                          Philadel
                                                                        Toledo,
                                                                    Buffalo-
                                                                        Louisvil
                                                                          New Orle
                                                                    Gary-Ham
                                                                         BirminghBoston,                            Los Ange
                                                                               Providen
                                                                             Oklahoma             New York                            Miami-Hi
                                                                         Memphis,
                                                                    Pittsbur
                                                                      Dayton-S
                                                                      Cincinna  Honolulu
                                                                  Rocheste
                                                                     Hartford
                                                                               San Fran
                               -.500415
                                                                 -.035463                                                                                                             1.11614
                                                                                                             grow th empl. Foreigners 70-2000




                                                                                                                        38
                                          Table 1
         Elasticity of Substitution between US-Born and Foreign-Born Workers
                       within the Same Education-Experience Group

Specification                    Imposing same elasticity        Allowing different
                                across different education       elasticity for each
                                groups                           education group
 σ HSD                          7.7**                            7.10**
                                (1.77)                           (1.05)
 σ HSG                          7.7**                            10.1**
                                (1.77)                           (3.02)
 σ COD                          7.7**                            16.6
                                (1.77)                           (11.1)
 σ COG                          7.7**                            4.21**
                                (1.77)                           (0.66)
Experience by school            YES                              YES
effects
Year b y school effects         YES                              YES
Year by Experience              YES                              YES
Effects
Instruments:                    Log of foreign immigrants        Log of foreign immigrants
                                in each skill group              in each skill group
Observations                    128                              128



Notes: The parameters -(1/σk) are estimated from the regression of relative wages (foreign-
born/US born) on relative supply (foreign-born/US born) for 32 education-experience groups
over four census years. The method of estimation is 2SLS. We compute σk and its standard error
using the delta-method. Estimates in each column corresponds to a separate regression.
Heteroscedasticity robust standard error in parenthesis *, ** significantly different from 0 at the
5%,1% level.




                                               39
                                          Table 2
Calculated Effects of Immigration (1990-2000) on Wages of US-born Using the CES Function.

   Specification   Total Shocks by    Parameter                    Calculated Elasticities
                         skill,       Values
                     1990-2000 as
                      % of 1990
                     employment                          (a)              (b)           (c)         (d)      (e)
                   ∆fHSG              δ         σHSD,    γ   own
                                                                          γ   own edu   γ   total
                                                                                            wkj
                                                                                                    γw      %
                   ∆fHSG              θ         σSHG,
                                                             wkj              wk
                                                                                                            Increase
                                                         HSD             HSD            HSD                 average
                   ∆fCOD                        σCOD,                                   HSG
                                                         HSG             HSG                                wage of
                   ∆fCOG                        σCOG                     COD            COD
                                                         COD                                                U.S. born
                                                         COG             COG            COG                 workers
   1               1.9%               1.5    ∞   -0.30  -0.60                           -0.56       0.09    0.7%
   Perfect         1.5%               3      ∞   -0.31  -0.64                           0.25
   Substitution    1.6%                      ∞   -0.32  -0.64                           0.21
   US-Foreign      3.0%                      ∞   -0.32  -0.66                           -0.02
   2               1.9%               1.5   7    -0.17  -0.48                           -0.30       0.28    2.2%
   Closest to      1.5%               3     10   -0.22  -0.55                           0.31
   point           1.6%                     10   -0.22  -0.55                           0.28
   estimates       3.0%                     4    -0.08  -0.41                           0.32
   3 Preferred     1.9%               1.5   6    -0.17  -0.45                           -0.30       0.34    2.7%
                   1.5%               3     7    -0.18  -0.50                           0.33
                   1.6%                     7    -0.18  -0.50                           0.31
                   3.0%                     3    -0.00  -0.32                           0.44
                                          COUNTERFACTUALS
   4               0                  1.5   6    -0.17  -0.45                           0.68        0.32    2.6%
    no inflow of   3.4%               3     7    -0.18  -0.50                           -0.06
   HSD             1.6%                     7    -0.18  -0.50                           0.34
                   3.0%                     3    0.00   -0.32                           0.47
   5               3.4%               1.5   6    -0.17  -0.45                           -1.07       0.35    2.75%
    no inflow of   0                  3     7    -0.18  -0.50                           0.64
   HSG             1.6%                     7    -0.18  -0.50                           0.28
                   3.0%                     3    0.00   -0.32                           0.41
   6               1.9%               1.5   6    -0.17  -0.45                           -0.41       -0.03   -0.2%
    no inflow of   1.5%               3     7    -0.18  -0.50                           0.21
   COG             4.6%                     7    -0.18  -0.50                           -0.43
                   0%                       3    0.00   -0.32                           0.18


   Notes: The Values of γ wkj
                          own
                              ,γ   own edu
                                   wk        , γ wkj
                                                 total
                                                       , γ w are obtained using the formulas derived in the text.
   The initial composition of US-born and Foreign-born in each of the skill group replicates the composition
   of year 1990, as obtained from the IPUMS Census data. The inflows of foreign-born by education-
   experience group are calculated from the IPUMS 1990-2000 data. The elasticities δ and θ are taken from
   the literature: Katz and Murphy (1992) and Card and Lemieux (2001). As for the elasticities σk we
   experiment with different values, in the vicinity of the estimates of Table 1.




                                                        40
                                          Table 3
Estimates of the “Own” Wage Elasticity to Flows of Immigrants within the Same Skill-Group



               Source, Method and Sample           Elasticity of US-born      Calculated elasticity
                                                   wages to immigration      from table 2
                                                   within the same skill     (range for the parameter
                                                   group, keeping output     values in specification 2
                                                   constant                  and 3)
    1    Borjas, (2003), IV, national 1960-                  -0.29*                     γ wkj
                                                                                          own
                                                                                              =
         2000, Skills: 32 experience-education               (0.11)
         groups                                                                      -0.13/-0.18
    2    Ottaviano and Peri, IV, national, 1970-             -0.15*                     γ wkj
                                                                                          own
                                                                                              =
         2000, 32 experience-education groups                (0.04)
                                                                                     -0.13/-0.18
    3    Card (2001), IV 175 MSA’s 1985-                  -0.03/-0.10*                   n.a.
         1990. 6 Skill groups (occupation-                 (0.02/0.04)
         based)
    4    Borjas, (2003), IV, national 1960-                  -0.75*                   γ wk
                                                                                        own   edu
                                                                                                    =
         2000, Skills: 4 education groups                    (0.64)
                                                                                     -0.30/-0.40
    5    Ottaviano and Peri, IV, 86 MSA’s,                   -0.45*                   γ wk
                                                                                        own   edu
                                                                                                    =
         1970-2000, 4 education groups.                      (0.25)
                                                                                     -0.30/-0.40



           Notes:

        1. Estimate is taken from the estimate of Equation 16, page 1363 in Borjas (2003)

        2. Our Estimates, adopting the same methods and variable choices as Borjas (2003). Only
           differences: hourly wages, rather than weekly, exclude 1960 from the sample and use
           IPUMS (rather than CPS) as data source for 2000.
        3. Estimates of the effect on US-born employment are taken from Table 4 in Card (2001),
           only the IV estimates (specification E,F and G). Estimates of the effect on US-born wages
           are taken from table 7 in Card (2001) only IV estimates for US-born Males (specification
           D,E,F,G).
        4. Estimate is taken from the estimate of Equation 17, page 1363 in Borjas (2003)
        5. Our Estimates, using cross-city variation and instruments, based on Card (2001) described
           in the main text.




                                                   41
                                         Table 4
Estimates of the Total Effects of Immigration on Wages of US-Born Workers in Each Skill
                                          Group

   Specification:                       I                 II                 III
   Sample and Method of                 1970-2000         1970-1990          Calculated elasticity
   Estimation:                          Panel IV          Panel IV           from Table 2
                                        86 MSA            117 MSA            (range for the
                                                                             parameter values in
                                                                             specification 2 and 3)
   γ wkj
     total                              -0.10             -0.20              -0.30
                                        (0.24)            (0.17)
   (High school Dropouts)
   γ wkj
     total                              0.15              0.20               0.31-0.33
                                        (0.19)            (0.15)
   (High School Graduates)
   γ wkj
     total                              0.17              0.23               0.28-0.31
                                        (0.20)            (0.15)
   (College Dropouts)
   γ wkj
     total                              0.40*             0.40*              0.31-0.44
                                        (0.20)            (0.15)
   (College Graduates)
   City Dummies                         Yes               Yes
   Year Dummies                         Yes               Yes
   Observations                         344               351
         Note: The parameter estimates in each cell of Column I and II are from a separate panel
         regression. We use as dependent variable ∆ln(w)ckt , the percentage change in average
         real (hourly) wage of US-born workers of education group k in city c for decade t. The
         average logarithmic wage for an education-group in a city in a census year is calculated
         as the city-specific intercept of a Mincerian regression of individual (log)wages on
         experience dummies, gender, race and marital status dummies restricting the sample to
         US-born individuals and running the regression separately for each education group and
         census year. In parentheses are Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors.
         Column III reports the values of the elasticity γ wkj
                                                             total
                                                                   obtained from the calculations in
         Table 2, using the values of structural parameters in specification 2 and 3.




                                                     42
                                             Table 5
    Estimates of the Total Effects of Immigration on Average Wages, Housing Values and
                  In/Outflows of US-Born Residents: US Metropolitan Areas


                   Specification:                    I                II
                   Sample and Method of              1970-2000        1970-1990
                   Estimation:                       Panel IV         Panel IV
                                                     86 MSA           117 MSA
                   γE                                0.87             1.30
                                                     (0.80)           (0.74)
                   γw                                0.46*            0.38*
                   (real hourly wages)               (0.21)           (0.19)
                   γw                                0.35*            0.36*
                   (real yearly wages)               (0.19)           (0.22)
                   γr                                1.25*            1.11*
                   (real gross rents)                (0.40)           (0.30)
                   γr                                1.61*            1.60*
                   (real value of the house)         (0.75)           (0.60)
                   City Dummies                      Yes              Yes
                   Year Dummies                      Yes              Yes
                   Observations                      344              351



The parameter estimate in each cell are from a separate panel regression. The explanatory variables in each
regression are city dummies, time dummies and the increase in foreign-born workers as a percentage of
initial total employment, as defined by ∆fct in the text. Method of estimation: Instrumental variables using
the “constructed” inflow of immigrants (from initial shares by nationality and average immigration rates
into the US, described in the text) as Instrument for ∆f.
Units of observation: Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSA) consistently defined across Census years.
Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parenthesis.
*=significant at 5% confidence level.
First Row, Estimates of γE . The dependent variable is ∆nct , the change in US-born workers in city (MSA) c
during decade t as percentage of the initial total employment. Specification I uses a sample of 86 MSA’s
for the 1970-2000 period, specification II uses 117 MSA’s for the 1970-1990 period.
Second and Third Row, Estimates of γw . The dependent variable is ∆ln(w)ct , the percentage change in
average real wage (hourly in the second and yearly in the third row) of US-born workers in city c for decade
t. The average logarithmic wage for a city in a census year is calculated as the city-specific intercept of a
mincerian regression of individual (log)wages on education dummies, experience dummies, gender, race
and marital status dummies restricting the sample to US-born individuals and running the regression
separately for each census year.
Fourth and Fifth Row, Estimates of γr . The dependent variable is ∆ln(r)ct , the percentage change in average
real monthly rent (fourth row) or house value (fifth row) divided by the number of rooms, for US-born
individuals in city c for decade t.




                                                     43
                                       Table 6
Simulation of the Long-Run Impact of Immigration Shock on Wages, Housing Values and
                 In/Outflows of US-born residents, from the City-Model



                            (I)      (II)   (III)   (IV)   (V)    (VI)    (VII)
   Immigration Shock : ∆f=8%, ∆fHSD=1.9%, ∆fHSG=1.5%, ∆fCOD=1.5%.%, ∆fCOg=3.0%.
                                 Parameter Values
   1-α- β                   0.2      0.2    0.2     0.2    0.25   0.2     0.2
   Β                        0.2      0.2    0.2     0.2    0.2    0.15    0.2
   γ                        6        6      6       7      6      6       6
   δ                        1.8      1.8    1.8     1.8    1.8    1.8     2
   σHSD                     6        7      20      6      6      6       6
   σHSG                     7        10     20      7      7      7       7
   σCOD                     7        10     20      7      7      7       7
   σCOG                     3        4      20      3      3      3       3
                              Short-Run (Impact) Effect
   Change of average Wage   2.8%     2.0% 0.5% 2.8% 2.8% 2.8% 2.7%
   US born
   Change of average Value of   10.2%    9.3%      7.9%   10.2% 10.2% 10.2% 10%
   Houses
                                        Long-Run Effect
   Change of average Wage       3.4%      2.9% 1.5% 3.5%          3.6%     3.6%     3.3%
   US born
   Change of average Value      12.9%    9.7%      4.2%   12.6% 10.7% 10.7% 13%
   of Houses
   Total Migration of US born   2.3%     -0.3% -4.9% 2.0%         -0.1%    -0.1%    2.6%
                                Implied Long-Run Elasticities
   γw                           0.42     0.35  0.19    0.42       0.44     0.44     0.40
   γr                           1.58     1.18  0.52    1.55       1.31     1.32     1.59
   γE                           0.28     -0.06 -0.61 0.24         -0.02    -0.01    0.31

   The Value of all other parameters as well as the initial conditions in the supply of US-born and
   Foreign-born workers of each skill group are constant across simulations and are reported in the
   section “Simulation of the Model” in the text. The simulated shock equals in magnitude and
   skill composition the inflow of foreign-born workers in the period 1990-2000.




                                              44
