                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         PRICE DISCRIMINATION, COPYRIGHT LAW
                           AND TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION:
                       EVIDENCE FROM THE INTRODUCTION OF DVDS

                                         Julie Holland Mortimer

                                          Working Paper 11676
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11676


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2005




I thank John Asker, Steve Berry, Estelle Cantillon, Liran Einav, Gautam Gowrisankaran, Ali Hortacsu,
Richard Mortimer, Ariel Pakes, Brian Viard, Paul Walsh and Mike Whinston for helpful discussions and
comments. I also thank seminar participants at the Bureau of Economic Analysis, Columbia University, Duke
University, Harvard University, Indiana University, Johns Hopkins University, MIT, Northwestern
University, the National Bureau of Economic Research Summer Institute, the Stanford Institute for
Theoretical Economics, University of Virginia, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Yale University, and the
2002 Workshop for Business and Economics Scholars at Florida Atlantic University for helpful comments.
Chris Conlon provided excellent research assistance. The data for this study were generously provided to me
by Rentrak Corporation, and I thank Ellen Dannenberg and Amir Yazdani for their help in collecting the data.
Jerilyn Kessel at Centris provided additional data, and Brad Hackley provided helpful comments from the
Video Software Dealers Association. I visited the Center for the Study of Industrial Organization during the
course of this research, and am grateful for their hospitality and financial support. Any remaining errors are
my own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Julie Holland Mortimer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Price Discrimination, Copyright Law, and Technological Innovation: Evidence from the
Introduction of DVDs
Julie Holland Mortimer
NBER Working Paper No. 11676
September 2005
JEL No. L0, O3

                                          ABSTRACT




This paper examines the welfare effects of intellectual property protection, accounting for firms'

optimal responses to legal environments and technological innovation. I examine firms' use of

indirect price discrimination in response to U.S. copyright law, which effectively prevents direct

price discrimination. Using data covering VHS and DVD movie distribution, I explain studios'

optimal pricing strategies under U.S. copyright law, and determine optimal pricing strategies under

E.U. copyright law, which allows for direct price discrimination. I analyze these optimal pricing

strategies for both the existing VHS technology and the new digital DVD technology. I find that

studios' use of indirect price discrimination under US copyright law benefits consumers and harms

retailers. Optimal pricing under E.U. copyright law also tends to benefit studios and consumers. I

also reanalyze these issues assuming continued DVD adoption.



Julie Holland Mortimer
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
mortimer@fas.harvard.edu
1        Introduction

The welfare effects of intellectual property protection depend on how firms respond to
the legal environment created by intellectual property laws (such as patent and copyright
law), as well as technological innovations that affect the distribution of protected work.
An important aspect of U.S. copyright law is a restriction that the law places on firms’
abilities to directly price discriminate based on a consumer’s intended use of a product.
Firms may attempt to mitigate the effect of this restriction through legal indirect price
discrimination. In addition to responding to legal restrictions, firms also face new challenges
when copywritten content (e.g., music and movies) is digitalized. This technological change
may alter firms’ optimal pricing decisions. To identify factors influencing firms’ optimal
pricing decisions under current U.S. copyright law, I empirically examine the outcomes
of two pricing strategies (no price discrimination and indirect price discrimination) used
by firms for products that are identical in content but distributed via an old established
technology and a new emerging technology. The analysis uses a new dataset covering
the distribution of movies on VHS and DVD formats to explain why alternative pricing
strategies may be optimal for the same movie distributed on different formats, and to
establish the welfare effects of indirect price discrimination strategies in the context of the
U.S. copyright law. I then estimate the welfare effects of optimal pricing strategies under
an alternative form of copyright protection currently used in the E.U. that allows for direct
price discrimination based on a consumer’s intended use of a product. Finally, I consider
the potential future effects of current and alternative copyright laws as adoption of the
emerging technology continues and firms respond to changes in the composition of their
consumers.
        In 1979, Paramount began licensing Fotomat to sell videocassette tapes of its movies,
and soon discovered that independent retailers were purchasing the tapes and renting them
out at their own stores. This was (and is) legal under the U.S. Copyright Act of 1976,
which stipulates that an owner of a legally-owned copy of a creative production has the
right of “first use.” This stipulation, commonly referred to as the First Sale Doctrine,
invokes copyright jurisdiction only upon the first sale of videocassette tapes (or any other
copyright-protected product), so that subsequent use, including resale and rentals, does
not generate income to the copyright holder.1 The First Sale Doctrine is distinct from the
    1
        In 1977, MCA/Universal and Disney jointly sued the Sony Corporation, which created and owned


                                                   1
Fair Use Doctrine, which addresses duplication of copyrighted materials for the purpose
of fair use (such as photocopying articles for distribution to a class or public showings of
copywritten content). The First Sale Doctrine applies to all copyright-protected products
and also allows for legal markets in used book, records/CDs, paintings, and other creative
works. It is still an open question as to how First Sale Doctrine will be interpreted with
respect to digital media, where transfering ownership of a legally-purchased copy, or allowing
others to “rent” a legally-purchased copy generally requires duplication of the original.2
    The First Sale Doctrine effectively strips movie studios of any ability to directly price
discriminate between institutional (i.e., video rental stores) and individual users in the
home video market, because any organization can purchase videos as an individual user
and legally rent them out. Thus, movie studios in the U.S. do not charge different prices
to video retail stores and individual buyers (although they can offer quantity discounts).
In contrast, many other countries specify their copyright law so that copyright holders can
restrict use of the product after first sale (e.g., the European Union and Australia, among
others). When selling a movie to the home video market in these countries, studios do in
fact charge very different prices to the two types of buyers.
    In the face of the legal restrictions in the U.S., copyright holders in the motion picture
industry adopted a form of intertemporal price discrimination. When releasing a movie for
home video on the established VHS format, a firm initially sets a very high price for the
videocassettes, during which time the buyers are typically video rental stores purchasing
rental inventory.3 Subsequently, the firm lowers the price substantially, at which time
the rights to Betamax hardware, over alleged lost revenues from home recordings of broadcast television
programs. In 1984, the Supreme Court voted five-to-four in favor of Sony in Universal v. Sony. The
decision permitted home videotaping of copyrighted programs without royalty payments, but was more
broadly interpreted to uphold the First Sale Doctrine, and the case paved the way for the emerging video
rental retail industry (Childs, 1992).
    2
      Recent examples of this in the news include an attempt to resell a digital music file on eBay (see
http://blogcritics.org/archives/2003/09/10/131657.php and http://georgehotelling.net/90percent/geekery/
does the right of first sale still exist.php) and the effort by Google to copy the full content of three university
libraries (Harvard, Stanford and the University of Michigan) into a searchable database (see the New York
Times, August 13, 2005). As a result, digital media introduce issues of Fair Use as well as First Sale
Doctrines.
    3
      A similar pricing pattern is observed for textbooks. In many introductory courses, most students resell
the textbook when the course ends, as allowed by the First Sale Doctrine. In response to this behavior, many
new introductory level textbooks carry a high price as the publisher attempts to capture the resale value
of the book. Thus, the discounted difference between the new and used prices is essentially the rental price
of the book. Textbooks for more advanced courses, where students are less likely to resell the book, tend
to carry a lower price. While intertemporal price discrimination is not used for any particular book title,
the pricing strategies reflect similar market conditions created by the First Sale Doctrine. Chevalier and
Goolsbee (2005) provide an analysis of publishers’ choices to issue new editions of introductory textbooks.


                                                        2
the typical buyers are end-users.4 This strategy is commonly referred to in the industry
as “rental pricing,” and has been used for approximately 90 percent of all titles on the
VHS format historically. For the remaining titles, the initial rental window is forgone in
favor of generating early (and potentially more) direct sales to consumers. For these titles,
studios set a retail price in the range of $19.99 - $26.99 immediately upon the first release.5
This practice, referred to as “sell-through pricing,” is typically used for children’s titles,
and occasionally for popular ‘blockbuster’ titles, especially movies with ‘teenager’ appeal.
Examples of sell-through priced movies include Blair Witch Project, Titanic, and Antz.6
       With the introduction of the DVD format, studios have almost exclusively adopted sell-
through pricing for a movie’s DVD release, even as they maintain a rental-pricing strategy
for the same-day release of the movie’s VHS format. For example, The Green Mile was
initially released with a VHS price of $107.95 and a same-day DVD price of $24.95. There
are at least two possible explanations for this dramatic change in the pricing policy of the
new format. On one hand, differences in the populations of consumers that adopt the DVD
format in early years versus keeping the VHS format may lead to different optimal pricing
choices. In this case, as more low-value consumers adopt DVD hardware and choose to
rent rather than purchase on the DVD format, upstream firms (movie studios) might again
choose to adopt a rental-pricing strategy in order to discriminate between the institutional
and individual purchasers.7 On the other hand, the digital DVD format may be inherently
different from the VHS format, allowing for convenient viewing of movies on laptop com-
puters and portable DVD players. These new uses potentially affect the perceived quality
   4
      Initial retail prices for VHS tapes under this strategy range from around $99.95 to $107.95. Approxi-
mately five months after its initial release, the studio re-prices the movie for “sell-through.” At this time,
the retail price falls to the range of $19.99 - $26.99 and videocassettes turn up for direct sale to consumers
at mass merchandisers and video stores. Wholesale prices facing retailers are in the range of $60 - $70 in the
first period, and then fall to $10 - $15 after the sell-through re-pricing. An inefficiency of intertemporal price
discrimination is the occurrence of double-marginalization and understocking in rental markets, as retailers
purchase only a small quantity of tapes at the high “rental” price. An important contractual change in the
industry in the late 1990’s and early 2000’s has involved the use of revenue-sharing contracts to mitigate
this source of inefficiency, and many studios are now participating in such programs. (See Dana and Spier
(2001), and Cachon and Lariviere (2002), for theoretical analyses of such contracts, and Mortimer(2004) for
an empirical analysis of the actual contracts.)
    5
      Wholesale prices are in the range of $10 - $15.
    6
      Revenue-sharing contracts are typically not used on sell-through priced titles.
    7
      A sell-through pricing strategy could be used in the initial phase of DVD hardware adoption in order
to stimulate direct sales to “high-value” early DVD adopters, and to take advantage of any novelty effect
that new hardware adoption has on purchases of software. Under this explanation, the use of sell-through
pricing for the DVD format and rental pricing for the VHS format may help to price discriminate between
institutional and individual buyers, as most “low-value” renters would still be using the VHS format.



                                                        3
of owning and renting, and may lead to different optimal pricing choices. In this case, one
would expect that sell-through pricing will remain the standard for pricing in the DVD
market.8
    The first goal of this paper is to understand what factors influence a studio’s choice
of sell-through and rental pricing strategies, and why the choice of pricing strategy may
differ for the same movie on the old VHS and new DVD formats. With that understanding,
I seek to answer the following questions. First, what are the welfare implications of the
different pricing strategies adopted under current U.S. copyright law? Second, what are the
welfare implications of pricing strategies that would be optimal under the alternative form
of copyright law widely used in other countries? Finally, assuming that all current VHS
users eventually adopt DVD hardware in the future, how are the optimal pricing strategies
and welfare estimates under each of the various copyright regimes affected?
    I find that firms consistently choose the more profitable strategy across titles and for-
mats, and that intertemporal price discrimination benefits consumers but harms retailers.
Regarding the form of the copyright law, I find that price discrimination under an EU-
style law allowing for contemporaneous price discrimination tends to benefit studios and
consumers at the expense of retailers for the new DVD format, but not necessarily for the
VHS format. Finally, I find that EU-style copyright protection allows for a more profitable
pricing strategy by copyright holders when consumers have fully adopted the new DVD
technology, and that consumers benefit in this legal environment.
    The paper proceeds as follows: section 2 discusses related literature and describes the
home video industry. Section 3 lays out a demand system for rentals and purchases of a
movie on a particular format and describes the upstream firm’s choice of whether or not
to use second- or third-degree price discrimination. In section 4, I describe the dataset
and the timing of rentals and sales. Section 5 modifies the demand system to incorporate
institutional details, describes the estimation strategy, and discusses results. Finally, section
6 describes the counterfactual experiments and provides the results of welfare analyses.
   8
     An alternative explanation may be that piracy is easier on the digital DVD format, and a sell-through
pricing strategy is aimed at discouraging piracy. The effects of piracy, however, are complicated: they
depend on the upstream firm’s ability to monitor piracy both by individuals and by video rental stores.
While piracy may be easier with the digital format, monitoring capabilities-especially for video rental stores-
have also improved dramatically in recent years.




                                                      4
2        Related Literature and the Home Video Industry

2.1       Related Literature

A growing empirical literature addresses the topic of price discrimination, and a large liter-
ature addresses the theoretical implications of copyright provisions. However, to my knowl-
edge, little empirical or theoretical literature addresses the welfare implications of copyright
law through its influence on price discrimination strategies or other static best responses in
product markets for copyrighted goods. Thus, this paper complements two distinct litera-
tures. First, it studies the welfare implications of price discrimination, and compares the
welfare effects of different forms of price discrimination (rental, sell-through, and EU-style
pricing). Second, the paper examines the welfare effects of intellectual property protection,
accounting for firms’ strategic responses to the legal environment.
        A related previous study on price discrimination is Leslie (2004), which examines the
welfare effects of both second- and third-degree price discrimination in Broadway theater.9
Others have empirically studied the effects of price discrimination in the presence of com-
petition.10 Also related to this study, Clerides (2002) examines the implementation of in-
tertemporal price discrimination in book sales, and Bergstrom (2001) examines institutional
pricing of academic journals.11
        In the home video industry, a strategy of no price discrimination can be more profitable
than a strategy of second-degree price discrimination, because there is a cost to implement-
ing second-degree price discrimination (i.e., firms must reduce product quality by delaying
the sell-through release to consumers). This is similar to treatments in the theoretical
literature in which firms destroy quality in order to better sort consumers.12
    9
     Previous empirical work on price discrimination primarily tested whether or not different instances
of price dispersion had a cost-based explanation, or a price discrimination-based explanation (Borenstein
(1991), Shepard (1991), Borenstein and Rose (1994), among others). Leslie (2004) makes the point that, in
some cases, such as Broadway and home video, we know that price dispersion is not cost-based. Thus, the
question of interest is quantifying the welfare effects of price discrimination.
  10
     See McManus (2001), Miravete (2002), and Busse and Rysman (2004)).
  11
     To the best of my knowledge, the difference in the pricing of VHS/DVD rentals and library subscriptions
of academic journals (where direct price discrimination occurs) is founded in the public availability of the
content of printed goods. Donations of personal subscriptions to libraries would be illegal due to “Fair Use”
violations, because the content of library journals is, in principle, available to the public, whereas the content
of a DVD is not. Similarly, copyright holders could charge a higher price for the sale of music or movies
intended to be played or shown publicly, as this act would fall under the public performance rights of the
copyright holder, and thus subject to Fair Use.
  12
     Mussa and Rosen (1978) is a seminal contribution; Maskin and Riley (1984) extend their model, and
Deneckere and McAfee (1996) also model damaged goods.



                                                        5
       The welfare effects of intellectual property protection have been studied in other con-
texts, often focusing on the optimal theoretical level of copyright protection for the purpose
of inducing investment in creative works13 , or the theoretical effects of piracy or unautho-
rized copying on firm profits and social welfare14 . Perhaps the most closely related previous
paper is Liebowitz (1986), which studies the impact of price discrimination by journal pub-
lishers on the working of copyright law. The treatment is primarily theoretical, although it
reports some basic data on the prevalence of price discrimination in the market for academic
journals and is based on work involving a Betamax court case. A much larger literature on
intellectual property protection has focused on patent, rather than copyright, protection.
An exception is McCalman (2004), which studies the governance structures and licensing
behavior of movie studios across countries with different levels of intellectual property rights
protection.15 The role of purchase and rental markets to segment high- and low-value con-
sumers has also been studied theoretically by Varian (2000), and an historical background
of the video rental industry is provided in Varian and Roehl (2001). Varian (2000) derives
conditions under which pricing exclusively for a rental market, or pricing exclusively for
direct sale, will be more profitable for the owner of an information good.16


2.2      Industry Background

In 1999, the $16 billion home video industry accounted for 55% of studios’ domestic revenues,
compared to 22% generated by theatrical revenues, and 23% from all other forms of media,
such as the sales of pay-per-view, cable, and broadcast television rights.17 Approximately
20,000 home video retailer outlets plus internet firms such as Netflix purchase movies on
VHS or DVD format and rent their inventory to consumers. In addition, consumers may
purchase movies on either format from video, non-specialized, or Internet retailers. Table 1
  13
      See Novos and Waldman (1984) and Yoon (2002).
  14
      see Ordover and Willig (1978), Johnson (1985), Liebowitz (1985), and Takayama (1994 and 1997).
   15
      Also related, McCalman (2001) studies the welfare effects of harmonizing patent protection across coun-
tries (via the TRIPs agreement of the Uraguay Round of GATT negotiations) by estimating a structural
model of innovation using a modified version of the model in Eaton and Kortum (1996).
   16
      Varian identifies three factors that play a role in determining the more profitable strategy: transactions
costs of renting compared to the marginal cost of production, the number of times content is viewed, and
the ability to use a rental market to segment high- and low-value consumers. The model I derive is very
similar in spirit–the main difference is that my model also incorporates intertemporal segmentation. Thus,
in the absence of contemporaneous market segmentation that might be achievable under a less restrictive
copyright law, the choice becomes whether to price discriminate intertemporally or not.
   17
      VSDA Annual Report, 1999.




                                                       6
outlines market shares of rentals and purchases according to the type of retail outlet where
the rental or purchase occurred, including video specialty stores, discount merchandisers
such as Walmart, Internet (both sales and Netflix rentals), and others.18
    The data for the present study are drawn from the population in the first row of table
1, ‘Video Specialty retailers,’ although I make use of the data in the other rows of table 1 to
weight my estimated market shares. As shown in table 1, Video Specialty retailers represent
nearly 77 and 74 percent of all VHS and DVD rentals respectively. However, a greater
proportion of sales occur through alternative distribution channels, including Internet and
non-specialized retail outlets, and so it is important to weight the sample accordingly.
    As discussed in the introduction, the distribution of videocassettes on the VHS format
often exhibits a form of intertemporal price discrimination, while the distribution of the
same movie on the DVD format displays no price discrimination. To understand the welfare
implications of alternative forms of copyright protection, it is necessary to first describe the
different optimal pricing strategies under current copyright law. Under “rental pricing,”
video retailers pay a linear wholesale price to the distribution arm of a movie studio (or
“distributor”) for each pre-recorded videocassette tape of a movie of around $60 to $70.19
After an initial period of rental activity (around five months), the distributor cuts the
wholesale price from the $60 - $70 range to $10 - $15, called “sell-through re-pricing.” At
this time the movie is commonly sold to individual users. This two-tiered pricing strategy is
a form of intertemporal price discrimination and helps to distinguish between institutional
(i.e., video stores) and individual buyers. Exceptions to this typical two-tiered pricing
pattern are titles priced for “sell-through.” In this case, intertemporal price discrimination
is discarded in favor of an immediate low price to stimulate early sales to individual users.20
    Tables 2 and 3 detail the use of sell-through pricing for the VHS and DVD formats
respectively. These figures are compiled from the dataset described in the next section, and
include all major titles released between January 2000 and December 2001. Titles classified
  18
     The table is constructed from weekly data gathered through phone surveys of consumers’ purchase and
rental habits provided by Alexander and Associates and reflect market shares as of the spring of 2002.
  19
     According to industry sources, the marginal cost of producing, packaging and shipping a pre-recorded
videocassette tape is around two dollars, and that of a DVD is around $1.25.
  20
     Wholesale price discounts off of suggested retail prices were obtained through interviews with studio
executives. In addition to these traditional pricing strategies, revenue-sharing contracts became a widely-
used contractual arrangement between retailers and distributors beginning in 1998. These distribution
contracts are discussed in detail in Mortimer (2004). For the present analysis, I focus on 41 titles with
theatrical box office revenues of more than 55 million dollars, and for which revenue-sharing contracts were
not available. More detail is provided in the next section which describes the data.



                                                     7
as “B” or “A” earned 15-40 million or more than 40 million respectively in theatrical box-
office revenue. Table 2 shows the incidence of sell-through pricing for titles released on
VHS. Childrens and Family movies are always sell-through priced, while Romance titles are
never sell-through priced in the dataset. Science Fiction titles are somewhat more likely to
be sell-through priced than rental priced if the title has a large theatrical box-office, but
are quite unlikely (17 percent) to be sell-through priced if the theatrical performance was
poor. Contrasting to this, table 3 shows the use of sell-through pricing for the same movies
under the DVD format. With the exception of a single B title in the Drama genre, all titles
are sell-through priced.
   Finally, growth rates of DVD rentals and sales and DVD hardware adoption are pre-
sented in Table 4 for the period of analysis. DVD households, which count households with
one or more DVD players and excludes households in which the DVD player is attached to
a PC but not used for entertainment, grew from 12 million at the end of 2000 to 24 million
at the end of 2001. Quarterly growth rates show faster growth during the fourth quarter of
each year due to holiday purchases. The rate of DVD hardware adoption has been extraor-
dinarily fast: as much as 10 times faster than VCR adoption according to some industry
sources. Anecdotal evidence suggests that in addition to purchasing the new hardware to
augment or replace an existing VCR, consumers have also replaced CD players with DVD
machines. DVD rentals and sales have also shown fast growth. The second and third rows
of table 4 show total expenditures on DVD rentals and sales, and rows 4 and 5 show the
implied growth rates. Rentals grew at a pace of 90 percent from 1999 to 2000, and grew
even faster, at a rate of 146 percent, in 2001. Sales grew 146 percent from 1999 to 2000, and
grew at a rate of 66 percent in 2001. Interestingly, the pattern of growth rates of rentals
and sales is consistent with an adoption pattern in which consumers with relatively low
willingness to pay for movie quality (i.e., consumers more likely to rent than buy) adopt
DVD hardware later than consumers with high willingness to pay for movie quality (i.e.,
consumers more likely to buy than rent). Of course, this is merely suggestive evidence,
and in no way establishes a relationship between observed growth rates and unobservable
willingness to pay for movie quality.




                                             8
3        Overview of Demand and Supply

In this section, I outline a model of consumer demand and firm behavior restricted by current
copyright law that specifies the conditions under which second-degree price discrimination
(i.e., rental pricing) is a more profitable pricing strategy than non-discriminatory linear
pricing (i.e., sell-through pricing). I also compare these outcomes to the results under an
alternative copyright law where firms are able to use third-degree price discrimination by
concurrently charging different prices to different types of users. The model consists of a
demand system for consumers and a supply decision for the firm.21 Consumers consider a
single product that is vertically-differentiated according to whether or not the product is
rented or purchased.22 The supply decision specifies firms’ profit functions and solves for
the optimal pricing strategy. I consider three possibilities. First, the firm is able to simulta-
neously charge different prices in the two markets (rental and purchase). This is a common
pricing strategy in the E.U., but is not feasible in the U.S. market because of the First Sale
Doctrine. Second, I consider simple linear pricing without price discrimination. Finally,
I consider the use of intertemporal price discrimination where the value of purchasing the
product declines over time. This general overview is intended to provide a framework for
describing the data and the estimation procedures in the following sections.


3.1       Consumer Demand

To motivate the supply decision, consider a standard model of consumer demand for two
vertically-differentiated products: the rental or purchase of a given movie title on a par-
ticular format.23 For each title, I assume that the upstream firm (in this case, the movie
studio) has monopoly ownership of that title.24 Consumers’ utility functions are specified
by:
    21
      I focus here on the supply decision of the firm that holds the copyright on the good, or the upstream
firm. I do not explicitly model the strategic behavior of downstream firms in response to upstream pricing
changes in this section. However, in the empirical work, I incorporate all downstream markups, which are
measured in the data. I also provide further discussion of this issue in the section on counterfactual policy
experiments.
   22
      In the empirical work, I also distinguish between purchases of used and new tapes. Further discussions
of this issue appear in the data description and estimation sections.
   23
      Bresnahan (1987) used a vertically-differentiated model to analyze the automobile industry; Song (2004)
is a more recent example in which a vertically-differentiated model is estimated. Much of the notation used
here follows that in Berry (1994).
   24
      In section 5 I discuss this assumption in detail.




                                                     9
                                            δs − αi ps if purchase
                                     ui = δr − αi pr if rent                                            (1)
                                                  0        otherwise
The parameters δs and δr represent the quality of purchasing and renting respectively; ps
and pr denote the prices for purchasing and renting the good. The parameter αi represents
a consumer’s marginal utility of income and differs across individuals according to their
income level and their unobservable willingness to pay for movie quality.25
       Consumers prefer to purchase when δs − αi ps > δr − αi pr , and they prefer to rent
when δs − αi ps < δr − αi pr and δr − αi pr > 0. Assuming that the quality of purchasing
is greater than the quality of renting (δs > δr ), and also assuming an interior equilibrium
(such that each product has non-zero market share), consumers purchase if their value of
αi is sufficiently low:
                                                  δr − δs
                                           αi <            ≡ α̃.
                                                  pr − p s
And consumers rent if their value of αi meets the conditions:

                                          δr − δs           δr
                                   αi >            and αi <    ≡ α̂.
                                          pr − p s          pr

Consumers with αi > α̂ consume the outside good. Thus, if N is the number of consumers
in the market, demand is given by

                                    N (F (α̃))        in purchase market
                                                                                                        (2)
                               N (F (α̂) − F (α̃)) in rental market.

where F (α) is the cumulative distribution function of α.


3.2      Supply

The rental and sales markets for VHS and DVD formats of a movie are both characterized
by a vertically-separated industry structure, in which retailers and studios are separately
owned.26 Consider an example with a single retailer and a single studio; I specify profit
functions for the retailer and studio in the sales market for one movie on one format as:
  25
     As is well-documented, we can also re-write this so that the αi parameter modifies the δ parameter and
thus affects the ‘taste’ for purchasing or renting the movie. See Tirole (1995) pp. 96-97.
  26
     In later sections of the paper, I distinguish between the VHS and DVD markets, and allow the parameters
of the model to vary across formats.



                                                      10
                                    s
                                   πret = N (F (α̃)) · (ps − psw ), and
                                       s
                                      πstud = N (F (α̃)) · (psw − c).

The parameter c is the production cost for the studio, and psw represents the wholesale
price charged to retailers by the upstream studio. If there is perfect competition in the
retail sector and no additional costs incurred by the retailer, ps = psw . The presence of any
mark-ups or additional costs for the retailer at the point of sale would lead to ps = psw + µs
where µs is the retail mark-up.
    In the rental market, retailer and studio profits are given by:

                              r
                             πret = N (F (α̂) − F (α̃)) · (pr − prw /τ ), and

                              r
                             πstud = N (F (α̂) − F (α̃)) · (prw − c) · (1/τ ).

In these specifications, τ is the number of rentals produced by each copy of the movie/format
sold to the rental market.27 If there is perfect competition in the retail sector and no
additional costs incurred by the retailer, pr = prw /τ . Again, the presence of mark-ups or
additional costs incurred by the retailer at the point of sale would lead to pr = prw /τ + µr .
Assuming retailer mark-ups are zero for the purpose of this example, the upstream firm
maximizes:


               max πstud = N (F (α̃)) · (psw − c) + N (F (α̂) − F (α̃)) · (prw /τ − c/τ )
              {prw ,psw }

where α̃ = α̃(ps , pr , δs , δr ) and α̂ = α̂(pr , δr ) as before.28
    Market Segmentation (Third-degree Price Discrimination)
    Under third-degree price discrimination, the upstream firm sets different prices in the 2
markets simultaneously. Note that when retailer mark-ups are zero,

                                           δr                    δr − δs
                                   α̂ =    r
                                                  , and α̃ =               .                          (3)
                                          pw /τ                pw /τ − psw
                                                                r

All rental stores pay prw due to the assumption of zero retailer mark-ups (which is relaxed in
the empirical work), all consumers pay psw ; and rental consumers pay prw /τ for a rental. This
  27
     Of course, one can always consider more complicated relationships between the inventory decisions of
the retailer and the production of rentals. Mortimer (2004) addresses this issue and compares robustness
tests of alternative views of the τ variable in the context of revenue-sharing programs. I provide further
discussion in the section on counterfactual policy experiments.
  28
     The appropriate retailer mark-ups are observed in the data and incorporated in estimation.


                                                      11
strategy is not feasible under current U.S. Copyright law because firms are not allowed to
charge different prices for different uses of the product, but it represents a strategy available
to (and used by) firms in many other countries, including all the countries in the E.U..
    No Price Discrimination
    The second case considers the upstream firm’s pricing problem in the absence of price
discrimination (sell-through pricing). I denote the single wholesale price as pw . Note that
the cutoffs which affect market shares (again assuming retailer mark-ups are zero) are now:

                                           δr                δr − δs
                                   α̂ =         , and α̃ =                                                (4)
                                          pw /τ            pw − pw /τ
The difference between the first case and the second case is that in the first case (equation
3), the relative price of a sale compared to a rental is under the control of the upstream
firm (i.e., α̃ depends on psw and prw ). In the second case (equation 4), relative prices for a
purchase versus a rental are constrained by τ (i.e., α̃ depends only on pw , because psw /prw
must equal τ ). Thus, copyright holders can only set one price, and the price of the second
use of the good is then determined by the technology in the downstream market.
    While the no price discrimination strategy is consistent with the U.S. copyright law and
used for virtually all movies released on the DVD format, the restriction of only being able
to set a single price can be very costly to studios. In the absence of the ability to use third-
degree price discrimination to segment the market under U.S. copyright law, upstream firms
recognized that it might be possible to discriminate over time, thus adopting a rental-pricing
strategy for many movies, in which price is lowered about five months after a title’s initial
video release. Theoretically, there is no reason to rule out a much more flexible use of the
temporal dimension, where firms adjust their prices at many points in time.29 In practice,
however, upstream firms in this industry have consistently chosen a single repricing date,
effectively using two time periods over which to discriminate. Consequently, I focus on
firms’ decisions to either price discriminate over two periods or to not price discriminate at
all, and the effects of these decisions on consumers.
    Intertemporal Discrimination Over Two Time Periods
    (Second-degree Price Discrimination)
    The third case considers intertemporal price discrimination over two time periods (rental
   29
      Indeed, there is also no reason to rule out the use of intertemporal price discrimination under EU-style
copyright law (in addition to segmentation by use), and one might be interested in the potential welfare
effects of such a pricing strategy.


                                                     12
pricing). Suppose that the value of the good to consumers decays, so that the value of
purchasing in the later period is δs2 < δs .30 This is meant to reflect such effects as word-
of-mouth, movie reviews, theatrical advertising, and other factors that might influence the
quality of purchasing a movie over time, relative to the standard discount factor.31
       I make the assumption, consistent with industry facts, that the rental market is fully
served in period one.32 In other words, I assume that there are not “second-run” video
stores that delay purchasing new releases until after the new release has been re-priced.
Such video stores do not seem to be a prevalent feature of the rental market, and so I make
no distinction between a rental in period two and consumption of the outside good. The
use of intertemporal price discrimination introduces a third product into consumers’ choice
sets. Consumers can rent in period 1, wait and purchase in period 2, or they can purchase
in period 1, (i.e., at the same time as video rental stores). Thus, consumers maximize utility
over the choices:


                                      δs − αi prw        if purchase in period 1
                             ui =     δs2 − αi psw       if purchase in period 2
                                                                                                            (5)
                                     δr − αi prw /τ      if rent in period 1
                                             0           otherwise
where prw is the price of purchasing in period 1, and psw is the price of purchasing in period
2. The price of a rental is prw /τ , and the cutoff points across the distribution of α are now:

                                   δr               δr − δs2                  δs2 − δs
                           α̂ =    r
                                          , α̃ =               ,   and ᾱ =                                 (6)
                                  pw /τ            pw /τ − psw
                                                    r                         psw − prw
While the firm has more control over the relative prices of rentals and sales compared
to no price discrimination, (α̃ and ᾱ depend on prw and psw rather than a single pw ), the
value of the product for purchase in period 2 is lower than in period 1. The use of market
  30
      The quality decay differs from the usual discount factor because it does not apply equally to the quality
of the movie and the price and cost factors. One could easily incorporate a discount factor for price and
cost: the simplifying assumption here is that the standard discount factor is equal to one.
   31
      A more critical simplifying assumption in the model is that upstream firms do not choose the extent
of decay (for example, by engaging in special sales-oriented advertising campaigns or other initiatives).
However, it is difficult to identify such effects empirically, and I have no reason to believe that the ‘choice’
of quality decay is a first-order decision for the upstream firm in this context.
   32
      One could extend the model to explicitly incorporate the cost structures and profit maximization problem
facing retailers. The assumption that the rental market is served in the first period holds as long as there
is sufficient competition between the video rental retailers, or between video retailers and other distribution
channels for a movie such as cable, pay-per-view, etc. The assumption that the rental market is served in
period one is supported empirically.


                                                         13
segmentation within each period would be strictly preferred, because the firm could then
set a first-period price for purchase in addition to the second-period purchase price and the
first-period rental price. The third-degree price discrimination case discussed earlier is a
corner solution of the two-period market segmentation strategy in which the firm sets prices
to induce all consumers to purchase in period one. I leave a proof of the conditions under
which the corner solution with market segmentation is optimal for later, and proceed with
a comparison of the three (non-nested) cases.33
         Under current U.S. copyright law, the model indicates that the decision of a firm to
use second-degree price discrimination, or no price discrimination, depends upon 1) the
decay rate of the quality of owning between the first and second periods, 2) the distribution
of α, and 3) the relative qualities of renting and owning.34 In simulated results reported
in appendix A, I show that intertemporal price discrimination becomes relatively more
attractive as: the decay rate falls, the quality of owning in the second period falls relative
to the quality of owning in the first period, or the expected value of α rises. These results
are intuitive: for example, the cost to the firm of delaying sales to the second period falls
as the decay rate falls, lowering the cost of intertemporal price discrimination and making
it more attractive. Also, if the relative value of renting is high compared to owning, there
is a stronger incentive to price discriminate between institutional and individual buyers
because institutional buyers face higher demand and are thus willing to pay more for their
rental inventories. Finally, as the average consumer price sensitivity increases (α rises)
there is greater incentive to price for the rental market, because the size of the potential
‘sell-through’ market is smaller.


4         Data

4.1        Primary Data Sources

The primary dataset used for this study is a new dataset provided by Rentrak Corporation.
Independent retailers, as well as many large retail chains, rely on Rentrak as a central source
for the provision of monitoring services in the home video industry. Monitoring through
the Rentrak system occurs for all titles in each retail location. Over 10,000 retailers used
    33
     Note that, in the absence of market segmentation, sell-through pricing is preferred to rental-pricing
whenever the optimal second-period price exceeds the optimal first-period price, because consumers cannot
be prevented from purchasing in the first period, and will indeed choose to do so.
  34
     Conditional on the rental technology (τ ).


                                                   14
Rentrak between 1998 and 2001, accounting for over half of all retailers in the industry.35
    Mortimer (2004) uses an earlier dataset collected from Rentrak, which covers VHS
transactions during the years 1998 - 1999. In the new dataset used here, I observe both DVD
and VHS transactions at 4,341 stores from January, 2000 through June, 2002. I eliminate
2,128 stores that did not carry most major titles during the period. This eliminates stores
that either exited the database at an early date, or entered the database at a late date. This
leaves a dataset with 2,213 stores whose rental and sales transactions are recorded for each
title in each week from January 2000 to June 2002, and who have complete demographic
and phone book data.
    I observe store location at the county, zip code, and Designated Market Area (DMA)
level for each of the 2,213 stores.36 For each title, I observe theatrical box-office revenues,
genre (such as Action/Adventure, Children’s, etc.), and MPAA rating (such as R, PG-13,
etc.). I focus on titles with theatrical box office revenues of at least 55 million in order
to ensure sufficient coverage of the sales market. I discard titles released after December,
2001 so that rental and sales activity for each title is tracked for at least 6 months on both
formats. Finally, I limit my attention to titles that are not available on revenue-sharing
contracts.37 This leaves 41 major titles in the analysis. An observation is a store-title pair,
which is constructed after summarizing over weekly transactions data; summary statistics
appear in the next section.
    The Rentrak dataset is an especially rich source of information on firm behavior. How-
ever, Rentrak cannot provide information on local competitive conditions facing each store
in the database. In order to observe (or at least proxy) for local competitive conditions, I
use Yellow Pages listings for all video retail stores in the United States, including Block-
buster and Hollywood Video stores, for 2000 through 2002. From these data, I identify the
total number of video retail stores within the same zip code of each observed store in the
Rentrak database. In addition, I utilize data from the 2000 US Census on the demographic
   35
      Blockbuster Video and Hollywood Video comprise about 4,000 of these retailers, and I do not observe
their transactions. Blockbuster Video does not release their data, and only process some titles through
Rentrak’s system. Hollywood Video recently settled a lawsuit with Rentrak involving a dispute over data
integrity.
   36
      Designated Market Areas organize the United States according to the coverage areas of broadcast tele-
vision.
   37
      Approximately half of the major studios offer revenue-sharing contracts at this time. Although I do not
observe title or studio names, I do observe that many of the remaining titles come from two studios that are
fairly large in terms of releases. The title and studio characteristics look quite representative of other titles
in the database.



                                                       15
characteristics of each zip code. Demographic data include the number of people, median
income, and marginal distributions of race, education, age, gender, employment, family sta-
tus, and the level of urbanization in each zip code. These three data sources (phone book
listings, demographics, and transactions data) are merged by zip code. When estimating
the model, I define a local market as a zip code area and use the merged data to characterize
local market conditions. Clearly, zip code areas are designed to provide convenient local
areas for the purposes of delivering mail, rather than as definitions of local markets. How-
ever, zip code areas appear to be a reasonable demarcation between markets in this setting:
the average zip code area contains approximately 24,000 people and 2.6 video retail stores.
Larger areas, such as 4-digit zip code areas or Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSA’s) are
also feasible ways of attaching local demographic and business listing information, but seem
to cover too large a geographic area for most video store customers.


4.2      Auxiliary Data Sources

An additional step for defining markets is to specify the portion of consumers that are
active in the market for either the DVD or VHS format. For this, I use data from Centris
on monthly DVD hardware penetration rates.38 Centris surveys consumers each month
on whether or not they own a DVD console, and weights each consumer survey response
according to a demographic weighting scheme. For more detail on the Centris data, see
Karaca-Mandic (2003). The Centris data begin their coverage in the late 1990’s and continue
through June 2001. I aggregate the individual surveys in each state to calculate an implied
state-level DVD hardware penetration rate. Due to the limitations of the survey size in each
month, and the noisiness of the weighting scheme, I then fit a linear trend in each state across
the eighteen months of January 2000 through June 2001. I use these fitted penetration rates
in each month in each state as the actual penetration rates, and I assume that they are
uniform within a state during that month.39 I assume that after a household has purchased
a DVD player, they always rent or purchase on the new DVD format, although they may
record and watch previously-purchased VHS movies on the old VCR.
       The number of consumers in a market, denoted as N , takes on a value appropriate for
                                                           V HS and N DV D as the
either the VHS or DVD market by state and month. I denote Nm,q       m,q
  38
    I thank Pinar Karaca-Mandic for her help in acquiring these data.
  39
    One would of course like to have even more detailed information on these penetration rates, but these
are the best data available to my knowledge.


                                                   16
number of consumers in market m and month q that rent and purchase movies on VHS and
                                            V HS and N DV D in each market are:
DVD formats respectively. The estimates of Nm,q       m,q


                         V HS = [HH · (0.90 − DV D )]/ST ORES
                        Nm,q                      q          m,y
                                                                                                   (7)
                         DV D = [HH · DV D ]/ST ORES
                        Nm,q              q         m,y

where 0.90 is the national penetration of VCRs, assumed to be constant across markets, the
variable HH is the number of households in the zipcode from the 2000 U.S. Census, and the
variable DV Dq is the penetration rate of DVD hardware in the relevant state and month.40
The variable ST ORESm,y is the number of video specialty stores listed in the phonebook
for that zipcode in a particular year. Typically, I observe roughly 1 of 3 stores in each
zipcode neighborhood. Unfortunately, I do not observe rentals and sales at other stores.
Dividing N by the number of stores in the market inflates my observed sales and rentals at
a single store to be representative of the local zip-code area, under the assumption that the
unobserved stores have the same characteristics and sales as the observed store, and that
phonebook listings represent the total population of video specialty stores.
    The market for sales of VHS tapes and DVDs also includes some sales of used tapes
from stores’ rental inventories. Unfortunately, the primary data source does not record sales
transactions separately as used or new. Thus, the best definition I have for distinguishing
between new and used products is on the basis of price. I estimate wholesale price as being
equal to 60 percent of the suggested retail price. This estimate is also borne out by industry
interviews. Thus, I classify a sale as ‘used’ if the average weekly price of sales for a given
title at a particular store is below the wholesale price of a new tape. This classification
identifies approximately 80-85 percent of all sales at my observed video specialty stores as
used. I checked these estimates with professionals in the industry and with more detailed
tabulations of the phone-survey data in Table 1. For purposes of weighting the sales and
rental observations, I assume that all sales of used tapes occur through video specialty stores
(and not, for example, through mass-merchandisers like Walmart).
    A final distinction about market size relates to the fact that I only observe rental and
sales transactions from video specialty stores, and not from discount merchandisers or In-
ternet firms. Thus, I need to weight the observed rentals and sales according to the market
share of the stores in my database. For this, I use the phone-survey data described in table
  40
     I match up titles to the monthly state penetration figures based on the month in which a title was
released. The figure for overall VCR penetration (0.90) is from the VSDA 2002 Annual Report.


                                                  17
1. I assume that purchases from discount merchandisers and Internet firms, etc., occur with
equal probability across zipcode areas, and that used tapes are only sold by video specialty
stores. The phone-survey data include both used and new sales. Thus, the weight in table
1 gives the weight to be applied for all sales (used plus new). In order to get the correct
weight for new sales, I calculate the total number of weighted sales, subtract used sales,
and calculate the appropriate weight for new sales. I do this for each store-title pair on
each format, using format-specific weights from table 1. Now I can write down the relevant
market size for each store-format-product as:

                                         V HS = 0.768 · N V HS
                                        Nr,m,q           m,q
                                         V HS = N V HS
                                        Nu,m,q   m,q
                                         V HS = W         V HS
                                        Ns,m,q    V HS · Nm,q
                                                                                                            (8)
                                        DV D = 0.738 · N DV D
                                       Nr,m,q           m,q
                                        DV D = N DV D
                                       Nu,m,q   m,q
                                        DV D = W         DV D
                                       Ns,m,q    DV D · Nm,q

where WV HS and WDV D are vectors of new sales weights for each store-title pair on VHS
and DVD formats respectively. This definition of market size effectively weights the sample
of stores appropriately to reflect the national market for the upstream firm.41 It would
be wonderful to have data on new sales from other outlets, such as mass-merchandisers.
Unfortunately, I do not observe title identity, so collecting and matching such data is not
possible.
    Finally, there is substantial variation across stores in the price paid for a rental or sale
by a consumer. Most stores rent and sell used tapes for the 41 titles in the analysis, and
charge different prices. However, some stores have zero market share for new sales of a
title.42 When I observe a zero market share for new sales, I assume the local price is equal
to the suggested retail price, with the exception that rental-priced VHS titles are assigned
the wholesale price faced by a retailer before re-pricing, and they are assigned the re-priced
SRP after re-pricing.
  41
     I have also estimated the model assuming that sell-through priced VHS titles have the same repre-
sentation across video stores and mass merchandisers as DVDs. This does not change the results in any
meaningful way.
  42
     An additional motivation for selecting titles with at least 55 million in theatrical box-office receipts is
that there is broad coverage of the titles across many stores. This is especially important for shares of new
sales, which are under-represented in my dataset.




                                                      18
4.3   Timing of Rentals and Sales

Table 5 provides summary statistics from the data on both the quantity and timing of
rentals and sales on both formats. For the 41 titles used in the analysis, I compute weekly
totals of rentals and sales for each title based on the first week it appeared at a store. The
top half of the table refers to those titles with a rental priced VHS release. The bottom half
of the table refers to those titles with a sell-through priced VHS release. All titles (including
those with a rental priced VHS format) are sell-through priced on the DVD format. Of the
41 titles, 29 are sell-through priced (in the lower half) while 12 are rental priced (in the
top half). The left half of the table reports total rentals and sales, and cumulative monthly
rental and sales activity for the VHS format, while DVD results are reported in the right
half of the table.
   I first discuss the timing of rentals and sales, and then discuss the totals and weighted
totals for the four different classifications of titles: rental priced VHS titles in VHS and
DVD formats, and sell-through priced VHS titles in VHS and DVD formats. Columns 1
and 4 provide information on the timing of rentals over months for VHS and DVD. Across
all four categories, approximately two-thirds of all rentals occur during the first eight weeks
(2 months). At least 85 percent of all rentals occur in the first 21 weeks (5 months).
   Columns 2 and 5 examine used sales. Relatively few sales of used VHS tapes or DVDs
occur during the first two months when the rental market is most active; however, by
week 21, roughly half of all used sales have occurred. I do not distinguish between the
timing of used sales for three reasons. First, unlike rentals and new sales, the sales of used
tapes are not as clearly delineated by timing. Second, the choice of whether or not to use
intertemporal price discrimination, and the effects of price discrimination on producer and
consumer surplus are not likely to be affected by the distinction between early and late
used sales. Finally, in table 6, there is little difference in the price of used tapes over time;
in fact, the average price of a used tape is actually higher in later months than in early
months for DVDs that were rental priced on VHS. The timing of rentals and used sales are
similar across the four quadrants of table 5.
   Finally, columns 3 and 6 examine the timing of the sales of new tapes or DVDs. For
rental priced VHS titles, relatively few sales of new tapes (less than 15 percent) occur during
the first five months. In contrast, roughly three-fourths of all new sales take place in the
first five months for sell-through priced VHS titles, and this figure is nearly 85 percent for


                                                19
all DVD titles. I classify sales occurring during the first 5 months as “period 1 sales.” It
is straightforward to test the robustness of my estimates to perturbations in this cut-off
point. There were two reasons that I chose 5 months as the cut-off point between the two
periods of the model. First, this corresponds to the timing of the sell-through re-pricing
done by the studio for rental priced VHS titles. Second, the data seem to conform best to
this definition when one examines table 5.
   Strictly speaking, the theory model described earlier predicts that 100 percent of new
sales should occur during period 1 for DVDs and for sell-through priced VHS. The fact that
15 to 25 percent of the sales actually occur in my period 2 could reflect either consumers
who wanted to purchase in period 1 but found the title out of stock, or they could just reflect
the revealed preferences of consumers with idiosyncratic timing preferences. For example,
a consumer could be purchasing the tape for a friend’s birthday which occurs in week 25.
In estimation, I assume that consumers are just as happy purchasing these titles in period
2, and I treat the quality of the sale in these cases as being no different from the quality
of earlier sales of the same titles. This assumption is somewhat supported by examining
prices over time.
   Prices of rentals and sales by month are shown in Table 6, which is also organized accord-
ing to the pricing pattern used for a film’s VHS release. Rentals of DVDs are slightly more
expensive than VHS; there are no significant differences in the price of a rental according
to whether or not a film was rental priced. This is somewhat surprising: the model predicts
that lower costs of inventory should yield lower rental prices to consumers. It seems that
99-cent children’s rentals, common in the eighties and nineties, are no longer found in the
data (and for that matter, one might expect 99-cent DVD rentals).43 I say more about this
in the discussion of retailer mark-ups later in the paper. Prices of rentals do not change
after month 5, because I aggregate rental transactions that occur after week 21 and report
the average price. Prices of used sales are also slightly higher for DVDs, and there are no
significant differences between prices of used tapes based on whether or not rental pricing
was used for a film’s VHS release. Prices of new sales in period 1 differ significantly for
rental priced VHS tapes. Average prices during the first five months (before sell-through
re-pricing occurs) range from $89 to $100. In contrast, prices of new sales in period 2
(months 6 and higher) average between $18 and $27. For sell-through priced VHSs and all
  43
     In the most recent update of this paper (Autumn, 2004), selected Hollywood Video and Blockbuster
retailers have introduced just such a program.


                                                 20
DVDs, prices of new sales in the second period are very similar to prices of new sales in the
first period, although there is a small reduction in price over time.
    Table 7 shows total activity levels in the data, as well as weighted totals. Most of the
sales that occur in this population of stores are sales of used tapes. The weights applied
to new sales are much larger, as I discuss in the estimation section. The ratio of total
weighted sales to total weighted rentals across the four quadrants shows a higher overall
level of weighted sales for DVDs compared to VHSs: 29.9 and 34.5 percent of rentals for
DVDs versus 13.2 and 7.5 percent of rentals for the same titles on VHS format. Note that by
comparing the different titles on the DVD format, one should get a sense of the importance
of the endogeneity of the sell-through pricing decision. DVDs are priced the same for all
titles, so the extent to which sell-through priced titles sell better on DVD than rental priced
titles should be due to unobservable characteristics of the titles that make them relatively
more desirable to own. This difference in the ratio of sales to rentals for these sets of titles is
4.6 percent for DVDs (34.5 versus 29.9 percent). Overall levels of DVD activity (including
rentals) are higher for sell-through priced titles, but overall levels of VHS activity are higher
for rental priced titles.
    Titles sell less often on the VHS format. This presumably reflects a relatively higher
quality attached to owning DVDs compared to VHS tapes, perhaps because of the increased
durability or flexibility for playing the DVDs on laptops, etc. It could also reflect differences
in taste for quality across the population of consumers adopting DVD versus VHS. The
difference between rental priced titles and sell-through priced titles on the VHS format
reflects both unobservable differences in the desirability of owning that lead to a sell-through
or rental-pricing decision, as well as the effect of delaying sales of the rental priced titles.
The difference here is quite large: sales total 13.2 percent of rentals for sell-through priced
titles, compared to 7.5 percent of rentals for rental priced titles. The difference is due to
both lower levels of rentals as well as higher levels of sales.


5    Estimation and Results

This section estimates the relevant demand and retailer parameters. Racall that in order
to address the research questions of interest, one must first understand the factors that
influence firms’ price discrimination strategies: namely, the nature of demand, including
product qualities and consumers’ willingness to pay for quality. With estimates of these


                                                21
parameters in hand, one can seek to understand the pricing policies currently in place.
       The patterns of sales and rentals shown in the last section provide motivation for the
model of demand outlined earlier, in which products are vertically differentiated.44 In
this section, I describe the necessary extensions of the demand specification, distributional
assumptions, and sources of identification that are used in estimation. I use only demand-
side moment restrictions for the purpose of estimation. Supply-side information will be used
to provide additional modeling as it becomes necessary in the counterfactual experiments,
after confirming a reasonable fit of the model’s parameters from estimation using only the
demand-side restrictions.


5.1       Estimation and Identification

When estimating the model of demand in section 3, I include an additional product–purchase
of a used tape–that has quality level δu ∈ (δr , δnew ) where δnew takes the value δs if the title
is sell-through priced, and takes the value δs2 if the title is rental priced. In other words, I
assume that owning a used tape provides lower quality than owning a new tape, but higher
quality than a rental (for a particular title). I adopt the simple two-period model from
section 3 for two reasons. First, the pattern of rentals and sales in table 5 are generally
consistent with a two-period model as a first-order approximation to the timing of rentals
and sales in this industry. Second, the nature of pricing in this market has always been
one in which products are either introduced immediately at one low price, or products are
introduced at a high price and are subsequently re-priced once. Thus, the model is very
much driven by the institutional details of the industry.
       Empirically, a market is defined to be a zipcode-title-format triple.45 A market in this
context includes three (or four) products: the rental of a title, or the purchase of a new or
used tape of a title, on either the VHS or DVD format. Thus, conditional on which hardware
they own, consumers decide whether to purchase or rent a given title in their local zipcode.
I consider two time periods for rental priced titles: before and after sell-through re-pricing.
       Note that the market definition implies that a studio acts as a monopolist for a particular
  44
     While the pricing patterns provide strong evidence for vertical differentiation across rental, used, and
new sales, the relative ranking of the outside good cannot be directly verified in the data. One could estimate
alternative demand specifications, such as a logit, or a more flexible random-coefficients model (such as in
Berry, Levinsohn and Pakes (1995) and Nevo (2000)) if the ranking of the outside good was of significant
concern.
  45
     For a discussion of the use of zipcodes to define geographic markets in this industry see Mortimer (2004).



                                                      22
title, because I do not model competition across movies in the sample. An alternative market
definition might include rentals and sales of other titles released during some defined window
of time.46 The inclusion of competing titles, although a potentially attractive extension of
the model, requires an alternative set of assumptions about the nature of competition
over time, because movies are released in different weeks. In fact, studios attempt to
avoid competing with each others’ titles by choosing different release dates. For example,
the 41 titles analyzed here are released across 108 weeks, so direct competition between
titles is softened by the staggered release schedule. Competition between titles and the
effect of rationing resulting from temporary inventory stockouts is also mitigated by the
fact that demand is considered in aggregate over several months. Thus, a consumer may
intertemporally substitute between two titles on any given visit to a rental store (selecting
one over the other), but in aggregate over several months, the consumer may be observed
to rent both movies.
    Following the notation in Berry (1994), demand for rentals and purchases are derived
based on the consumer utility functions in section 3, where the parameter α captures the
marginal utility of income. I specify a flexible Weibull distribution for α, with parameters
                                     0 γ), where Z contains a constant term and the log of
(λ, ρ), s.t. λ, ρ > 0, and λ ≡ exp (Zm            m

median income. The probability density function is given by f (α) = ρλα(ρ−1) exp (−λα)ρ ;
the cumulative density function is given by F (α) = 1 − exp(−λα)ρ . The predicted demand
levels are calculated based on the distributional assumption for α; thus, sales (or rentals)
as a function of the model’s parameters are:


                                             −δu,m,j ρ
                                                   
                                     δ
 qs,m,j = N · 1 − exp − exp(Zm γ) ps,m,j
                                       s,m,j −pu,m,j
                               δs,m,j −δu,m,j ρ                               −δr,m,j ρ
                                                                                
                                                                        δ
 qu,m,j = N · exp − exp(Zm γ) ps,m,j −pu,m,j         + exp − exp(Zm γ) pu,m,j −pr,m,j
                                                                       u,m,j 
                               δu,m,j −δr,m,j ρ                         δr,m,j ρ
                                                                           
 qr,m,j = N · exp − exp(Zm γ) pu,m,j −pr,m,j         + exp − exp(Zm γ) pr,m,j
                                    ρ 
                               δ
 q0,m,j = N · exp − exp(Zm γ) pr,m,j
                                 r,m,j
                                                                                         (9)
where the definition of market size, N is defined appropriately according to the auxilliary
data discussed in section 4. For each title, we observe sales and rentals in over 2,000
   46
      One benefit of aggregating sales and rentals is that this mitigates cross-titles substitution caused by
stockouts and rationing. In other words, if one used weekly data, the effect of stocking out of a particular
title would potentially affect a title’s rentals. By aggregating all of a title’s weekly rentals, I allow for
intertemporal substitution, so that consumers who may be stocked-out in one week can rent the title in a
later week.


                                                     23
geographic markets; the additional subscripts denote variation across titles and geographic
market areas. Thus, δr,m,j represents the quality level of a rental of title j in market
m. Furthermore, suppressing additional notation, δr,m,j , δu,m,j and δs,m,j are assumed to
represent the quality levels of the appropriate format for title j, so that δr,m,j takes the
       v
value δr,m,j      d
             and δr,m,j for VHS and DVD formats respectively.
   I assume that purchases of new sell-through priced VHS tapes and DVDs occur in period
1. However, if a title is rental priced on the VHS format, the sales share is divided between
sales in the first period and sales in the second period. In this case, new sales are predicted
by the model’s parameters as:


                                       δs,m,j −δs2,m,j ρ
                                                     
 qs,m,j =    N · 1 − exp − exp(Zm γ) ps,m,j   −ps2,m,j
                                  δs2,m,j −δu,m,j ρ                               −δr,m,j ρ
                                                                                    
                                                                          δ
 qs2,m,j   = N · exp − exp(Zm γ) ps2,m,j −pu,m,j       + exp − exp(Zm γ) pu,m,j
                                                                            u,m,j −pr,m,j
                                                                                           (10)
where ps2,m,j is the price of a sale in the second period. Using the distributional assumptions
for α, I can rewrite equation 9 in terms of the quality parameters. This produces local
estimates of movie quality which are of the form:


                         δr,m,j = pr,m,j [− ln(s0,m,j ) · exp(−Zm γ)]−(1/ρ)                 (11)

for a rental; similar expressions are solved recursively for the quality of used and new
purchases (δu,m,j and δs,m,j ). Once again, the quality parameters take values of δr,m,j , δu,m,j
and δs,m,j that are format-specific (VHS or DVD). Local market shares are denoted by s0,m,j ,
                           q0,m,j
etc., and are defined as     N      using the relevant value of N according to equation 8. The
quality parameters for rental priced VHS titles are solved similarly to incorporate period 1
and period 2 sales.
   The market-specific quality of a title-use-format is decomposed as follows:


                        δr,m,j = δr,j + Xm βj + ξr,m,j , for rentals, and
                                                                                            (12)
                        δs,m,j = δs,j + Xm βj + ξs,m,j , for new sales,
and the quality of used tapes or second-period sales are similarly defined. The term δr,j
denotes the national average quality of a rental of the movie, and δs,j denotes the national
average quality of a purchase. The term Xm βj denotes the market-specific quality of all uses
of title j in market m and allows for horizontal differentiation across geographic markets


                                                 24
for different movie titles on the basis of observables. Note that the effect of any observable
Xm is allowed to differ across movie titles. For example, movie j may be more valuable
both as a rental and as a purchase in market m because it appeals to local demographics.
Local demographic shifters (Xm ) include the percent of the area that is suburban, store
size, the percent of families who are married with kids, and the local DVD penetration rate,
which is measured at the state level in each month. Finally, ξ·,m,j captures the unobserved
quality of a title-use-format in market m. For example, a rental of title j may be more
valuable in market m because of unobservable promotions or community events. Prices
vary by market (pr,m,j , etc.) and also apply separately to VHS and DVD formats (thus,
they have a suppressed v or d superscript similar to the quality variables).
       Instruments
       The ξ·,m,j terms contain all unobserved characteristics of a use (such as rental or sale) of
title j in market m. The unobserved attributes may be correlated with the local retail price,
p·,m,j , and any such correlation will bias the estimate of γ. A valid instrument for price
must be uncorrelated with the unobserved attributes of the good, but still correlated with
price. Thus, researchers often use an instrumental variable that is correlated with costs, or
else correlated with competitive conditions from the supply side, as these measures affect
price, but are uncorrelated with tastes for unobserved features of the product. In this case,
we need to instrument for all three uses of the good: rentals, used sales, and new sales.
       The variable cost of a rental is one candidate instrument for rental price. This cost is
calculated by dividing the wholesale price of a tape by the number of rentals per tape for
that store-title pair. The wholesale price assumes a 40 percent discount off the observed
suggested retail price of each videocassette tape or DVD.47
       Thus, variation in retailers’ average costs of rentals (for a given title) arises because of
variation in the number of rentals per tape: some retailers purchase 10 tapes and produce
100 rentals from them, while others purchase 10 tapes and produce 200 rentals from them.
Unfortunately, constructing this variable requires an ex-post measure of rental demand
(through division by q) and so, by construction, the instrument is correlated with tastes for
  47
    The wholesale discount figure was obtained through interviews with studio executives and video retail
owners. Other discounts (such as volume discounts, bundling discounts, or other ‘copy-depth’ programs may
also apply. I assume that retailers pay the usual wholesale price when reselling tapes, but get a 20 percent
discount on rental inventories that are acquired under rental-pricing contracts. These figures were derived
from consultations with industry executives; the results are robust to reasonable alternative assumptions on
these costs (such as the removal or extension of the additional 20 percent discount.)



                                                    25
unobserved attributes of the local rental use of that title, and thus invalid. Two options
are available: first, one could choose to not instrument for rental price. Rental price does
vary across titles within a retail location, but the extent of the variation is smaller than
that across retail locations. Furthermore, one could argue that there is sufficient stickiness
in price across titles at a retail location that instrumenting for price is not necessary.
       Alternatively, one could construct an expected average cost of a rental of a title at a
store by essentially bootstrapping the cost of other similarly-priced titles on the same format,
where “similarly priced” refers to rental pricing or sell-through pricing. For example, of the
12 titles released under rental-pricing terms on the VHS format, the expected average cost
of a rental at store A of title 12 is measured by the average cost of a rental at store A
of titles 1 - 11. Cost measures for titles 1 - 11 are constructed in a similar fashion. This
measure captures common cost components that store A faces for rental-priced titles on
the VHS format, but preserves the title-level variation within the store. In order for the
expected average cost of a rental to be a valid instrument, this variation cannot be under
the control of the retailer. One possibility is that retailers cannot anticipate the number of
rentals that each unit of inventory will produce.48 Another possibility is that retailers–even
if they can anticipate a lower or higher inventory usage rate–cannot control this rate for an
individual title, conditional on the cost of inventory.49 Both assumptions seem reasonable,
especially for the large ‘blockbuster’ titles analyzed here.
       I estimate demand and calculate the results from counterfactual experiments using both
methods (not instrumenting for the rental price, and using the expected average cost of a
rental). In the analysis that follows, I present results that use the expected average cost
of a rental as an instrument for rental price. Not instrumenting for the rental price yields
results that are qualitatively the same throughout the analysis.50
       Instrumenting for used and new sales is more straightforward. For used sales, I use the
total rental inventory that the retailer ordered for title j less one unit, which is by definition
his available supply of the used product. For new sales, the average cost to the retailer of
title j depends only on the wholesale price, which does not vary across retailers. Therefore,
I interact the wholesale price paid by retailers with the observed competitive conditions
  48
     See Mortimer (2004) for a similar treatment of this variable, which allows for uncertainty from the
retailer’s point of view in τ .
  49
     Note that competition in the retail market will also set τ if consumers value earlier availability of a
movie rental.
  50
     I omit these results in the interest of brevity, but they are available upon request.



                                                    26
in their local market, which consist of three variables: the number of video stores in the
same zipcode, and the numbers of Blockbuster and Hollywood Video store locations in the
zipcode.
       Having described the instruments, one can now use equation 12 to form moment condi-
tions:


                                             E(W 0 ξr,m,j ) = 0                                        (13)

where W includes Zm and the instrumental variables (i.e., retailer costs). The parameters
to be estimated are: θ ≡ (δr , δu , δs , δs2 , β, γ). The parameters δr , δu , and δs are all vectors
of length J (the number of titles), while δs2 has length equal to the number of rental priced
titles.
       Estimation proceeds using generalized method of moments, choosing θ to minimize
                                                      !0                        !
                                        X                         X
                        θ̂ = argmin          ψ(θ, Wi )     A           ψ(θ, Wi ) .
                                         i                         i

where ψ(θ, Wi ) is the set of moment conditions, i is now used to denote format-title-use
observations, and A is a weight matrix chosen to minimize variance according to Hansen
(1982). Estimation is simplified by using a two-step procedure. I first guess values for the δ
and β vectors, then minimize the objective function over values of γ and ρ. Given the new
values of γ and ρ, I construct fitted values of δ·,m,j ’s, which I can regress on title-use-format
dummies and the Xm ’s to recover new estimates of the δ and β vectors. I iterate this
procedure until convergence.
       The parameters of the distribution of α (γ and ρ) are identified from variation in the
instruments, as well as variation in income across geographic markets, while the quality
parameters are identified off of title-use-format dummies and local demographic character-
istics. As utility functions are ordinal, rather than cardinal, I normalize the value of the
outside good for movie 1 on the VHS format such that E(Xm β1 ) is equal to a constant.51
  51
    I calculate the value of E(Xm β1 ) by setting α = 1, computing the δ·,m,j ’s, and then regressing δ·,m,j
on use dummies and Xm . The vector β1 from this regression (i.e., the value of the beta vector for title 1,
on VHS) was then used to normalize the outside good in each market for title 1. This was done to preserve
geographic variation in the normalization for title 1. Normalizing the value of β1 to be zero would give the
same value of the outside good for all geographic markets. My method normalizes β1 to be equal to some
vector of non-zero constants.




                                                    27
5.2    Estimation Results

Table 8 provides estimates of the parameters of the model. Rather than report 41 sets of
quality parameters (one set for each title), I report means of the parameter estimates for
each of the four format-pricing types (i.e., VHS and DVD formats, based on whether the
VHS format was rental priced or sell-through priced.)
    The β parameters affect the ‘local quality’ or local taste for movies, across all uses of
a title. Larger stores are located in neighborhoods where a higher overall utility exists for
movie watching regardless of format (the average β associated with store size is positive).
A higher proportion of “families that are married with children” is associated with a lower
overall utility of movie watching on the VHS format, but with a higher overall utility of
movie watching on the DVD format although this varies by movie and genre. Surburban
areas are estimated to receive lower relative utility on the DVD format compared to their
non-suburban counterparts. This effect is often not statistically significantly different from
zero. DVD hardware penetration rates are strongly correlated with tastes for movie watch-
ing. When examining the market for movies on the VHS format, neighborhoods with higher
DVD penetration are estimated to have higher overall utility from movie consumption. In
contrast, neighborhoods with higher DVD penetration are estimated to have lower overall
utility from movie consumption on the DVD format. This is consistent with an adoption
pattern of DVD hardware in which high-value consumers adopt early. Finally, the param-
eters of the distribution of α indicate that neighborhoods with higher median income are
associated with a higher willingness to pay for movies on tape or DVD (γ1 = 1.06).
    The quality parameters indicate that DVD is typically of higher average quality than
VHS. People in the market for DVDs are estimated to have higher utility from movie
watching than people in the market for VHS for the set of titles that are sell-through priced
on the VHS format, based on the average value of Xβ. For the set of titles that were rental
priced on the VHS format, the average values of Xβ are lower for the DVD format. The
rental-use dummies are slightly lower for the DVD format compared to VHS, while the
used and new sale use dummies are higher for the DVD format (based on the average value
of δ·,j ’s). The lower average quality on the DVD format, compared to the VHS format is
primarily driven by lower quality estimates for children’s titles.52 The set of movies for
  52
     Anecdotally, trade press articles cite the ease of use of the VHS format for children as one source of this
difference, because VHS tapes can be inserted into a machine and automatically played without the need to
press any additional buttons.


                                                      28
which the VHS format was rental priced are of average higher quality than the set of sell-
through priced movies for both formats. The decay rate for the quality of a purchase is
estimated as the ratio of the quality of a purchase in the second period and the quality of
a purchase in the first period for rental priced VHS titles, and is 0.89 on average.
         Table 8 also reports values for the parameters τ and µ, which are essentially backed-out
from the data directly. The τ parameter is the ratio of rentals to inventory, and differs
considerably across the two pricing regimes. Table 8 indicates that VHS inventory is used
more intensively for titles that are rental priced, producing 23.7 rentals per tape compared
to 16.9 rentals per tape for sell-through priced titles. DVDs show almost no difference in the
rental technology across the two sets of titles, producing 15.6 and 15.3 rentals respectively.
The µ parameter is estimated as the difference between the observed retail price, and the
observed variable cost of the rental. Retail mark-ups are higher for the sell-through priced
VHS titles and for DVDs: around $2 compared to $-0.03 for rental priced titles on the VHS
format, and between $0.38 and $0.90 for both sets of titles on the DVD format. Sales mark-
ups by retailers are around $40 in the first period for rental priced VHS, but are around $4
after re-pricing. Mark-ups in the first period for sell-through priced VHS and titles on the
DVD format range from $8 - $10. The retailer mark-up on sales of used tapes is assumed
to be equal to the price, with no proceeds going to the upstream firm.53


6         Counterfactual Experiments and Welfare Analysis of Copyright Law

Using the estimated demand model I examine the welfare implications of price discrimina-
tion under current U.S. and E.U. copyright law in three steps. First, I examine the welfare
implications of the two pricing regimes (rental pricing and sell-through pricing) currently
observed under U.S. copyright law. Second, I examine the welfare implications of a shift
to E.U. copyright law allowing for third-degree price discrimination. Third, I examine the
future optimal DVD pricing strategy under U.S. copyright law and the welfare implicatons
of E.U. copyright law as DVD hardware adoption continues to supplant VCRs in the future.
         In order to undertake the first step, I use the estimated parameters in table 8 to predict
market shares, variable profits for studios and retailers, and consumer surplus assuming that
studios choose the price or prices that maximize their profit on each title. I then recalculate
market shares, variable profits and consumer surplus under the assumption that studios
    53
         Both τ and µ need to be modeled in any counterfactual analyses. I discuss this in the next section.


                                                        29
adopt the “other” pricing regime in each of the four groups of title-format pairs, allowing
for the studio’s optimal price under the alternative regime. That is, I examine the outcomes
if rental priced titles were instead sell-through priced and vice versa. This counterfactual
yields the welfare implications of alternative pricing strategies under U.S. copyright law.
   To examine the welfare implications of a switch to E.U. copyright law, I perform the
same calculation as above, but allow studios to directly charge different prices in the rental
and sales markets. In priciple, one might also be interested in the effects of a policy that
uses both market-segmentation and intertemporal price discrimination. Although studios
are not observed doing this in the E.U., there would be no legal restrictions barring it under
the E.U. copyright law. Finally, for step three I predict whether or not sell-through pricing
of DVD will continue in the future under U.S. copyright law as DVD hardware adoption
continues, and what implications if any this would have on the welfare effects of switching
to E.U. copyright law. To accomplish this, I perform the same calculations as above, but
apply the DVD coefficients on local quality to the VHS market. The exercise supposes
that continued adoption of DVD hardware will expand DVD rental and sales activity into
markets that currently serve only VHS users, but that the DVD quality parameters do not
change. The point of this exercise is to estimate the effects for firms and consumers of price
discrimination in the context of the evolution of a new technology.
   There are several explanations for the current pricing of titles on the DVD format. The
DVD format may represent a permanent shift in the nature of the ‘packaged good’ movie
product. If the quality of renting or buying, or the relative quality of these uses, is much
higher for the DVD format, changes in the distribution of consumer tastes are unlikely to
affect the optimal pricing strategy. As described in the previous section and in table 8, it
does appear to be the case that there is a larger difference in the quality of buying versus
renting for the DVD format than for the VHS format. The change in pricing should lead
to a decline of the rental industry and a very different form of distribution for this segment
of the motion picture industry. Another explanation is that the current pricing strategy of
DVDs functions as an introductory pricing mechanism. In this case, high-value consumers,
and not the relative difference in purchasing and renting qualities, drive the pricing decision.
Thus, changes in the distribution of consumer tastes that results from hardware evolution
should lead to a DVD pricing strategy that mimics the strategy used for VHS and preserves
the heavy reliance upon a rental market. Yet another possible explanation for the different


                                              30
pricing of DVDs is that the rate of decay of sales quality is different under this format.
If this rate of decline in quality is much faster for DVDs, sell-through pricing would be
optimal.


6.1   Additional Modeling for Counterfactual Exercises

Retailer Markups and Inventory Use
   The pricing strategies outlined here are non-nested cases: depending on the values of
the structural parameters, a firm might prefer sell-through pricing to rental pricing, or vice
versa. Although rental pricing involves price discrimination and sell-through pricing does
not, price discrimination under rental pricing is achieved only at the cost of destroying
some of the value of the sales product through the decay of quality. Similarly, a firm might
prefer rental pricing to market segmentation (or “EU pricing”), or vice versa, since EU
pricing is assumed to not give the firm the ability to discriminate intertemporally. The
only nested pricing strategy is that a firm should always be able to replicate the results
of sell-through pricing under an EU pricing strategy, since the two prices set under EU
pricing can always be chosen to mimic a sell-through pricing strategy. These predictions
are true holding all parameter values fixed. However, as already noted, the values of the
retailer-level parameters differ considerably across titles according to pricing type. Rental
priced VHS titles have much lower retailer mark-ups empirically than sell-through priced
titles (a lower µr ), and they are used more intensively (a higher τ ).
   There are two choices for how to handle changes in µ and τ . On one hand, one could
write down a model of retailer competition in which τ and µ are determined endogenously.
One challenge with this approach is that many of the observable competitive conditions at
the retail level do not change across pricing types.
   Alternatively, one could adopt a less complete model of retailer competition, but use the
rich structure of the data to predict changes in µ and τ empirically under counterfactual
upstream pricing strategies. The benefit of this approach is that it retains the focus on the
upstream pricing decisions and allows for considerable flexibility within the current set of
prices that are observed. It also allows for flexibility across retailers that differ according
to unobservable characteristics, but which have the same observable characteristics. The
main drawback to this approach is that, while it may give quite accurate predictions about
changes in µ and τ for pricing contracts that are observed, it is less informative about


                                              31
changes in µ and τ for prices for which we have no observations. In other words, out-of-
sample predictions are more constrained. I adopt the second method. The reduced-form
model for changes in µ and τ that result from new pricing strategies at the upstream level
is as follows.
       For µ, I assume that each retailer receives the average markup observed for its “other”
priced movies when examining the effects of the “other” pricing strategy. For example, for
a rental of title j at store k, I regress:


                                  µrjk = µ0,rk RP + µ1,rk ST P + rjk                                     (14)

       Then, for retailer k, I use µ̂0,rk for counterfactual exercises examining outcomes of a
rental pricing strategy for titles that were actually priced for sell-through. Similarly, I use
µ̂1,rk for counterfactual exercises examining outcomes of a sell-through pricing strategy for
titles that were actually rental priced. An analogous approach identifies markups of sales.
Thus,


                                  µsjk = µ0,sk RP + µ1,sk ST P + ζsjk                                     (15)

gives counterfactual markups for sales. In addition to modeling retailer markups, I allow for
a change in the intensity of inventory use under the counterfactual pricing regime. This is
due to the difference in the cost of a tape for downstream retailers. In a method analogous
to that used for retailer markups, I regress


                                     τjk = τ0,k RP + τ1,k ST P + ηjk                                      (16)

       to give counterfactual inventory use.54 One could incorporate other variables in these
predictions to allow for a smoother mapping over prices. For example, one could regress µ
and τ on pricing indicators as well as on actual wholesale prices. In all of these methods, I
assume that the regressors are orthogonal to the error terms.
       Second Period Quality
       In addition to retailer parameters, the quality of a second-period purchase must be
estimated for sell-through priced titles, since I do not have any data on actual second-
  54
     I have also performed a number of robustness tests, such as calculating the average increase in inventory
use for the two pricing regimes, and applying that to each store’s actual τ for each title. The average increase
is around three (i.e., stores produce three times as many rentals from each tapes for rental-pricing titles,
compared to sell-through priced titles). The results are not affected in any meaningful way.


                                                      32
period purchases for those titles that would identify this quality level directly. The results
in table 9 use an estimate of second-period quality that is constructed as follows. The
average difference between the first-period new purchase quality and the used purchase
quality is estimated for each genre from the 12 rental priced titles in the top panel.55 I then
calculate the percentage split represented by the second-period purchase quality for these
titles, and apply that percentage to the sell-through priced titles in the second panel. For
example, if rental-priced dramas have average used, period 2, and period 1 qualities of 1,
1.5, and 2, respectively, and a sell-through priced drama (say, title j) has used and period
1 qualities of 2 and 4, then the period 2 quality assigned to title j is 3. I have tried several
robustness tests of this assumption, and none of them change the results in any meaningful
way.56
       Durable Goods and Used Markets
       Finally, the demand for used tapes highlights an important issue for producers of durable
goods. I assume in the counterfactual exercises that the market for used tapes is constrained
by the level of inventory purchased by retailers. Thus, I assume that retailers can only sell
used tapes up to the level of their inventory, less one tape to keep for future rental business.
In many cases, this leads to rationing of used tapes. This effect is quite interesting, as it
highlights the importance of price discrimination in markets for durable goods where an
upstream firm does not control the second-hand market.


6.2      Welfare Analyses

The results of the counterfactual exercises are contained in tables 9 - 11. I start with table 9,
in which the first two columns give actual and estimated market shares for the VHS format.
The table is divided into two panels, according to whether or not a title’s VHS release
was rental or sell-through priced. The first column lists actual prices, market shares, and
variable profits for upstream and downstream firms. The reported profits are the average
variable profits for a title, assuming that mark-ups and prices in the unobserved stores in
each market are the same as the mark-ups and prices I do observe. Actual market shares
are around 25 to 29 percent for rentals of titles on VHS. Column 2 of table 9 solves for
  55
     For children’s titles, I used PG-rated “family” movies, which are primarily directed at the children’s
market.
  56
     It is straightforward to bound this parameter, because the second-period quality is presumably greater
than the used quality and less than the period-one new quality.



                                                    33
the optimal monopoly price, given the parameter values. In the top panel, covering rental
priced VHS titles, the optimal price is estimated to be slightly lower than the actual price
for this set of titles, with slightly higher profits to the studio and to retailers. Overall, the
estimated prices indicate a reasonably good fit to the data. In the bottom panel, covering
sell-through priced VHS titles, estimated prices and market shares are quite close to the
actual, implying that the demand model is predicting the data quite well. Subsequent
comparisons will be to these results in column two.
   Column 3 of table 9 gives predicted market shares and profits under the “other” pricing
regime. For the first panel of table 9, which contains rental-priced movies, this corre-
sponds to the adoption of sell-through pricing. I again solve for the optimal wholesale
price. Markups and inventory use are modeled as described in the previous section. At
these parameter values, the use of sell-through pricing results in a 15 percent reduction in
profits for the studio. Retailers would be 10 percent better off under this pricing regime, and
consumers would be worse off under this scenario, with consumer surplus falling roughly
22 percent. In the panel of table 9 that covers sell-through priced titles, the third column
corresponds to counterfactual outcomes under rental pricing. Both studios and retailers
are worse off under rental pricing for this set of titles. This is consistent with reports in
industry trade journals and interviews about the expected effects of rental pricing for such
movies. Consumers are better off. Note the effects of rental pricing strategies to limit the
size of the used market. Studios receive no revenues from these sales, and price new tapes in
order to shrink the supply of used tapes under the rental pricing strategy. The shrinking of
this market also occurs because video stores are assumed to use inventories more intensively
under rental pricing, thus carrying smaller inventories that can subsequently be re-sold.
   Column 4 of table 9 gives results under market segmentation, similar to the pricing
policies followed by these same studios in countries with EU-type copyright laws. Under
this counterfactual, studios are allowed to charge different prices to retailers and consumers
on the first day of a movie’s release to the video market, but I assume they do not engage
in intertemporal price discrimination. I adopt parameter values of µr and τ that are appro-
priate to rental pricing in this exercise. I estimate that market segmentation makes studios
and retailers worse off compared to rental pricing in the first panel. Consumer surplus
decreases by 15 percent. Column 4 in the second panel shows a positive effect for studios
under EU-type pricing, although retailers receive lower profits than they would have under


                                               34
rental-pricing and consumers are worse off.
   Table 10 provides the same results for the DVD format. The comparison between the
first two columns indicates a good fit of the model. Results of the experiment of adopting
rental pricing for DVDs are shown in column three. Studios and retailers are estimated to
be worse off under rental pricing for both groups of titles, as are consumers. Column four
allows for EU-type pricing. Studios are estimated to increase their profits by about 5 to
7 percent under this pricing regime compared to the current sell-through pricing strategy.
Consumers also benefit significantly under this policy. On the other hand, the use of market
segmentation is estimated to make retailers worse off. Anecdotally, the average predicted
prices under this scenario ($40 for retailers and $24 for consumers for the set of sell-through
priced titles) are very close to some actual prices charged for recent sell-through priced
DVD releases in the U.K.. For example, Garfield - The Movie, with U.S. theatrical box-
office receipts of $75 million, was released in the U.K. recently at prices of £15.99 and
£11.99, or $30.74 and $23.05, for retailers and individuals respectively.
   Table 11 examines the outcomes among current VHS participants under the assumption
that everyone in the VHS market eventually adopts DVD technology. The outcomes are
calculated by replacing the product quality parameters for each title-use pair under the VHS
format with the quality parameters for the same title-use appropriate to the DVD format.
Retailer mark-ups are assumed to be unchanged compared to the values in the equivalent
columns in table 9, as are consumers’ tastes for all uses of a movie (i.e., the β parameters).
Production costs for the studio are adjusted to reflect production costs for DVDs. The
results in table 11 indicate that as the VHS market adopts DVD technology, rental-pricing
becomes a more profitable strategy for the studio, compared to sell-through pricing. Despite
the higher estimated quality of the DVD technology for owning compared to renting movies,
the population that was using VHS technology in 2000 and 2001 differs from their DVD
counterparts in the overall utility that it receives from watching movies (the β’s). As a
result, studio profits are estimated to be 24 percent higher under a rental-pricing strategy
for the group of titles that were rental priced on VHS. On the other hand, studio profits
are estimated to be 5 percent lower under a rental-pricing strategy for titles that were sell-
through priced on VHS. Retailers are worse off under the rental pricing regime than they
would be under continued sell-through pricing policies, while consumers are made better
off by the adoption of rental pricing. Market segmentation, or EU-style pricing, leads to


                                              35
higher studio profits than the profits expected with no price discrimination for both groups
of titles. EU pricing also leaves retailers with lower profits than they would have earned
under a sell-through pricing regime, while consumers benefit from a shift from sell-through
pricing to EU pricing.


7    Conclusion

Firms respond strategically to the legal restrictions imposed upon them and the technologies
they face, and consumers may be made better or worse off by these actions. As a result,
giving additional control to a copyright holder may increase or decrease consumer surplus,
and may also affect producer surplus for firms that use copyrighted goods as inputs (e.g.,
retailers). To identify factors influencing firms’ optimal responses to U.S. copyright law,
I empirically examine the outcomes of two pricing strategies used by firms for products
that are identical in content, but distributed via an old established technology and a new
emerging technology. Using a new dataset covering the distribution of movies on VHS and
DVD formats, I find that firms consistently choose the more profitable pricing strategy
across titles and formats.
    I address three issues. First, I examine the welfare effects of the current price discrimi-
nation strategies used by firms in the U.S., and find that intertemporal price discrimination
benefits copyright holders, but generally harms retailers. Consumer welfare is highest under
the current price discrimination strategies in use; thus, for some titles, intertemporal price
discrimination benefits consumers, while for other titles, consumers are made worse off by
this form of price discrimination. Second, I estimate the welfare effects of an alternative
form of copyright protection currently used in the E.U., allowing for the price discrimina-
tion strategy that would be optimal under that alternative. I find that price discrimination
under this law tends to benefit studios and consumers at the expense of retailers, although
studios are not better off for the set of movies that are currently intertemporally priced,
and consumers do not benefit on the VHS format. Third, I consider the potential future
effects of current and alternative copyright laws as firms respond to continued adoption of
the DVD format and changes in the composition of DVD owners over time. I find that
E.U.-style copyright protection allows for a more profitable pricing strategy by copyright
holders on some titles, and that consumers benefit when this price discrimination strategy
is chosen.


                                              36
   Future research could examine the effects of intertemporal price discrimination in con-
junction with revenue-sharing contracts. Such contracts were widely used for rental priced
movies on the VHS format in the late 90s, and could affect social welfare in future if in-
tertemporal price discrimination were adopted for DVDs. Understanding the effects of
pricing strategies in a simpler setting provides a foundation for analyses of more compli-
cated supply contracts. If intertemporal price discrimination is profitable in the absence of
non-linear contracts, the use of such contracts should make it even more attractive for copy-
right holders. By reducing some of the inefficiencies of intertemporal price discrimination,
revenue-sharing may help to mitigate welfare losses due to copyright restrictions.




                                             37
Appendix A: Optimal Price Discrimination Strategies


       For the cases outlined in section 3, one can estimate prices, market shares (for the
purchase and rental products of a title), firm profits, and consumer surplus if the parameters
(N, τ, c, δs , δs2 , δr ) and any parameters of the distribution of α are known (along with retail
mark-ups, which we have so far been assuming to be zero). To provide a simple example
of the upstream firm’s pricing decision, I solve the firm’s profit-maximization problem over
a range of parameter values and provide a graph showing the values over which rental-
pricing or sell-through pricing strategies are optimal. For this example, I assume that
1/α has a Weibull distribution with parameters (λ, ρ) and retailer mark-ups are zero (i.e.,
µr = µs = 0). I assume there is a single upstream firm and a single, price-taking retailer.
I also assume N = 1, c = 2, δs = 1.6, and ρ = 2.9. I solve for the optimal pricing strategy
over a range of values for λ and δr assuming that the upstream firm effectively cannot
use third-degree price discrimination. I consider a few alternative assumptions about the
parameters τ and δs2 , which are discussed shortly.57 The values of λ that I consider range
from 0.17 to 0.40, implying a mean value of 1/α of 1.1 to 0.23, respectively for the given
value of ρ. The values of δr that I consider range from 1/7th of the value of owning to
2/3rds of the value of owning.58
       Results are shown in figure 1 for three alternative specifications of τ and δs2 . The area
down and to the left of each line represents the values of λ and δr for which the upstream
firm prefers rental pricing to sell-through pricing. Starting with the solid line (closest to
the lower left-hand corner), I show the results when τ = 20 and δs2 = 0.90δs . When the
relative quality of renting versus owning is high (so that consumers get a large part of the
value of a movie by seeing it one time), rental-pricing is preferred. For a “high enough”
δr (relative to δs ), rental-pricing is preferred over a large range of E(1/α). However, as
E(1/α) becomes large, rental-pricing is no longer preferred. When the market has many
low-value consumers, or when renting is a relatively high-quality good compared to owning,
rental-pricing is the firm’s most profitable strategy. On the other hand, when the value of
  57
     In the empirical work, I relax many of these modeling assumptions; for example, I allow for greater
variation in τ , and I estimate retailer mark-ups.
  58
     I show results for discrete changes in λ (increments of 0.1) and δr (it decreases from δs /1.5 to δs /7.0 in
increments of 0.5 in the denominator).




                                                       38
owning is a large multiple of the value of renting (perhaps because consumers watch the
movie many times), a sell-through strategy is preferred. This accords well with the casual
evidence that firms nearly always use sell-through pricing strategies for children’s movies,
and Blockbuster hits.
   The next closest dotted line in figure 1 shows the parameter values for which rental-
pricing is preferred when inventories are used differently under the two pricing strategies.
Retailers are still assumed to have no mark-ups for this simple example, but I allow for the
fact that inventories may be used more intensively when a movie is rental priced. As this
is an empirical regularity in the industry, I assume that sell-through priced movies produce
20 rentals from each tape, while rental priced movies produce 30 rentals from each tape.
There are two potential effects here: one is that the constraint on the relative price of a
rental, compared to the price of a purchase, differs as a function of τ . The other is that
the cost of producing a rental is lower. Whether or not different values of τ make rental or
sell-through pricing more attractive is essentially an empirical question. In this example,
there is a slightly wider range of parameters over which the firm will choose rental-pricing.
Finally, in the outermost dotted line, I show the results when τ differs in the same way as
above, but δs2 = 0.95δs rather than 0.90δs . More patient consumers (a higher δs2 ) results
in rental pricing being preferred over a larger set of values for λ and δr : if consumers are
more patient, there is not as much to lose by delaying the introduction of the good to the
purchase market.

           Figure 1: Optimal Pricing Strategies for Simulated Parameter Values


   1/7δs
                                        Firm prefers
                                    Sell-through Pricing.




                                                                      τRP = 30, τST P = 20, δs2 = 0.95δs
   δr                                                                 τRP = 30, τST P = 20, δs2 = 0.90δs
                                                                      τRP = 20, τST P = 20, δs2 = 0.90δs




               Firm prefers
              Rental Pricing.
   2/3δs                                     39
       0.23                E(1/α)                           1.10
                                    Bibliography


Bergstrom, T., (2001), “Free Labor for Costly Journals?,” Journal of Economic Perspec-
    tives, Autumn.

Berry, S., (1994), “Estimating Discrete-Choice Models of Product Differentiation,” RAND
    Journal of Economics, Vol. 25, pp. 242-62.

Bresnahan, T., (1987), “Competition and Collusion in the American Automobile Industry:
    The 1955 Price War,” Journal of Industrial Economics, Vol. 35, No. 4, pp. 457-82.

Berry, S., Levinsohn, J., and A. Pakes, (1995), Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium,
    Econometrica, Vol. 63, No. 4, pp. 841-90.

Borenstein, S., (1991), “Selling Costs and Switching Costs: Explaining Retail Gasoline
    Margins,” RAND Journal of Economics, Vol. 22, pp. 354-69.

Borenstein, S. and N. Rose, (1994), “Competition and Price Dispersion in the U.S. Airline
    Industry,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 102, pp. 653-83.

Busse, M. and M. Rysman, (2004), “Competition and Price Discrimination Yellow Pages
    Advertising,” RAND Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

Cachon, G. and Lariviere, M., (2000), “Supply Chain Coordination with Revenue-Sharing
    Contracts: Strengths and Limitations,” working paper.

Chevalier and Goolsbee, (2005), “Are Durable Goods Consumers Forward Looking? Evi-
    dence from College Textbooks,” NBER working paper 11421.

Childs, R., (1992), “Home Video,” in The Movie Business Book, Second edition, edited by
    Jason E. Squires, New York, NY: Simon and Schuster.

Clerides, S.K., (2002), “Book Value: Intertemporal Pricing and Quality Discrimination
     in the U.S. Market for Books,” International Journal of Industrial Organization, Vol.
     20, No. 10, pp. 1385-1408.

Dana, J. and Spier, K., (2001), “Revenue Sharing, Demand Uncertainty, and Vertical
   Control of Competing Firms,” Journal of Industrial Economics, Vol. 49, No. 3, pp.
   223-45.

Deneckere, R. and P. McAfee, (1996), “Damaged Goods,” Journal of Economics and Man-
    agement Strategy, Vol. 5, No. 2, pp. 149-74.

Hansen, L., (1982), “Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method of Moments Estima-
   tors,” Econometrica, Vol. 50, No. 4, pp. 1029-54.

Hausman, J., (1997), Valuation of New Goods under Perfect and Imperfect Competition,
   The Economics of New Goods. Bresnahan, Tim and Gordon, Robert, eds., NBER
   Research Studies in Income and Wealth, Vol 58, Chicago and London: University of
   Chicago Press, pp 209-37.

                                           40
Karaca-Mandic, P., (2003), Network Effects in Technology Adoption: The Case of DVD
    Players, working paper.

Eaton, J. and S. Kortum, (1996), “Trade in Ideas: Patenting and Productivity in the
    OECD,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 40, No. 2, pp. 251-78.

Leslie, P., (2004), “Price Discrimination in Broadway Theater,” RAND Journal of Eco-
     nomics, V. 35, No. 3, pp. 520 - 41.

Liebowitz, S., (1985), “Copying and Indirect Appropriability: Photocopying of Journals,”
    Journal of Political Economics, V. 93, No. 5, pp. 945 - 57.

McCalman, Phillip, (2001), “Reaping What You Sow: An Empirical Analysis of Interna-
   tional Patent Harmonization,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 55, No. 1,
   pp. 161-86.

McCalman, Phillip, (2004), “Foreign Direct Investment and Intellectual Property Rights:
   Evidence from Hollywood’s Global Distribution of Movies and Videos,” Journal of
   International Economics, Vol. 62, No. 1, pp. 107-23.

Maskin, E. and Riley, J., (1984), “Monopoly with Incomplete Information,” RAND Journal
   of Economics, Vol. 15, No. 2, pp. 171-96.

McManus, B., (2001), “Nonlinear Pricing in an Oligopoly Market: The Case of Specialty
   Coffee,” working paper.

Miravete, E., (2002), “Estimating Demand for Local Telephone Service with Asymmetric
    Information and Optional Calling Plans,” Review of Economic Studies Vol. 69, pp.
    943-71.

Mortimer, J., (2001), An Empirical Study of Contractual Arrangements and Inventory:
   The U.S. Video Rental Industry, UCLA Dissertation.

Mortimer, J., (2004), Vertical Contracts in the Video Rental Industry, working paper.

Mussa, M. and Rosen, S., (1978), “Monopoly and Product Quality,” Journal of Economic
   Theory, Vol. 18, No. 2, pp. 301-17.

Nevo, A., (2000), A Practitioner’s Guide to Estimation of Random Coefficients Logit Mod-
    els of Demand, Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, Vol. 9, No. 4, pp.
    513-548.

Novos and Waldman, (1984), “The Effects of Increased Copyright Protection: An Analytic
    Approach,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 92, pp. 236-46.

Ordover and Willig, (1978), “On the Optimal Provision of Journals qua Sometimes Shared
    Goods,” American Economic Review, Vol. 68, No. , pp. 324-38.

Johnson, (1985), “The Economics of Copying,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 93, pp.
    158-74.


                                          41
Takayama, (1994), “The Welfare Implications of Unauthorized Reproduction of Intellectual
    Property in the Presence of Demand Network Externalities,” Journal of Industrial
    Economics, Vol. 42, pp. 155-66.

Takayama, (1997), “The Intertemporal Consequences of Unauthorized Reproduction of
    Intellectual Property,” Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 40, pp. 511-22.

Roehl, R. and Varian, H., (2001), Circulating Libraries and Video Rental Stores, First
    Monday , Vol. 6, No. 5.

Shepard, A., (1991), “Price Discrimination and Retail Configuration,” Journal of Political
    Economy, Vol. 99, No. 1, pp. 30-53.

Song, M., (2004), Measuring Consumer Welfare in the CPU Market: An application of
    the pure characteristics demand model, working paper.

Tirole, J., (1995), The Theory of Industrial Organization, Cambridge, Massachusetts: The
    MIT Press.

Varian, H., (2000), “Buying, Sharing and Renting Information Goods,” Journal of Indus-
    trial Economics, Vol 48, No. 4, pp 473-88.

Video Software Dealers Association, various Annual Reports.

www.bva.org.uk, British Video Association.

www.copyright.gov, Text of U.S. Copyright Act.

www.fipr.org/copyright/eucd.html, Text of Directive 2001/29/EC, European Union Copy-
   right Directive, Section 6.

www.intellectual-property.gov.uk

Wyatt, E., (2005), “Google Library Database is Delayed,” The New York Times, August
   13, p. D1.

Yoon, K., (2002), “The Optimal Level of Copyright Protection,” Information Economics
    and Policy, Vol 14, No. 3, pp 327-48.




                                           42
    Table 1: Market Shares of Alternative Distribution Channels: Rentals and Sales*


              Retail Outlet               VHS      VHS      DVD         DVD
                                         Rental    Sales   Rental       Sales


              Video Specialty            76.8%    22.9%    73.8%    10.0% (1)
              Other brick&mortar/          23.2     10.7     17.1     30.0 (2)
              grocery stores, etc.
              Internet (Netflix, etc.)       0      1.9       9.1    10.0
              Discount merchandiser          0     55.1         0    40.0 (3)
              (i.e., Walmart, etc)
              Other (direct mail, etc)       0       9.4       0     10.0




*Data Source: Alexander and Associates. Sales tabulations reflect activity for the second
quarter of 2002; rental tabulations reflect activity for May 2002.
(1) Includes Blockbuster at 7 percent (mostly pre-viewed DVDs) and an allowance for other
video specialty stores.
(2) Includes Best Buy at 20 percent, Circuit City at 5 percent, and an allowance for others
at 5 percent.
(3) Includes Walmart at 29 percent, Target at 8 percent, and an allowance for others at 3
percent.




                                            43
             Table 2: All A and B Titles Released on VHS, Jan 00 - Dec 01*


                                   % VHS ST priced        Total Released
                     Genre           A           B         A           B

                     Act/Adv        22.2            0.0    27         11
                     Child/Fam     100.0          100.0    13          4
                     Comedy         29.4            2.7    34         37
                     Drama          15.8            0.0    19         24
                     Horror/Sus      0.0            0.0    17         15
                     Romance         0.0            0.0     4          5
                     Sci-Fi         75.0           16.7     4          6

                     Total           29.4           5.9   118       102




             Table 3: All A and B Titles Released on DVD, Jan 00 - Dec 01*


                                   % DVD ST priced        Total Released
                     Genre           A           B         A           B

                     Act/Adv       100.0          100.0    27         11
                     Child/Fam     100.0          100.0    12          2
                     Comedy        100.0          100.0    27         37
                     Drama         100.0           96.0    19         25
                     Horror/Sus    100.0          100.0    13         16
                     Romance       100.0          100.0     4          5
                     Sci-Fi        100.0          100.0     4          7

                     Total         100.0           99.0   106        103


*Tabulations compiled by author using data from Rentrak Corporation. A titles grossed at
least 40 million dollars in theatrical revenues. B titles grossed between 15 and 40 million
dollars in theatrical revenues. Table includes all A and B titles released during the relevant
time period, including those available on revenue-sharing terms.



                                             44
                 Table 4: Empirical Evidence on the Growth of DVD


                   (in millions)             1999   2000    2001

                   DVD Households (1)                 12      24
                   Total Expenditures:
                   DVD Rentals (2)            300     569   1,400
                   DVD Sales (3)            1,300   3,200   5,300
                   Growth Rate over Previous Year
                   DVD Rentals (2)                   90%    146%
                   DVD Sales (3)                    146%     66%
                   Expenditures in my data
                   DVD Rentals (4)                    9.7    43.0
                   DVD Sales (4)                      0.6     5.1




(1) VSDA 2002 Annual Report, pg. 3. Source: Kagan World Media;
www.adamsmediaresearch.com.
(2) VSDA 2002 Annual Report, pg. 3. Source: Vidtrac; www.adamsmediaresearch.com.
(3) VSDA 2002 Annual Report, pg. 13. Source: Adams Media Research.
(4) Author’s calculations. (2000-2001 New Releases, Sample Stores Only)




                                        45
       Table 5: Timing of Rentals and Sales: Cumulative Percentages by Month


                              VHS                                   DVD

             Rentals         Used Sales   New Sales    Rentals   Used Sales   New Sales
Panel 1: Rental Priced Titles (N = 12):
Month 1         39.9                0.3          3.0      44.7          7.7        23.4
Month 2         62.2                1.2          7.5      63.6         20.8        46.1
Month 3         77.2               14.7         11.0      75.1         37.9        66.7
Month 4         83.7               29.6         13.3      80.3         48.3        76.6
Month 5         88.1               44.4         14.7      84.8         56.7        83.2
Month 6         94.7               57.1         37.5      93.3         71.3        90.9
Month 7        100.0               69.6         74.4     100.0         84.2        94.5
Month 8        100.0               79.5         89.4     100.0         91.4        96.2
Months 9+      100.0              100.0        100.0     100.0        100.0       100.0

Panel 2: Sell-through Priced Titles (N = 29):
Month 1           44.1               1.8       50.1       44.4          5.9        17.4
Month 2           65.8              15.7       60.3       64.3         20.6        34.3
Month 3           76.9              38.5       65.2       77.7         42.2        61.3
Month 4           85.1              54.1       69.2       83.8         55.7        74.8
Month 5           88.1              65.8       71.4       88.2         67.6        84.2
Month 6           94.7              75.3       90.1       94.7         79.5        91.3
Month 7         100.0               84.6       95.7      100.0         87.3        94.1
Month 8         100.0               92.8       98.2      100.0         93.5        96.4
Months 9+       100.0              100.0      100.0      100.0        100.0       100.0




                                          46
                Table 6: Monthly Average Prices of Rentals and Sales


                              VHS                                    DVD

             Rentals         Used Sales   New Sales     Rentals   Used Sales   New Sales
Panel 1: Rental Priced Titles (N = 12):
Month 1         3.00              11.84         97.74      3.04         8.45       16.87
Month 2         3.03               7.81        100.44      3.18         9.10       16.48
Month 3         3.01               7.92         97.65      3.29         8.33       16.53
Month 4         2.97               9.15         88.60      3.28         9.02       16.27
Month 5         3.03               8.44         96.40      3.23         9.28       15.60
Month 6         2.72               7.05         19.23      2.78         9.79       14.85
Month 7         2.72               6.29         18.80      2.78         9.93       14.90
Month 8         2.72               5.72         18.27      2.78         9.18       14.60
Months 9+       2.72               5.98         26.68      2.78         9.57       15.47

Panel 2: Sell-through Priced Titles (N = 29):
Month 1           3.01              7.79      17.48        3.05        10.40       19.50
Month 2           3.17              7.70      18.85        3.53        11.36       17.08
Month 3           3.18              7.36      20.30        3.67        11.27       15.67
Month 4           3.15              7.11      18.47        3.86        10.96       15.47
Month 5           3.12              7.00      18.34        3.80        10.87       14.60
Month 6           2.74              6.42      13.53        3.09         9.87       13.23
Month 7           2.74              6.41      14.34        3.09         9.87       14.01
Month 8           2.74              6.29      14.24        3.09         9.46       12.54
Months 9+         2.74              6.00      15.19        3.09         9.87       11.61




                                          47
                  Table 7: Weighted Quantities of Rentals and Sales


                                VHS                                 DVD

                  Rentals Used Sales      New Sales    Rentals   Used Sales   New Sales
Panel 1: Rental Priced Titles (N = 12):
Total per
Title (’000)       1112.2          20.3          0.2     129.6          3.7         1.5
Weighted Total
per Title          4054.9          56.8        248.5     491.7         10.4       136.6
Ratio, Weighted
Sales/Rentals                                  7.5%                              29.9%

Panel 2: Sell-through Priced Titles (N = 29):
Total per
Title (’000)         910.5          39.2         0.5     131.8          5.0         0.9
Weighted Total
per Title           3319.5         109.8       327.3     500.1         14.0       158.4
Ratio, Weighted
Sales/Rentals                                 13.2%                              34.5%




                                          48
                           Table 8: Estimated Parameter Values


                                         VHS                                    DVD
                                                                              (VHS was:)
                               Rental              Sell-through        Rental        Sell-through
                               Priced                 Priced           Priced            Priced
 Avg. βj ’s (se):
 Store Size                 0.159   (0.006)    0.138     (0.007)     0.249   (0.010)    0.196   (0.011)
 %Married/kids             -0.731   (0.184)   -0.651     (0.222)     0.565   (0.288)    0.562   (0.306)
 % Suburban                 0.059   (0.076)    0.165     (0.091)    -0.192   (0.117)   -0.138   (0.123)
 % DVD Penetration          2.390   (0.656)    1.079     (0.721)    -6.919   (1.101)   -2.503   (1.077)
 E[Xβ]                      0.794              0.577                 0.625              0.748

 Parameters of the Distribution of α(se):*
 Constant                                                  2.524   (0.056)
 Median Income                                             1.058   (0.050)
 ρ (shape parameter)                                       2.804   (0.007)

 Avg. Quality
 Parameters :
 E(δr,m,j )                     0.845                 0.790             0.828               0.730
 E(δu,m,j )                     0.975                 0.969             1.301               1.026
 E(δs2,m,j )                    1.050                   –                 –                   –
 E(δs,m,j )                     1.179                 1.099             1.692               1.198
 E(δs2,m,j )/E(δs,m,j )         0.891                   –                 –                   –
 E(δr )/E(δs )                  0.718                 0.719             0.489               0.610

 Other Parameters:
 τ                             23.74                 16.91              15.60              15.31
 µr                             -0.03                 1.88               0.90               0.38
 µu                              8.45                 7.71              10.29              11.57
 µs (period 1)                  43.60                 9.50               8.19              10.61
 µs (period 2)                   4.09                   –                  –                 –
 Local Mkt. Size (000s)          5.62                 5.49               0.69               0.79
 No. Obs.                      23,213                58,077             18,041             42,118


*Constant across titles.




                                              49
                         Table 9: Counterfactual Exercises, VHS

                                           Actual   Current   “Other”   Mkt. Seg.

        Rental Priced Titles (12):

        prw                                 52.43     57.59     31.58       38.49
        ps (per 1)                         109.13    104.58     41.35       35.99
        ps (per 2)                          20.46     16.98         –           –
        pu                                   8.45      8.63      8.48        8.62
        pr                                   2.92      2.83      3.36        2.49
        % New (per 1)                        0.16      0.24      0.11        0.35
        % New (per 2)                        0.34      0.98         –           –
        % Used                               0.40      0.32      0.52        0.34
        % Rent                              29.35     32.12     25.29       38.43
        Avg. πstud (Mil.)                    5.77      5.68      4.85        4.14
        Avg. πret (Mil.)                     3.01      3.12      3.42        2.43
        % Change πstud                          –     -1.53    -14.57      -27.06
        % Change πret                           –      3.63      9.68      -21.99
        % Change Con. Surplus                   –         –    -22.23      -15.46

        Sell-through Priced Titles (29):

        prw                                 14.49     16.07     32.41       47.99
        ps (per 1)                          24.00     25.67     76.13       21.44
        ps (per 2)                              –         –     19.54           –
        pu                                   7.71      7.71      7.80        7.79
        pr                                   2.94      3.04      1.70        2.57
        % New (per 1)                        0.86      1.44      0.07        2.22
        % New (per 2)                           –         –      1.17           –
        % Used                               0.81      0.47      0.35        0.14
        % Rent                              25.43     24.09     46.67       27.97
        Avg. πstud (Mil.)                    3.53      4.68      3.29        4.93
        Avg. πret (Mil.)                     6.41      6.31      2.02        2.29
        % Change πstud                          –     32.73    -29.81        5.32
        % Change πret                           –     -1.46    -68.01      -63.77
        % Change Con. Surplus                   –         –     -9.49      -30.89


*Retail and studio profits are weighted to include all outlets.
‘Current’ uses actual µ and τ .
‘Other’ uses counterfactual µ and τ .
‘Mkt. Segm.’ uses µr and τ from rental pricing; µs from sell-through.


                                            50
                        Table 10: Counterfactual Exercises, DVD

                                           Actual   Current    “Other”   Mkt. Seg.

      VHS was Rental Priced (12):

      prw                                   15.55      15.10     31.84       35.92
      ps (per 1)                            23.75      23.99     75.40       21.62
      ps (per 2)                                –          –     21.43           –
      pu                                    10.29      10.28     10.31       10.28
      pr                                     2.81       2.81      1.52        1.90
      % New (per 1)                          5.66       7.52      0.29       10.42
      % New (per 2)                             –          –      2.97           –
      % Used                                 0.28       0.05      0.65       -0.02
      % Rent                                24.47      26.63     55.01       37.69
      Avg. πstud (Mil.)                      0.96       1.15      0.72        1.21
      Avg. πret (Mil.)                       0.58       0.63      0.34        0.34
      % Change πstud                            –      20.14    -37.48        4.74
      % Change πret                             –       7.49    -45.03      -46.22
      % Change Con. Surplus                     –          –     -8.51       36.10

      VHS was Sell-through Priced (29):

      prw                                   17.16      17.42     33.18       39.93
      ps (per 1)                            27.77      28.44     76.58       23.59
      ps (per 2)                                –          –     21.75           –
      pu                                    11.57      11.38     11.39       11.41
      pr                                     2.81       2.92      1.63        2.19
      % New (per 1)                          2.62       3.96      0.09        5.85
      % New (per 2)                             –          –      2.91           –
      % Used                                 0.34       0.24      0.37        0.05
      % Rent                                22.80      25.95     48.14       33.43
      Avg. πstud (Mil.)                      0.72       0.84      0.55        0.90
      Avg. πret (Mil.)                       0.61       0.61      0.28        0.25
      % Change πstud                            –      16.80    -34.91        6.50
      % Change πret                             –       0.57    -54.31      -59.99
      % Change Con. Surplus                     –          –     -5.14       12.97


*Retail and studio profits are weighted to include all outlets.
‘Current’ uses actual µ and τ .
‘Other’ uses counterfactual µ and τ .
‘Mkt. Segm.’ uses µr and τ from rental pricing; µs from sell-through.


                                           51
                    Table 11: Counterfactual Exercises, Future DVD

                                                   Sell-thru   Rental    Mkt.
                                                     Priced    Priced   Segm.

            VHS was Rental Priced (12):

            prw                                       25.90     52.11    39.93
            ps (per 1)                                35.89     96.53    25.11
            ps (per 2)                                    –     16.79        –
            pu                                         8.57      8.65     8.64
            pr                                         2.94      2.56     2.47
            % New (per 1)                              0.22      0.22     1.52
            % New (per 2)                                 –      2.26        –
            % Used                                     1.86      1.07     1.32
            % Rent                                    35.35     41.27    43.38
            Avg. πstud (Mil.)                          5.48      6.80     5.66
            Avg. πret (Mil.)                           5.07      4.07     3.64
            % Change πstud                                –     24.09     3.33
            % Change πret                                 –    -19.67   -28.28
            % Change Con. Surplus                         –     18.02     5.00

            VHS was Sell-through Priced (29):

            prw                                       15.06     29.55    35.56
            ps (per 1)                                24.88     73.58    23.96
            ps (per 2)                                    –     19.12        –
            pu                                         7.75      7.73     7.71
            pr                                         3.00      1.53     2.00
            % New (per 1)                              1.45      0.07     2.19
            % New (per 2)                                 –      1.59        –
            % Used                                     0.70      0.77     0.58
            % Rent                                    19.91     38.83    28.31
            Avg. πstud (Mil.)                          2.87      2.73     3.80
            Avg. πret (Mil.)                           3.97      1.59     1.87
            % Change πstud                                –     -4.80    32.54
            % Change πret                                 –    -59.91   -52.86
            % Change Con. Surplus                         –     12.54     1.94


*Retail and studio profits are weighted to include all outlets.
‘Current’ uses actual µ and τ .
‘Other’ uses counterfactual µ and τ .
‘Mkt. Segm.’ uses µr and τ from rental pricing; µs from sell-through.


                                           52
