                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       THE CLIMATE FOR BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT
                       AND EMPLOYMENT GROWTH IN PUERTO RICO

                                             Steven J. Davis
                                            Luis Rivera-Batiz

                                         Working Paper 11679
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11679


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2005




This paper was prepared for a conference on the Puerto Rican economy sponsored by the Center for the New
Economy, San Juan, Puerto Rico, and the Brookings Institution. We thank Marinés Aponte, David Audretsch,
Barry Bosworth, Susan Collins, colleagues at the University of Chicago and participants in the
CNE/Brookings Conference for many helpful comments. We also greatly appreciate the many persons who
cooperated in interviews, often lengthy, about the Puerto Rican business climate. Barry Bosworth and
Orlando Sotomayor kindly supplied data, Sophie Castro-Davis and Christopher Pope provided research
assistance, Juan Castañer clarified aspects of the methodology in Estudios Técnicos (2004), and Ricardo Solá
supplied Figure 4 in the paper. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Steven J. Davis and Luis Rivera-Batiz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
The Climate for Business Development and Employment Growth in Puerto Rico
Steven J. Davis and Luis Rivera-Batiz
NBER Working Paper No. 11679
September 2005
JEL No. J21, J23, D73, O54

                                            ABSTRACT




Employment rates in Puerto Rico range from 55 to 65 percent of U.S. rates during the past thirty

years. This huge employment shortfall holds for men and women, cuts across all education groups,

and is deeper for persons without a college degree. The shortfall is concentrated in the private sector,

especially labor-intensive industries that rely heavily on less educated workers. Motivated by these

facts, we identify several factors that undermine employment growth and business development,

including high minimum wage requirements, a history of tax incentives for capital-intensive

activities, a host of regulatory entry barriers, and a business climate in which profitability and

survival too often rest on the ability to secure favors from the government,. We pay close attention

to the permitting process whereby the government oversees and regulates construction and real estate

development projects, the commercial use of equipment and facilities, and the periodic renewal of

various business licenses. Based on interviews with experts and participants in the permitting

process, and supplemented by other sources, we compile evidence that the permitting process is
excessively slow and costly, fraught with uncertainty, subject to capricious outcomes, susceptible

to corruption, and prone to manipulation by business rivals and special interest groups.



Steven J. Davis                                        Luis Rivera-Batiz
University of Chicago                                  University of Puerto Rico
Graduate School of Business                            Graduate School of Business Administration
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue                             Rio Pedras, PR 00931
Chicago, IL 60637                                      lariverabatiz@aol.com
and NBER
steve.davis@gsb.uchicago.edu
1. Introduction
         The employment rate among Puerto Rican residents is stunningly low, and it has
been so for decades. Household census data for 1980, 1990 and 2000 yield employment
rates in the neighborhood of 40% for persons 16 to 65 years of age. Comparable data for
the United States yield employment rates in the range of 65 to 70%. The OECD reports
an average employment rate of 66% for member countries in 2000, and Turkey, at 49%,
is the only OECD member with an employment rate below 54%.1 These comparisons
underscore the puzzle presented by Puerto Rico’s persistently low employment rate.
         This paper investigates the employment record in Puerto Rico and its climate for
business development. The paper has three related goals. One is to shed new light on the
reasons for Puerto Rico’s low employment rate by taking a close look at its employment
structure. Another is to highlight some longer term consequences of Puerto Rico’s
business climate and chronically weak employment performance. A third goal is to
identify government policies and institutional arrangements that impede employment
growth and business development.
         In terms of our third goal, we pay close attention to the permitting process
whereby the government oversees and regulates construction and real estate development
projects, the commercial use of equipment and facilities, and the periodic renewal of
various business licenses. Several factors contribute to Puerto Rico’s poor employment
performance, but there are good reasons to suspect that the permitting process is one
important obstacle to business development and employment growth. Anecdotal evidence
suggests that the permitting process is excessively slow and costly, fraught with
uncertainty, subject to capricious outcomes, susceptible to corruption, and prone to
manipulation by business rivals, politicians and special interest groups. Problems and
inefficiencies in the permitting process raise the costs of creating new business
establishments, undercutting the drive for employment growth. Sizable fixed costs in
learning how to navigate the system fall more heavily on smaller and younger businesses
1
  The OECD statistics are taken from Table B in the Statistical Annex to the 2004 issue of the OECD
Employment Outlook. The statistics for Puerto Rico and the United States reflect our tabulations of
household census data. It is worth remarking that the OECD figure for the 2000 U.S. employment rate is
five percentage points higher than our census-based figure, implying that the two data sources are not fully
compatible. There are also concerns about the accuracy of the Puerto Rican household census data, as we
discuss below. However, there is little doubt regarding the central point that Puerto Rico has a remarkably
low rate of employment.


                                                     2
and on would-be entrepreneurs who lack political connections. For these reasons, the
permitting process is also likely to repress the emergence of a productive entrepreneurial
culture, or drive it into the underground sector.
       The permitting process is one aspect of an obtrusive and often counterproductive
role for government in Puerto Rico’s economy. There are many others. Section 936
provisions in the U.S. tax code distorted Puerto Rico’s industry structure at great cost to
the U.S. treasury with few benefits for Puerto Rican residents (Pelzman, 2002, Hunter,
2003, and Bosworth and Collins, 2005). Puerto Rico’s own tax code is replete with
provisions that benefit special business interests at the expense of the general welfare.
Various “buy local” laws and tax provisions lessen competitive pressures on local
business interests by disfavoring foreign producers. Regulatory entry barriers abound.
The Jones Act raises the cost of international trade by requiring the use of American
vessels for goods shipped by water between U.S. and Puerto Rican ports. Puerto Rican
employers are subject to U.S. minimum wage requirements, even though the average
Puerto Rican wage is roughly half the average U.S. wage. Government transfer payments
account for more than a quarter of Puerto Rican household incomes in recent decades
(Burtless and Sotomayor, 2005). And the Puerto Rican government has traditionally
accounted for a large share of employment and production activity on the island, much
larger than in the United States.
       A truly striking feature of Puerto Rico’s economy is the underdeveloped state of
its private sector. Private sector employment rates in Puerto Rico are less than half the
U.S. rates in recent decades. Even fewer Puerto Rican residents have first-hand
experience, as owners or employees, in “free enterprise” organizations – private
businesses that operate in the formal economy without large government subsidies,
special tax breaks and regulatory advantages, or heavy-handed oversight by government
bureaucracies.
       These observations about Puerto Rico’s economy point to some key challenges
and concerns. First, chronically low employment rates imply that Puerto Rican residents




                                              3
are short on work experience, opportunities for learning on the job and marketable skills.2
Second, the management skills and business savvy required for a thriving entrepreneurial
class are likely to be in especially short supply. Relatively few Puerto Ricans work in the
private sector, and business persons have learned to focus their creative energies on how
to curry favor with government officials and circumvent bureaucratic obstacles to
commercial success, rather than how to develop and execute business models that can
withstand the rigors of competition in an unfettered marketplace. Even if reform creates
an institutional framework that is advantageous for productive entrepreneurial activity
and long term growth, it will be difficult to rapidly upgrade business skills and reorient a
rent-seeking business culture. Third, most Puerto Ricans have a strong financial stake in
maintaining certain aspects of an expansive public sector – as salaried government
employees, as recipients of transfer payments and public sector pensions, or as
beneficiaries of government contract awards, subsidies, tax breaks and special regulatory
advantages. This web of vested interests in a highly socialized economy presents a
formidable barrier to effective economic reform.
        The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 investigates the structure of employment
in Puerto Rico with a focus on comparisons to the United States. Section 3 considers
several policies and institutions that shape the climate for business development and
employment growth in Puerto Rico. Section 4 considers the permitting process in some
detail. We draw on a variety of sources for our study of the permitting process, including
personal interviews with more than one hundred business persons, real estate developers,
construction contractors, government officials and outside experts. Section 5 summarizes
our main results and distills a few conclusions.


2. A Comparative Perspective on Employment in Puerto Rico
2.1. Private, Public and Free Enterprise Employment Rates
    There is an enormous gap between employment rates in Puerto Rico and the United
States. As reported in Table 1, only 37.5% of Puerto Rican residents (16-65 years old)
held a job during the reference week of the 2000 household census, compared to 68.8%

2
  The importance of work experience and on-the-job training for skill formation and earnings growth are
recurring themes in modern labor economics. See, Mincer (1962) and Becker (1993, chapter 2) for seminal
contributions.


                                                   4
for the United States. Census data also show an enormous employment gap in 1980 and
1990. Figure 1 draws on perennial labor force surveys rather than the decennial
household census to plot employment rates from 1947 to 2001. The labor force survey
presents a less dire picture in recent years than the 2000 census, but it confirms that
Puerto Rico’s employment rate is remarkably low in recent decades.3
    Figure 1 reveals several other interesting facts. Puerto Rico’s employment situation
was much stronger at the midpoint of the 20th century, with an employment shortfall
relative to the United States of less than seven percentage points. U.S. employment rates
drifted upward over the next five decades, but they fell sharply in Puerto Rico – by 7
percentage points in the 1950s, and by another 10 percentage points from 1973 to 1982
before recovering some lost ground. Figure 1 also shows that the U.S.-Puerto Rican
employment gap widened greatly for both sexes after the early 1950s, from 5 to 25
percentage points among women and from 10 to 20 percentage points among men.
    These data indicate that, since 1975, Puerto Rican residents have been accumulating
work experience at only 55-65% of the rate in the United States. This huge experience
deficit is a negative legacy of Puerto Rico’s chronically weak employment performance,
and it cannot be erased over night.4 It will depress the earnings potential of Puerto Ricans
for years to come. By the same token, strong and sustained increases in the employment-
population ratio are essential for long term development of Puerto Rico’s human capital.
    The U.S.-Puerto Rican gap in private sector employment rates is even more extreme.
According to Census data, only 28 percent of Puerto Rican adults worked in the private
sector in 2000, less than half the 58 percent figure for the mainland. A similar pattern
prevails in 1980 and 1990. These private sector employment figures overstate first-hand
exposure to employment in the unfettered “free enterprise” segment of the formal


3
  Bosworth and Collins (2005) raise questions about the reliability of the Puerto Rican household census,
especially the 2000 census. Based on comparisons to the labor force survey and payroll records, Bosworth
and Collins conclude that the 2000 census seriously understates the participation rate (and presumably the
employment rate). Their Table 6 shows that the participation rate in the 2000 census is about five
percentage points below the rate in the labor force survey. The accuracy of the Puerto Rican labor force
survey has also been called into question. See Rivera-Batiz and Santiago (1996). In any event, all sources
show a huge U.S.-Puerto Rican gap in employment rates. We rely heavily on the household census for our
study, because several of our empirical exercises require large samples of individual workers.
4
  A careful effort to quantify the experience deficit among Puerto Rican residents would account for work
experience accumulated on the mainland by return migrants and any U.S.-Puerto Rican difference in
average hours worked by employed persons. We address the latter issue shortly.


                                                    5
economy. Indeed, many Puerto Ricans with private sector jobs work in industries with a
major role for government employment (e.g., hospitals, schools), industries that owe their
Puerto Rican operations to special tax subsidies (e.g., pharmaceuticals), or industries that
face costly bureaucratic obstacles to business activity (e.g., construction). Similar
remarks apply to many private sector jobs in the United States, but the government’s role
is typically more extensive on the island, as shown by some of our evidence below.
    Table 1 reports the fraction of Puerto Rican adults who work in the free enterprise
segment of the economy, defined as private sector employment less non-governmental
employees in Public Utilities and Sanitary Services, Primary and Secondary Education,
Colleges and Universities, and several smaller industries for which public sector
employment exceeds 35% of industry employment.5 We also exclude Construction from
the free enterprise segment because of the major role played by the government
bureaucracy in construction and development projects, an issue treated at length in
Section 4. We do not exclude Pharmaceuticals or other industries that receive large
government subsidies or special tax breaks, although the Puerto Rican operations of such
industries do not reflect unfettered free enterprise outcomes. Based on our classification,
less than one-quarter of Puerto Rican adults work in the free enterprise segment of the
economy.6
    Low levels of work experience in free enterprise activity are potentially important for
at least three reasons. First, jobs in the free enterprise segment probably require
somewhat different skills and work habits than jobs in the public and regulated sectors.
This view resonates with evidence that experience-related human capital is imperfectly
portable across industries (Neal, 1995 and Parent, 2000) and evidence that many
displaced workers suffer large, persistent earnings losses (e.g., Jacobson et al., 1993).



5
  We have not systematically subtracted non-governmental employees in all industries for which public
sector employment exceeds a specified threshold, although that would be a reasonable approach. A separate
issue involves the manner of achieving consistency between Puerto Rico and the United States in defining
the free enterprise segment. We opted for a uniform list of industries that are designated as outside the free
enterprise segment in both Puerto Rico and the United States. An alternative approach would allow the
designated list of industries to differ between the two, recognizing industry-level differences between
Puerto Rico and the United States in public sector employment shares and the extent of government
involvement.
6
  Excluding Pharmaceuticals, the percentage of Puerto Rican adults working in the free enterprise segment
of the economy is 21.0% in 1980, 23.7% in 1990 and 22.9% in 2000.


                                                      6
Thus, the skills and earnings potential acquired through work experience in the public
and regulated sectors may not easily transfer to free enterprise work activity.
    Second, private sector work experience is a more powerful incubator of
entrepreneurial skills and ambitions than jobs in the public and regulated sectors. This
proposition finds support in previous research on the propensity to become a business
owner and the determinants of business success. Studies consistently find that self
employment and business ownership rates are much higher among children of business
owners.7 Based on U.S. data, Fairlie and Robb (2003) report that half of all business
owners had a self-employed family member prior to starting a business, where “family
member” means a spouse, parent or guardian, sibling or other immediate family member.
Moreover, their empirical investigation leads them to conclude that “the business human
capital acquired from prior work experience in a family member’s business appears to be
very important for business success.” Less than 2% of small U.S. businesses are
inherited, according to Fairlie and Robb, consistent with the view that business
experience rather than business transfer explains the strong intergenerational link in
business ownership propensities.
    Third, the nature of work experience, one’s own and that of friends and family,
probably plays an important role in shaping attitudes towards business regulation,
taxation, public sector employment, and income redistribution. There is a greater belief in
the propositions that “poverty is society’s fault” and “luck determines income” in
countries with higher social welfare spending (Alesina and Glaeser, chapter 7). And there
is stronger support for the view that “it is the responsibility of the government to reduce
income differences” in countries with a history of socialized production (Corneo and
Gruener, 2002, Table 1). These cross-country patterns suggest that limited work
experience in free enterprise activity leads to limited political support for economic
reforms that would aggressively expand private business activity and employment.
    Despite Puerto Rico’s huge shortfall in overall employment rates, the percentage of
adults who work in the public sector was actually larger on the island than on the
mainland in 1980 and 1990. For example, 13.2% of adult Puerto Ricans worked in the


7
 Recent studies on this issue include Dunn and Holtz-Eakin (2000), Hout and Rosen (2000), and Fairlie
and Robb (2003).


                                                   7
public sector in 1990, compared to 11.6% of U.S. adults. The situation reversed over the
next decade as public sector employment rates in Puerto Rico fell sharply to 9.3% of the
adult population in 2000. Part, perhaps a large part, of the decline in Puerto Rico’s public
sector employment rates reflects the privatization of state-owned enterprises.8 The partial
privatization of telecommunications in the 1990s faced strong resistance from labor
unions that included a long strike and widespread sabotage. It would be useful to know
how wages and employment fared in privatized Puerto Rican firms before and after
privatization. It would also be useful to know whether Puerto Ricans who lost public
sector jobs during the 1990s experienced particular difficulties in finding new jobs in the
private sector. We are unaware of direct evidence on these issues.
    The public sector continues to absorb a bigger percentage of more educated persons
on the island, and a much bigger percentage of more educated workers. Consider college-
educated persons in 2000. In Puerto Rico, 24% work in the public sector, 41% work in
the private sector, and the rest are not employed. In the United States, 20% work in the
public sector and 63% work in the private sector. Put differently, the public sector
absorbs 37% of college-educated workers in Puerto Rico compared to 24% in the United
States. As shown in Panel C of Table 1, the share of college-educated persons working in
Puerto Rico’s public sector is even larger, indeed much larger, in 1980 and 1990, and the
share working in the private sector is smaller. Of course, the population fraction with a
college education is lower on the island. The upshot is that college-educated persons with
private-sector work experience are much more abundant in the United States that in
Puerto Rico. If higher education produces forms of human capital that are useful for
entrepreneurial endeavors in the private sector, then Puerto Rico faces another type of
large human capital deficit compared to the United States – larger than a simple
comparison of schooling levels would suggest. We attach numbers to this point below.


2.2. Employment Rates by Educational Attainment
    Puerto Rico’s employment shortfall is most acute for less educated persons. Tables 2
and 3 describe the situation for men and women, respectively, based on household census

8
 We have been unable to obtain the data required to quantify the role of privatizations in the decline of
public sector employment. However, we have been informed that privatized enterprises routinely hired
government employees, often as a requirement to secure government contracts.


                                                      8
data for 1980, 1990 and 2000. The tables show that U.S. employment rates exceed Puerto
Rican rates in every schooling category except for college-educated women in 1980. For
both men and women, there is a clear pattern of bigger gaps in the employment rate at
lower levels of schooling.
   Less educated persons are also relatively abundant on the island. Hence, in an
accounting sense, one can attribute a sizable portion of the U.S.-Puerto Rican
employment gap to lower schooling levels on the island. But the data weigh heavily
against an explanation for Puerto Rico’s employment shortfall that focuses on lower
schooling levels as the main reason for lower employment rates. U.S.-Puerto Rican gaps
in the employment rate are remarkably large within schooling groups. In the 2000
Census, every schooling group shows a double-digit gap in the employment rate. For
Puerto Ricans with a high school diploma or GED equivalent (the median schooling level
among Puerto Rican adults in 2000), the employment rate is 47 percent for men and 25
percent for women. The corresponding U.S. figures are 75 percent for men and 62
percent for women.
   Moreover, schooling levels cannot account for the time-series behavior of Puerto
Rican employment. According to Census data, Puerto Rico’s employment rate fell by 4.8
percentage points between 1990 and 2000 from an already low base. It fell by 3.6
percentage points relative to the United States over the same period. These absolute and
relative declines in Puerto Rico’s employment rate coincide with rising schooling levels
among Puerto Rican adults and a sharp narrowing of the schooling gap vis-à-vis the
United States. The labor force survey (Figure 1) presents a more favorable picture of
Puerto Rico’s employment performance in the 1990s, but even these more favorable data
suggest that dramatic gains in schooling are associated with very modest increases in the
rate of employment.
   Tables 2 and 3 also show that the enormous U.S.-Puerto Rican work experience gap
holds in terms of hours worked as well as employment rates. For employed men, U.S.
work time exceeds Puerto Rican work time by 220 to 270 hours per year. This sizable
gap in hours worked per employed amplifies the work experience gap calculated from
employment rates. For women, annual work hours per employed person are somewhat
greater for Puerto Rico in 1980 but somewhat less in 2000. On net, the hours worked data



                                            9
reinforce and strengthen the view that Puerto Rican residents have accumulated a huge
shortfall in work experience relative to U.S. residents.
   Table 4 combines data on the population schooling distribution and employment rates
by schooling levels to calculate the percentage of adults who are college educated and
working in the private sector. Relative to the population, college-educated persons
working in the private sector are nearly three times more abundant on the mainland than
on the island in 1980, and roughly twice as abundant in 1990 and 2000. A similar pattern
holds with respect to college-educated persons working in the free enterprise segment of
the economy. Recall from our earlier discussion that we designate the same set of
industries as comprising the free enterprise segment in Puerto Rico and the United States,
even though the government role at the industry level looms larger in Puerto Rico. For
this reason, we think Table 4 understates the relative scarcity of college-educated Puerto
Ricans engaged in free enterprise work activity.


2.3. The Structure of Public Sector Employment
   Table 5 provides a closer look at public sector employment in Puerto Rico and
provides additional comparisons to the United States. In 1980, the percentage of workers
with government jobs was nearly twice as big in Puerto Rico. The public sector share of
Puerto Rican employment fell from 34 percent in 1980 to 31 percent in 1990 and 25
percent in 2000. Nevertheless, the public sector continues to account for a much bigger
fraction of overall employment on the island. The entire gap, and then some, between
Puerto Rican and U.S. public sector shares reflects bigger employment shares at the sub-
federal government level. In fact, the discrepancy arises almost entirely at the state and
commonwealth levels of government. The share of total employment accounted for by
local governments is similar on the island and the mainland.
   Does Puerto Rico’s high public employment share reflect an industry mix that leans
toward goods and services that, even in the United States, tend to be supplied by the
public sector? (An industry mix effect.) Or, does Puerto Rico’s high public employment
share reflect a bigger government role within narrowly defined industries? (A within-
industry effect) To address these questions, express the public sector share of
employment in Puerto Rico and the United States as



                                             10
                      PUB PR =         SiPR PUBiPR and PUBUS =                   SiUS PUBiUS             (1)
                                   i                                         i


where Si is the share of employment in industry i, and PUBi is the public sector share of
employment for industry i. Next, evaluate Puerto Rico’s industry-level government
employment shares at the U.S. industry distribution of employment:
                       PUB PR (U.S. Industry Distribution) =                     SiUS PUBiPR             (2)
                                                                         i

Also, evaluate the U.S. industry-level government employment shares at the Puerto Rican
industry distribution of employment:
                        PUB PR (U.S. Government Shares) =                    SiPR PUBiUS                 (3)
                                                                     i

By calculating (2) and (3), we can quantify the contribution of the industry mix effect and
the within-industry effect to the U.S.-Puerto Rican difference in the public sector share of
overall employment. We carry out these calculations using detailed Census classifications
into 232 to 264 distinct industries, depending on year.
         The results of calculating (2) and (3) appear in the rightmost two columns of
Panel A in Table 5. The basic story is similar for each Census year: the industry mix
effect accounts for about 60% of the U.S.-Puerto Rican difference in public sector
employment shares, and the within-industry effect accounts for about 40%.9 Recall that
the U.S.-Puerto Rican gap in the public sector share of overall employment has been
shrinking. Hence, we infer that Puerto Rico’s economy has been evolving toward a less
government-intensive industry mix relative to a contemporaneous U.S. benchmark, and at
the same time, the average U.S.-Puerto Rican gap in public sector employment shares
within industries has also been shrinking.
         Panel B of Table 5 illustrates the latter point with specific examples. As of 1980,
Puerto Rico’s public sector share of employment is much larger in several sizable
industries, involving a broad range of production activities. After 1980, the public sector
share of employment in these industries shrinks on the island and in the United States.
The declines in within-industry public sector shares are bigger in absolute percentage
terms for Puerto Rico. However, the 2000 Census data show that government

9
  The decomposition into between and within effects is not exact, but the cross product terms are small in
these data.


                                                    11
employment continues to play a relatively large role on the island in a broad range of
industries that include Electric Light and Power, Sugar and Confectionary
Manufacturing, Residential Care, Nursing Facilities, Child Day Care, Job Training,
Hospitals, Museums and Zoos, and Sanitary Services. According to these data, there
remains considerable room for shifting employment and production activity from the
state sector to the private sector in many Puerto Rican industries.


2.4. The Industry Structure of Employment
         Among the 50 states, there is a close relationship between average years of
schooling in the adult population and the schooling intensity of the industry mix. In
particular, the employment mix tilts toward industries that rely more heavily on highly
educated workers in states with more educated populations. Figure 2 depicts this strong,
perhaps unsurprising, relationship using household census data. We calculate the state-
level measure of schooling intensity in two steps. In the first step, we compute the
schooling intensity of each Census industry as the mean years of completed schooling
among all U.S. workers in the industry, weighting each worker in proportion to hours
worked. In the second step, we compute a schooling intensity index for the state (or
commonwealth) as the employment-weighted mean of the industry-level schooling
intensity values. By construction, an industry has the same schooling intensity in all
states and in Puerto Rico. So, the index quantifies the extent to which the employment
distribution tilts toward schooling-intensive industries.
         Figure 2 reveals a striking misalignment between Puerto Rico’s industry structure
and the schooling attainment of its population. Mean years of schooling among Puerto
Rican adults fall well short of any state in each of the last three censuses.10 Nevertheless,
the schooling intensity of Puerto Rico’s industry mix exceeds that of two-thirds or more
of the 50 states.11 In terms of schooling intensity, Puerto Rico’s industry mix ranks 13th
out 51 in 1980 (comparable to Virginia, Minnesota, Delaware and Hawaii), 10th out 51
in 1990 (above Delaware and Vermont), and 16th out of 51 in 2000 (tied with Utah and

10
   Ladd and Rivera-Batiz (2005) provide a detailed comparison of U.S. and Puerto Rican schooling levels.
11
   Lawrence and Lau (2005) provide complementary evidence that the factor content of Puerto Rican
exports is out of line with its factor endowment mix. Using industry-level measures of factor intensity, they
find that Puerto Rican exports are much more capital-intensive than U.S. exports and similar in terms of
R&D intensity and labor skill intensity, where compensation level proxies for skill.


                                                     12
Washington). Thus the Puerto Rican economy has for decades failed to generate jobs
that, in terms of educational requirements, fit the qualifications of the Puerto Rican
population.12
         This finding provides an important clue regarding Puerto Rico’s anemic
employment performance and its especially low employment rates among persons with
lower schooling levels. In an important sense, the “missing jobs” in Puerto Rico are to be
found largely in labor-intensive industries that rely heavily on less educated workers.
Table 6 provides additional evidence on this point. Consider Eating, Drinking and
Lodging, an industry group that accounts for 5 or 6 percent of employment in the United
States. Most workers in this industry group have relatively low schooling levels.13 Puerto
Rico’s share of employment in this industry group is less than any of the 50 states in
1980 and 1990 and near the bottom of the distribution in 2000. The story is similar but
less pronounced for Entertainment and Recreation Services. To fully appreciate the
glaring nature of Puerto Rico’s employment shortfall in these industries, three facts
should be kept in mind. First, Table 6 considers employment shares, but we showed
earlier that Puerto Rico’s employment rate is only 55-65% of the U.S. rate. Hence, Puerto
Rico’s employment shortfall in these industries is much greater as a percentage of the
working-age population. Second, Puerto Rico has a relative abundance of less educated
persons to potentially fill jobs in these industries. And third, Puerto Rico is blessed with a
tropical climate and interesting topography that could potentially attract many more
visitors from the United States and elsewhere, visitors who would intensively demand the
types of goods and services that these industries produce. In light of these last two
points, the magnitude of Puerto Rico’s employment shortfall in these industries is a



12
   A small caveat to this conclusion is worth a mention. The same economic policies that distort Puerto
Rico’s industry structure may also alter the mix of production activities within industries on the island
relative to the mainland. In the case of Pharmaceuticals, Section 936 tax subsidies stimulated the sourcing
of physical production to the island while the more schooling-intensive research and development activities
remained on the mainland. For two reasons, we do not see this issue as a big concern in the interpretation of
Figure 2. First, the scope for this type of outsourcing arises mainly in certain manufacturing industries.
Second, the Section 936 subsidies are highly concentrated in a small number of capital-intensive industries
that account for only a small share of employment. Pharmaceutical manufacturers, which received the bulk
of Section 936 subsidies, account for only 2-3 percent of Puerto Rican employment in recent decades.
13
   Table A.2 in Davis and Henrekson (2005b) reports workers’ mean schooling years for 61 industry groups
based on data from the Current Population Survey for 1984 to 196. Eating and Drinking establishments
rank 54 out of 61 industry groups on this measure of skill, and Hotels and Lodging rank 47.


                                                     13
powerful testament to the decades-long failure of industrial and employment policy on
the island.
         One might hope that Puerto Rico’s rising schooling levels would eventually
eliminate any employment shortfall created by the misalignment of its industry structure.
However, Figure 3 suggests that such a hope is largely in vain. We carry out the same
type of exercise as before in Figure 3, except that we now relate the industry structure of
employment to the schooling attainment of employed, rather than all, persons. For 1980
and 1990, Figure 3 tells a similar story to Figure 2. By 2000, however, the misalignment
between the schooling intensity of Puerto Rico’s industry structure and the schooling
attainment of its workers has largely vanished. Puerto Rico remains an outlier in 2000 but
no more so than Texas, California or New Mexico. Yet, as we have seen, the U.S.-Puerto
Rican gap in the employment-population ratio remains enormous in 2000. In other words,
Puerto Rico achieved a reasonable alignment between its industry structure and the
educational attainment of its workers by 2000 – roughly in line with the relationship
among the 50 states – but it did so by excluding the less educated from jobs.
         One other fact, readily visible in Figure 1, belies the hope that Puerto Rico can
educate its way out of a huge jobs shortage for less educated persons. Between 1980 and
2000, the U.S.-Puerto Rican gap in average schooling attainment among persons 16-65
years old shrank by roughly two thirds. Yet over the same twenty-year period, the Puerto
Rican employment rate rose only slightly from 61% to 64% of the U.S. rate according to
the labor force survey, and it fell relative to the U.S. rate according to the household
census. If more education were the key to addressing Puerto Rico’s employment
shortfall, the island would have a spectacular record of employment growth in recent
decades.


2.5. The Size and Ownership Structure of Employment
     Table 7 reports the distribution of paid employees by establishment size in four major
industry groups for Puerto Rico and the United States.14 These statistics derive from the
Economic Census of 1997, an establishment-level census of all tax-paying business units


14
  Comparable statistics on the distribution of employees by firm size are not available for Puerto Rico in
the Economic Census or other sources known to us.


                                                    14
in covered sectors. In comparison to the United States, Puerto Rico’s Construction and
Manufacturing employees are considerably more concentrated at larger establishments. In
contrast, its Retail Trade employees are dramatically less concentrated at larger
establishments. Remarkably, only 36% of retail employees in Puerto Rico work at
establishments with fifty or more paid employees, as compared to 76% on the U.S.
mainland. The two employee size distributions are similar in Wholesale Trade, although
Puerto Rico has smaller shares at the smallest and largest establishments. In short, there is
no simple characterization of Puerto Rico’s small business employment share, relative to
the United States, that holds across major industry groups.
     The Economic Census also provides limited information about the ownership
structure of employment. As seen in Table 8, unincorporated enterprises account for very
small shares of paid employees in Manufacturing. They account for bigger shares,
ranging from 5% to 24%, in Construction, Wholesale Trade and Retail Trade. Notably,
the share of paid employees at unincorporated enterprises in these industry groups is
roughly twice as big in Puerto Rico as on the U.S. mainland. Retail Trade again presents
a sharp contrast: about 16% of paid employees work for individual proprietorships in
Puerto Rico, compared to only 6% on the U.S. mainland.
     The Retail Trade figures for Puerto Rico are especially noteworthy in light of
developments on the U.S. mainland in recent decades. Wal-Mart, Target, Staples, Best
Buy, Home Depot and other national chains have propelled the introduction and diffusion
of larger stores with greater product selection, lower prices, electronic credit-card
processing, barcode scanners, and advanced inventory management techniques.15 In the
process, they have transformed the U.S. retail sector, dramatically increasing
productivity, and displacing thousands of smaller and independent retail enterprises.
Using micro data from the U.S. Census of Retail Trade, Foster et al. (2004) document
that retail establishments owned by large national chains have higher labor productivity
than establishments owned by single-unit firms. They also show that essentially all of the
productivity growth in the U.S. retail sector between 1987 and 1997 reflects the



15
  For description and analysis of these developments in the U.S. Retail Trade sector, see Nakamura (1999),
McKinsey Global Institute (2001), Sieling, Friedman and Dumas (2001), Foster, Haltiwanger and Krizan
(2004), Hausman and Leibtag (2004), Basker (2005ab), and Holmes (2005).


                                                   15
displacement of less productive single-establishment retail firms by the entry of more
productive, typically larger, establishments owned by national chains.
   Wal-Mart, in particular, has been at the forefront of these developments and has
attracted attention in several careful studies. McKinsey Global Institute (2001) describes
Wal-Mart’s role in the transformation of the retail sector this way:
         In general merchandise retailing, productivity growth accelerated after
         1995 because Wal-Mart’s success forced competitors to improve their
         operations. In 1987, Wal-Mart had just 9 percent market share, but was
         40 percent more productive than its competitors. By the mid-1990s, its
         share had grown to 27 percent while its productivity advantage
         widened to 48 percent. Competitors reacted by adopting many of Wal-
         Mart’s innovations, including large scale (“big box”) format,
         economies of scale in warehouse logistics and purchasing, electronic
         data interchange (EDI), and wireless barcode scanning.

   Tables 7 and 8 imply that Puerto Rico’s retail sector lags well behind the mainland in
the type of creative destruction process documented by Foster et al. (2004) and McKinsey
Global Institute – to the detriment of its residents. Some of the most powerful consumer
benefits of the U.S. retail transformation take the form of lower prices. Hausman and
Leibtag (2004) find that “Wal-Mart offers identical food items at an average price about
15%-25% lower than traditional supermarkets.” A complementary study by Basker
(2005b) finds that the entry of a new Wal-Mart store leads to significantly lower prices at
competitor stores in the same city. Basker (2005a) provides evidence that the entry of a
new Wal-Mart store leads to a modest net increase in county-wide employment.
   Why has Puerto Rico lagged in the transformation of its retail sector? The permitting
process for new construction and real estate development projects has slowed the
transformation of the retail sector for reasons explained in Section 4 below. Municipal
government oversight of retail store entry and location decisions has also played a role, as
explained in Section 3.4 below.


2.6. Informal Sector Employment
       The underground, shadow or informal economy refers to output and incomes
generated in market production activity that are not declared to the government,
particularly the tax and regulatory authorities. Standard establishment-based measures of



                                            16
output and employment are unlikely to capture underground activity. In principle,
household surveys capture employment in the underground economy, but respondents
may be reluctant to provide information about employment in illegal or undeclared
activities. This leaves open the possibility that official estimates of Puerto Rico’s
employment rate are so low, because they miss a high rate of employment in the
underground economy.
         Estudios Técnicos (2004) provides a figure for informal sector employment in
Puerto Rico that is 20.5 percent as large as the official labor force measure. However, the
figure is based on a methodology that attributes the U.S.-Puerto Rican gap in labor force
participation rates to the U.S.-Puerto Rican gap in informal sector employment. So the
20.5% figure is essentially a restatement of the participation (and employment) gap, and
it cannot tell us how much of the measured employment gap reflects informal sector
activity. Direct, survey-based evidence on informal sector employment for a random
sample of Puerto Rican residents is lacking. The lack of direct evidence leaves us unable
to confidently adjust the U.S.-Puerto Rican employment gap for informal activity.
         It is unlikely, however, that the informal sector accounts for the bulk of the U.S.-
Puerto Rican employment gap, as measured by standard labor force surveys. Many
persons who work off the books for a portion of their income also hold formal sector
jobs, and they already show up in measured employment. Many other persons who work
only in the informal sector are also counted as employed in household surveys. Hence,
any U.S.-Puerto Rican gap in the rate of missing employment is smaller in magnitude,
probably much smaller, than the U.S.-Puerto Rican difference in informal sector
employment rates. In addition, the available evidence suggests that underground activity
in Puerto Rico has declined relative to GDP in the past quarter century, and moved closer
to U.S. levels.16




16
  Bosworth and Collins (2005, Appendix B) report that the revenue gap between income in the national
accounts and income declared for tax purposes diminished sharply after 1976 in Puerto Rico. This trend
suggests that underground activity motivated by tax avoidance activity also declined. In recent years
Puerto Rico’s revenue gap as a percentage of GDP has declined to levels only a few percentage points
above the U.S. level. Another standard indicator based on electricity usage suggests that underground
activity in Puerto Rico fell sharply relative to GDP in the 1980s, and then partly recovered in the 1990s.


                                                     17
3. Policy Influences on Business Development and Employment Growth
3.1. The overall policy and institutional environment
       Compared to many middle-income countries, Puerto Rico enjoys strong
institutions and favorable economic policies. By virtue of its association with the United
States, Puerto Rico benefits from sound monetary policy, a stable financial environment,
and open migration to and from the U.S. mainland. Puerto Rico’s international trade
regime is largely governed by U.S. trade policies and World Trade Organization (WTO)
rules. As a result, tariffs on traded goods and services are relatively low and somewhat
insulated from manipulation by political authorities on the island. Price controls are
minimal, and there are no burdensome currency regulations or capital controls. Many
aspects of the overall economic environment are shaped by U.S. laws.
       Set against these favorable features of Puerto Rico’s economic environment are
several unfavorable ones. There are peculiarities and loopholes in the application of U.S.
trade laws that raise effective trade barriers. Section 936 and other tax subsidies have
distorted Puerto Rico’s industrial structure. Minimum wage laws raise the cost of
employing less skilled workers. An extensive role for government transfer payments
undermines work incentives. An inefficient and cumbersome regime for business licenses
and permits impedes construction activity, new business development and cost-effective
operation of existing businesses. More generally, many government services are of poor
quality, and there is a culture of dependence on the government as a source of
employment and favors. In addition, the traditional prevalence of state-owned enterprises
has probably softened competitive pressures and lowered productivity throughout much
of the economy. We discuss each of these features in greater detail below.
       Table 9 shows business climate indicators compiled by the World Bank for Puerto
Rico and other countries. According to these indicators, Puerto Rico compares favorably
to the Latin American and Caribbean region in terms of the costs of starting a formal
business, the regulation of employment, institutional support for credit markets, and the
costs of closing an insolvent business. The Puerto Rican business climate is roughly
comparable to the average OECD country according to many of the indicators, and there
is greater employment flexibility on the island. The most unfavorable aspects of Puerto




                                             18
Rico’s business climate according to the World Bank indicators pertain to the cost and
difficulty of enforcing commercial debt obligations.
            The picture of Puerto Rico’s business climate suggested by Table 9 is too rosy in
our view, because it fails to capture several factors that increase day-to-day operating
costs, raise artificial barriers to entry and expansion, and cultivate a rent-seeking business
culture. Unfortunately, these factors are difficult to quantify. Hence, portions of our
discussion below rely on descriptive and anecdotal evidence drawn from a variety of
sources, including informal interviews with business persons and government officials.


3.2. Trade Protectionism
            The U.S. Jones Act raises the cost of trade between Puerto Rico and the United
States by requiring the use of American vessels for all goods shipped by sea between
Puerto Rican and U.S. ports. The effect is equivalent to a tariff on Puerto Rican imports
from the United States and on U.S. imports from Puerto Rico.
            Puerto Rico has also established protectionist measures that are incompatible with
WTO rules for international trade. For instance, Law 69 of 2002 levies a higher excise
tax for high-volume producers than for low-volume producers. High-volume producers
tend to be foreign, and low-volume producers tend to be local. The Supreme Court of
Puerto Rico has ruled that Law 69 does not discriminate against foreign producers,
because it does not explicitly target foreign firms for higher tax rates.17 In recent cases
involving Japan, Korea and Chile, however, the WTO has ruled that what matters is the
outcome, not the precise manner in which local authorities structure a tax (Rodriguez
Santiago, 2005).
            Puerto Rico also has other “buy local” laws with a strong protectionist element.
These laws support certain local enterprises, but they also distort purchase decisions,
lessen competitive pressures, and lower government tax revenues. For example, Law 110
(August 2001) provides for a 25% credit on Puerto Rican corporate income taxes for the
purchase of eligible products manufactured and sold in Puerto Rico. Law 169 (December
2001) contains similar provisions for manufactured goods that are purchased for export.



17
     U.S. federal courts did not assume jurisdiction in this matter, leaving it to Puerto Rican courts.


                                                         19
A June 2005 executive order issued by the governor requires government agencies to
earmark 15 percent of their purchase contracts for small and mid-sized local enterprises.


3.3. Tax Subsidies that Distort the Structure of Production and Employment
         Tax incentives for industry have a long history in Puerto Rico. Section 936 of the
U.S. tax code “largely exempted U.S. corporations from paying federal tax on income
earned by their Puerto Rican subsidiaries. Puerto Rico has a parallel tax subsidy program
effectively exempting 936 corporations from Puerto Rican income taxes as well.”18
(Hexner and Jenkins, 1998) At one time, these tax subsidies were seen as useful tools for
stimulating employment in labor-intensive industries and easing Puerto Rico’s
unemployment problems. In practice, Section 936 tax subsidies proved most attractive in
capital-intensive manufacturing industries that produce proprietary products with big
price markups over marginal costs. Products of this type facilitate tax-minimizing transfer
prices and profit shifting between jurisdictions with different effective tax rates.
         According to a study by the U.S. General Accounting Office (1993) cited in
Bosworth and Collins (2005), Section 936 tax subsidies to U.S. corporations with Puerto
Rican operations amounted to $2.6 billion in 1989 or 13% of Puerto Rico’s GDP. One
view is that subsidies of this magnitude profoundly influenced Puerto Rico’s economy
and industrial structure. Another view is that the Section 936 subsidies mainly reflect
paper transactions with little impact on the Puerto Rican economy but a high cost to the
U.S. treasury. Both views contain an important element of truth. On the one hand,
Bosworth and Collins make a convincing case that a large portion of the Section 936
subsidies in recent decades reflects income shifting by U.S. corporations through
distorted transfer prices and other means. On the other hand, it is widely acknowledged
that pharmaceutical firms sourced much of their production activity in Puerto Rico to
exploit Section 936 subsidies. The employment statistics for Pharmaceuticals in Table 6
support this view. The share of employment accounted for by the Pharmaceuticals

18
  Section 936 was established by the U.S. Tax Act of 1976, but precursors in the U.S. and Puerto Rican tax
codes date back several decades. Section 936 tax credits have been phased out as of 2005, but U.S. firms
can still defer U.S. corporate income tax on Puerto Rican earnings by converting their Puerto Rican
operations into controlled foreign corporations. See Odishelidze and Laffer (2004, pages 174-180) for a
useful synopsis of the evolution of Section 936 and related features of the U.S. and Puerto Rican tax codes.
Pelzman (2002) provides a detailed and highly informative description.


                                                    20
industry in Puerto Rico is about ten times larger than in the United States as a whole and
two or three times larger than in any single state.
         If the goal is to stimulate employment, one would be hard pressed to devise a less
effective, more costly tool than Section 936 subsidies or similar tax subsidies. Hunter
(2003, Figure 4) reports that, in 1993, 98.5% of Section 936 tax credits for the Puerto
Rican operations of U.S. corporations accrue to Manufacturing and Public Utilities.
These are among the most capital-intensive sectors of the economy. According to
Bosworth and Collins, 60% of the subsidies accrue to the manufacture of chemicals and
allied products such as medicines. Hexner and Jenkins (1998) refer to a 1992 GAO study
that finds “drug companies with manufacturing operations in Puerto Rico received tax
benefits worth $72,788 for each job paying an average of $26,471.”


3.4. Tax Subsidies, Entry Barriers, and Rent-Seeking Behavior
         Section 936 tax subsidies merit special attention because of their enormous
magnitude, historically, and their impact on the structure of employment and output. But
they are only part of a larger story. The Puerto Rican tax code and regulatory system
abound with provisions that cater to special business interests. Some provisions take the
form of targeted tax breaks, others restrict business entry and expansion, and others
involve licensing requirements and burdensome regulations that favor incumbents over
potential rivals. In this climate, profitability and survival often hinge on obtaining and
exploiting special tax breaks and regulatory advantages. The result is a complicated web
of policy-induced financial incentives that helps to sustain a rent-seeking business culture
and an overly intrusive role for the government.
         As an illustration, Table 10 presents a list of business incentives enacted into law
from August 2001 to August 2002.19 Various provisions aim to encourage the industrial,
agricultural and export sectors, the film industry, call center operations, stagnant
municipalities, and the employment of high skill workers and handicapped workers.
These various provisions, which add to a large set of older incentive programs, exhibit

19
  The number of industrial incentives enacted into law during this period is unusually large, but the
characteristics of the incentives described in Table 10 are typical of other periods as well. We do not claim
that the list in Table 10 is exhaustive for the period covered. See Cao Garcia (2004) for an historical
account of federal and home-grown tax incentives in Puerto Rico, and Alm and Cao Garcia (2005) for a
comparative analysis of Puerto Rico’s tax system.


                                                     21
several noteworthy characteristics. First, they typically benefit special business interests.
Second, the form of the benefits, e.g., credits and deductions on business taxes, makes it
difficult to assess the magnitude of the subsidy and the likely drain on the government
treasury. Third, the incentive provisions often enlarge the powers of the government
bureaucracy, especially at the commonwealth level. Fourth, several of the industrial
incentives erode the revenue base at the municipal level. Examples include exemptions
from local property taxes and municipal patent requirements. Fifth, some provisions
contain an element of trade protectionism, such as tax exemptions for the purchase of
Puerto Rican manufactures. Finally, when taken as a whole, Table 10 suggests that rent
seeking is an important feature of the Puerto Rican business climate. Much effort and
large expenditures are devoted to lobbying the legislature for special-interest provisions.
The bills actually passed into law represent a small sample of the proposals that shuttle
around the legislature.
           Rent seeking behavior extends beyond tax breaks and subsidized credit to a
variety of entry barriers that protect incumbents and local business interests. Some of the
most important barriers arise at the municipal government level. Businesses in Puerto
Rico must usually obtain a patent from the local municipality to operate within its
boundaries. The steps required for obtaining municipal patents look straightforward on
the books, but, in practice, the process can be plagued with difficulties. A key problem is
that a patent is granted only for a particular location, as determined by the municipal
authority. Municipalities often grant patents only for slow business areas, effectively
protecting incumbents in desirable locations.
           Other entry barriers arise at the commonwealth level. A recent federal appeals
court decision explains how entry barriers work for retail pharmacies in Puerto Rico.20
Law No. 189 of July 29, 1979 requires a proposed new pharmacy establishment to obtain
a Certificate of Need and Convenience from the Secretary of the Puerto Rico Health
Department. Certificates are routinely granted in the absence of local merchant
opposition, but they are subjected to a costly and lengthy legal proceeding if any
“affected party”, invariably a rival pharmacy establishment, opposes the proposed
pharmacy. In such cases, the certificate is often denied, as it was for several Walgreen

20
     See United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit (2005b).


                                                       22
outlets. Walgreen filed suit in federal court, claiming that Law 189 amounted to an
unconstitutional infringement on interstate commerce, and eventually prevailed at the
appellate level. The Walgreen matter pertained to pharmacies only, and similar
certification requirements remain in effect for other health care facilities.
       More generally, licensing requirements restrict entry into many professions,
services and business activities. In the past decade, there has been a wave of lobbying
efforts to establish new professional licensing requirements and collegiate associations
with compulsory dues. One example involves the legal requirements to produce a public
performance such as a theatrical production or a music concert. The current requirements
under Law 182 are reasonably straightforward: a $20 license fee, a certificate of good
conduct, evidence that tax payments are current, and the posting of a bond or insurance
policy. Law 182 also provides for a $10,000 fine for anyone who produces an event
without a license. House bill 1460, approved by the House with bipartisan support on
June 21, 2005, would raise entry barriers by requiring that a producer have five years of
experience as a promoter, work at least one year with an established producer, and hold a
specified college degree. In addition, the proposed law would create a Puerto Rico
College of Public Performance Producers (Colegio de Productores de Espectáculos
Públicos) that would have the power to license, regulate, sue, and investigate the actions
of collegiate members. Similar legislation is currently under review in the Senate. Other
recent examples of efforts to erect professional entry barriers include Senate Project 1842
for psychologists, a proposed College of Journalists for newspersons, and House Project
3755 for economists. This last one is favored by the Puerto Rico Association of
Economists, suggesting that economists are just as ready to erect entry barriers in their
own interests as anyone else.
       The similarity of these licensing requirements and collegiate organizations to
medieval guilds is striking. These measures are sold as arrangements that ensure quality
and protect local interests against foreign interests or large companies. Their clear
economic effect, however, is to restrict competition and raise prices for consumers. Adam
Smith developed this theme more than two centuries ago in his vigorous critique of
mandatory apprenticeships and other restrictions on entry into cutlery, weaving and other




                                              23
trades in 18th century Britain.21 More recently, Djankov et al. (2001) examine data for
start-up firms in 85 countries. They report that countries with heavier entry regulation
have more corruption and larger underground economies but not better quality of private
or public goods. The implication is that stronger entry regulation accentuates corruption
and expands the underground economy without any compensating improvement in the
quality of goods and services.


3.5. Taxes on Labor Income and Consumption
         Taxes on labor income and consumption expenditures encourage households to
substitute away from the legal market sector in favor of untaxed activities – leisure,
household production, and the underground economy. Substitution away from the legal
market sector is relatively easy for certain goods and services such as meal preparation
and cleaning services, and relatively difficult for others such as automobile production
and surgery. Hence, high tax rates on labor and consumption discourage work activity in
the legal market sector, and they systematically alter the mix of market production
activity. Tax-sensitive sectors include eating and drinking establishments, laundry and
cleaning services, child care, consumer repair services, domestic household help, and
most personal services. As suggested by this list of examples, tax-sensitive sectors tend to
rely heavily on workers with lower schooling and lower wages. It follows that high tax
rates on labor and consumption have disproportionately large negative effects on the
demand for less skilled workers.
         Davis and Henrekson (2005a) investigate these issues in a sample of rich
countries. They find that higher tax rates on labor and consumption lead to less work
activity in the legal market sector, a bigger underground economy, and an altered
industry mix.22 The estimated effects are quite large. Consider, for example, a 12.8
percentage point between-country difference in the tax rate, a unit standard deviation in
the cross section of their sample. Using data for the mid-1990s and their preferred
specification, they find that a tax rate increase of this size leads to 122 fewer hours


21
   See Book I, chapter X, part II in The Wealth of Nations. See Carlton and Perloff (2000, pages 74-76) for
a modern analysis of the adverse price, output and cost effects of artificial entry restrictions.
22
   Many other studies also investigate the role of tax rates in cross-country differences in work activity and
the size of the underground economy. See Davis and Henrekson (2005a) for references to this literature.


                                                      24
worked per adult per year in the legal market sector, a drop of 4.9 percentage points in
the employment-population ratio, and a rise in the underground economy equal to 3.8%
of GDP. It also lowers by 10 to 30 percent the economy-wide share of production and
employment in tax-sensitive sectors such as eating, drinking and lodging establishments.
As Davis and Henrekson stress, these estimates reflect the direct effect of taxes on labor
supply and labor demand plus the effects of tax-funded welfare and social insurance
programs on labor supply incentives.
        The impact of tax-funded transfer programs is of particular concern in Puerto
Rico, because so many residents rely on government transfers as a major source of
income. As analyzed in detail by Burtless and Sotomayor (2005) and Enchautegui and
Freeman.(2005), these transfer programs often confront recipients with very high implicit
tax rates if they move from welfare to work. On the U.S. mainland, earned income tax
credits for working families mitigate the adverse labor supply incentives introduced by
means-tested transfer programs. Puerto Rican residents are not eligible for earned income
tax credits, because they do not pay federal income taxes.


3.6 Minimum wage laws
        The U.S. Federal Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) regulates minimum wages
and working conditions for covered workers. It has applied to Puerto Rico since its
inception in 1938, but for decades the FSLA allowed for less extensive coverage and
lower minimum wages in Puerto Rico. Starting in 1974, amendments to the FLSA
increased coverage in Puerto Rico and gradually brought the Federal minimum for Puerto
Rico into line with the U.S. minimum. Since 1983 Puerto Rican employers have faced
essentially the same minimum wage requirements as U.S. employers (Castillo-Freeman
and Freeman, 1992). The current Federal minimum of $5.15 per hour for covered
workers is about 30% of the average hourly wage in the United States and more than 60%
of the average hourly wage in Puerto Rico.23 The Federal minimum has also been quite
high historically relative to the average wage in Puerto Rico.



23
  Puerto Rico’s average hourly wage is about $8.00. Table 620 in U.S. Bureau of the Census (2005) reports
an average hourly wage of $17.35 for the United States in 2002.


                                                   25
           There is compelling evidence that minimum wage laws have profoundly affected
the earnings distribution in Puerto Rico.24 For example, Castillo-Freeman and Freeman
(1992) report that half of all covered workers in 1979 were paid at the prevailing U.S.
minimum of $2.90 per hour and another 13% were paid within 10 cents of the U.S.
minimum. They also show that the increase in the Federal minimum from $2.90 in 1979
to $3.35 in 1983 had a pronounced effect on the shape of the earnings distribution.
           The evidence regarding employment effects is much less clear cut. Based on an
investigation of aggregate and industry-level data, Castillo-Freeman and Freeman
conclude that the extension of the U.S. minimum to the island starting in 1974 caused
“massive job losses” and greatly altered Puerto Rico’s industry mix.25 However, Krueger
(1995) revisits the same data and concludes that the evidence regarding employment
effects is “fragile” and “surprisingly weak.” He shows that the estimated employment
effects of Castillo-Freeman and Freeman are sensitive to reasonable alternatives for the
empirical specifications and estimation methods. In short, the existing literature has
reached no clear conclusions about the employment effects of minimum wage
requirements in Puerto Rico.
           Previous studies are largely silent about the longer term employment
consequences of minimum wage requirements. This is a major drawback for the purposes
of policy analysis, because the disemployment effects of minimum wage requirements
are probably (much) larger in the longer term. It takes time to substitute away from low
skill labor in response to mandatory wage floors. These substitution responses can take
the form of higher capital-labor ratios, greater reliance on relatively skilled workers, and
the adoption of labor-saving technology. Even with fixed factor intensities and
unchanging technologies, disemployment effects mount over time if minimum wage
requirements operate on the entry margin for new employers and new job positions.
Given the overwhelming evidence that minimum wage laws have pushed up the lower
half of Puerto Rico’s wage distribution, it is highly likely that they also slowed the entry
of new employers and the creation of new jobs for less skilled workers. In this regard, the
evidence in Figure 2 is highly suggestive: Puerto Rico’s missing jobs are concentrated in


24
     See Reynolds and Gregory (1965), Santiago (1989) and Castillo-Freeman and Freeman (1992).
25
     Santiago (1989) reaches similar conclusions based on a different approach to the aggregate time series.


                                                       26
industries with relatively low schooling requirements. Employment in these industries is
much more likely to be depressed by minimum wage requirements than employment in
schooling-intensive industries.
         Slow-working disemployment effects also arise through the impact of minimum
wage requirements on the accumulation of work-related skills, as analyzed by Hashimoto
(1982) and Mincer (1984), among many others. The skill accumulation effects work
through two main channels. First, wage floors can reduce employment and hours directly,
lowering work experience. Second, even when there is no direct effect on employment
and hours, a binding wage minimum reduces the scope for learning and training on the
job. For both reasons, workers then accumulate marketable skills more slowly. The result
is a reduction in future earnings capacity and weaker attachment to the labor market, as
recently emphasized by Neumark and Nizalova (2004).26 Longer term effects on labor
market attachment are of particular concern when means-tested government transfer
payments prop up reservation wages, as they do in Puerto Rico for a large fraction of the
population. In summary, there are good reasons to think that the application of U.S.-level
minimum wages has had a large negative impact on the rate of employment in Puerto
Rico and on the accumulation of marketable skills among Puerto Rican residents.


3.7 Other labor market regulations
         Private business owners and public sector managers in Puerto Rico frequently
complain about an inability to address worker abuse of labor market regulations. There
are important abuses pertaining to vacation time, sick leave, and worker dismissal. For
example, employee claims of work-related stress are routinely endorsed by medical
authorities without serious examination. As another example, the law mandates twelve
days of sick leave per year for employees. However, employees are required to submit a
medical report only if absent from work for more than two consecutive days. Many
workers abuse the system by claiming health-related absences two days at a time up to
26
  Previous research provides little direct evidence on the longer term effects of minimum wage
requirements, but the work by Neumark and Nizalova (2004) is an exception. They present evidence that
exposure to higher minimum wage requirements at young ages leads to lower earnings and fewer work
hours later in life for U.S. residents. The estimated effects are sizable: one additional year of exposure as a
teenager to an 11 percent increase in the minimum wage above the level of the Federal minimum lowers
earnings by 1.9% at ages 25-29. Reduced hours at ages 25-29 account for about one-quarter of the earnings
reduction.


                                                      27
the maximum number of days per year. Health-related absences are not determined in
advance, so business planning and the performance of work groups suffer from
unscheduled absences. These unscheduled absences raise labor costs and discourage
employment growth.
       Other problems arise in connection with dismissals and long term leaves of
absence. If an employee is granted a long term leave for health-related reasons, the rules
of the State Security Fund (Fondo de Seguro del Estado, FSE) require the employer to
keep the employee’s post open for a full year. During that time, the employer need not
pay wages but must pay social benefits. The rules also specify that the employer cannot
phone the employee or the FSE to discuss the issue. As a result, it is difficult for the firm
to plan and operate efficiently. Worker dismissal often ends in legal lawsuits, causing
employers to refrain from legally justifiable dismissals due to incompetence at work or a
business slowdown. In turn, the difficulty and cost of dismissing workers make
employers reluctant to hire.


3.8 The Effect of State-Owned Enterprises on the Competitive Environment
   As we documented in Section 2, the public sector accounts for a large but declining
share of economic activity in Puerto Rico. This evidence raises two questions:
Historically, how has a large public sector affected the competitive environment in Puerto
Rico? And, how is Puerto Rico’s competitive environment likely to evolve in response to
a declining role for the public sector? Definitive answers to these questions are beyond
the scope of this paper, but we can draw on recent research to suggest some tentative
answers. In this regard, our main point is twofold: a large role for the public sector
lessens competitive pressures, and a lessening of competitive pressures yields lower
productivity.
   A large public sector lessens competitive pressures in the economy for several
reasons. First, state-owned enterprises operate with “softer” budget constraints than
private enterprises in the sense that financial distress is more likely to result in taxpayer-
funded bailouts for public enterprises. Second, the private sector can rely on the profit
motive and high-powered incentives much more readily and effectively than the public
sector. Third, when public and private sector enterprises potentially compete in the same



                                              28
line of business, the state often restricts private sector entry or expansion opportunities in
order to protect the public enterprise. The U.S. postal service – with its government-
granted monopoly in the delivery of first-class mail – is a classic example.
     Several recent studies provide evidence that greater competitive pressure leads to
higher labor productivity. This research suggests that the beneficial productivity effects
of competitive pressure work through a variety of channels that vary with circumstances.
Galdon-Sanchez and Schmitz (2002) and Schmitz (2005) offer some of the most
compelling evidence that competitive pressure can provide the impetus for dramatic
productivity gains. Schmitz (2005) finds that an intensification of competitive pressure in
the iron ore industry in the early 1980s led, within a few years, to a doubling of labor
productivity at U.S. and Canadian mines. Work-rule reforms that cut overstaffing
requirements in collectively bargained labor contracts drove most of the productivity
gains. The exit of low-productivity mines and the adoption of new technology played
minor roles. Schmitz and Teixeira (2004) study the privatization of state-owned iron ore
mines in Brazil in 1989. Prior to privatization, about 60% of the industry was state
owned. In the first few years after privatization, labor productivity doubled at newly
privatized mines and, even more remarkably, previously private mines. These
productivity gains were much larger than contemporaneous gains at iron ore mines in
other countries. Several other studies produce evidence that an intensification of
competitive pressure raises productivity by displacing less efficient producers, triggering
the reallocation of factor inputs to higher value uses, and stimulating reform in work
practices.27
        These observations suggest that a large public sector has suppressed productivity
levels in Puerto Rico for decades. By the same logic, they suggest that the rapid
downsizing of Puerto Rico’s public sector in the 1990s is a potentially important source
of long term productivity gains. This issue merits further attention by researchers and
policy makers.




27
  See Eslaval et al. (2004), Holmes and Schmitz (2001), Markiewicz et al. (2004), Sivadasan (2003), and
Syverson (2004).


                                                   29
4. The Permitting Process as a Barrier to Business Development
4.1. Our Approach to the Topic
       We now turn to the permitting process whereby the government oversees and
regulates construction and real estate development projects, the commercial use of
equipment and facilities, and the periodic renewal of various business licenses. To the
best of our knowledge, there is little systematic research on the permitting process in
Puerto Rico and no comprehensive sources of information about the process and its
consequences. Persons with in-depth knowledge of the permitting process are reluctant to
speak for attribution, because the topic is politically sensitive and because public
statements could jeopardize their commercial interests. In some cases, concerns about
potential legal perils may also dissuade statements on the record.
       In light of these realities, we took the following two-pronged approach in our
efforts to understand the functioning of the permitting process. First, we conducted
informal interviews with more than one hundred persons who have expertise on or first-
hand experience with the permitting process in Puerto Rico. Second, we sought to
corroborate the claims and characterizations of interviewees by drawing on external
public sources such as newspaper articles, judicial proceedings and government laws and
regulations. The result, we believe, is a first-pass description and analysis that delivers
some insights into how the permitting process in Puerto Rico raises the cost of doing
business, corrodes the business and regulatory climate, hampers economic development,
and undermines the drive for employment growth. Our discussion below focuses on the
permitting process for construction and real estate development projects, but our
interviews indicate that the problems we identify also plague the permitting process for
the commercial use of equipment and facilities and the periodic renewal of business
operating licenses.
       Before proceeding, a few additional remarks about our interview process are in
order. We conducted face-to-face interviews with about ten contractors and construction
engineers, fifteen real estate developers and their employees, ten business persons with
experience as clients of construction contractors and real estate developers, five lenders
and employees of financial institutions, twenty current and former government office
holders, fifteen attorneys and permit specialists, and thirty other persons comprised of



                                              30
small business owners and their employees, entrepreneurs, and academics with
knowledge of the permitting process. We did not select the interviewees randomly.
Instead, we initially approached and interviewed several experts on the permitting
process, and these experts referred us to other potential interviewees. As we proceeded,
we also independently contacted other persons to clarify particular issues or seek out
additional information. Interviews varied widely in depth and duration. The average
interview lasted about thirty minutes, but many others lasted no more than ten minutes,
and several interviews took a few hours. Follow-up interviews to clarify particular
questions typically took place by phone, and were usually brief.


4.2. Overview of the Permitting Process
       The permitting process for construction and real estate development projects in
Puerto Rico involves four main elements:
   1. Consultation regarding the proposed project’s location (consulta de ubicación),
       which requires approval by the Planning Board (Junta de Planificación), an arm of
       the Governor’s office. Zoning variances and proposed exceptions to standard
       construction requirements are also treated at this stage.
   2. The preparation and filing of environmental assessments and environmental
       impact statements. The latter are more detailed and extensive.
   3. Applications to the Permits and Regulations Administration (Administración de
       Permisos y Reglamentos, or ARPE) for permits pertaining to construction,
       renovation, and the placement of signs and advertisements. These permits are
       required by law for project development, the construction of new facilities, the
       refashioning of sites when starting new businesses, and for merely putting up
       signs.
   4. Applications for various use permits required to operate a completed or renovated
       facility. These use permits include health certificates and fire department
       endorsements.
   This high-level overview suggests that the permitting process is reasonably
straightforward, but the reality is far more complex and fraught with uncertainty,
compliance costs, and delays. To help provide a sense of the complexity and uncertainty,



                                            31
Figure 4 (translated from Solá, 2004) depicts the main elements of the permitting process
as diagrammed by an experienced construction engineer. It offers a bird’s eye view of the
permitting maze. The sheer number of government agencies with hands in the process
provides some indication of the complexities and the potential for bottlenecks. Solá
(2004) describes the process as follows:

         There are at least thirty four (34) public agencies that intervene in the
         process, in at least one hundred nineteen (119) procedures and twelve
         (12) stages in obtaining construction permits…There are about sixty
         (60) sets of regulations (reglamentos) that regulate land development
         and construction, many of them, or the amendments to them, realized
         incoherently and without an integrated vision of the objectives of the
         regulation…The budget assigned to pay needed technical and
         management personnel and to adequately equip regulatory agencies and
         the reviewing units of the agencies providing endorsements is
         excessively low. It is therefore necessary to restructure the processes in
         all and each of the agencies simultaneously. Without adequate funding
         these tasks cannot be realized.

       All industry participants interviewed for this study stressed that the permitting
process has been a nightmare for a long time and remains so. Many interviewees
remarked that construction and development projects must overcome a wide range of
bureaucratic obstacles that can unexpectedly delay or derail a project in its initial stages,
and after construction has begun. In the case of environmental reviews, many
interviewees remarked that bureaucratic inaction, legal ambiguities and political
uncertainties lead to overly long approval delays and uncertainties. Interviewees tend to
agree with the statement that the permitting process requires more than incremental
change. Instead, the predominant view is that effective reform requires a full scrapping of
the existing system and a fresh set of rules and procedures.


4.3. Project Approval, Zoning and Construction Variances, and Environmental
Review
       Two government agencies oversee the regulation of construction and
development projects: the Planning Board (or Junta) and ARPE. The Planning Board is
responsible for guiding the island’s overall economic, social and physical development. It



                                              32
prepares the Economic Report to the Governor and elaborates the government’s fiscal,
social and economic plans as well as its zoning and other regulations. The agency was
created in the early 1940s as the brainchild of Governor Rexford Guy Tugwell, who
made it the main government arm to control and plan development of the island.
       The Planning Board has an explicit consultation role in the permitting process
when there are requests for variances (variaciones) from existing construction regulations
and zoning requirements. Variances arise when some aspect of the project does not abide
exactly by the existing regulations and requirements, which is the case for most
substantial projects. Approval of variances requires consultations with the Board as the
first step in the permitting process. If a project does not involve any variances, the
developer proceeds directly to ARPE, which oversees the operational process related to
the granting of permits. ARPE was created in 1975 (Law No. 76 of June 24, 1975) as a
spin-off from the Planning Board, which formerly undertook the operational functions
now performed by ARPE. These two agencies now enter at different stages in the
permitting process and have distinct roles.
       If the Planning Board approves a project’s location and all variances, ARPE takes
over for the remainder of the process. It applies the regulations, laws, and ordinances that
govern the use and development of land, the construction, use and alteration of buildings
and structures, and the installation of signs and announcements (rótulos y anuncios).
However, if some unapproved variance is detected by ARPE, the developer proposing the
project must return to the Planning Board for additional consultations and decisions.
       According to interviewees, consultations with the Planning Board typically
require one to two years for the approval of a major construction or development project,
and as much as four years. The next step, preliminary approval from ARPE, may take as
little as one week for projects with no variances from existing regulations and zoning
requirements, but major projects typically require another six to twelve months for
approval by ARPE. As mentioned by several developers that we interviewed,
environmental disputes can further delay the start of development projects for many
years. One example is the Serene Coast project in the Piñones area of Loíza, first
proposed in 1995. The developer originally presented an Environmental Assessment but,
in response to a judicial proceeding, it submitted a more detailed Environmental Impact



                                              33
Statement in 1997. As of 2005, the project has yet to obtain Planning Board approval,
reportedly because public agencies have not determined if the project abides by the
Environmental Public Policy Law of 1970. In July 2005, the Department of Natural and
Environmental Resources requested modifications to the project on environmental
grounds. Opposition to the Serene Coast project by environmental groups set against
strong support for the project by the mayor of Loíza suggests that a stalemate will
continue for some time.28


4.4. Centralization, Politicization and Corruption in the Permitting Process
           Key aspects of the permitting process – location consultation, zoning variances,
ARPE permits, and environmental approvals – are centralized in the Governor’s office.
This anomalous state of affairs traces back to the creation of the Planning Board in the
early 1940’s under the administration of Governor Tugwell, an activist planner. Tugwell
concentrated the power to grant location and use permits in his office as a planning tool.
When the Environmental Quality Board was created in 1970, it was incorporated into the
Governor’s office as well. When the operational part of the permitting process was
separated from the Planning Board to form ARPE, it was also kept in the Governor’s
office. Thus, new business activity on the island that requires real estate development,
new construction or major renovations to existing structures must be approved by the
Governor’s Office, that is, by agencies operating under the direct supervision of the
governor. Exceptions for projects in autonomous municipalities are discussed below.
           Perhaps as a result, the regulation of project development and construction
activities is highly politicized on the island and susceptible to corruption. Experienced
government workers who are knowledgeable about the consultation and permitting
process are often transferred to other government offices after a change in administration,
replaced in turn by less experienced employees affiliated with the winning political party.
Corruption in the permitting process, and the harm it does to the business climate, came
up repeatedly in our interviews. Consistent with comments by interviewees, corruption
in the permitting process has also received attention in public forums. The president of
the Retailers’ United Center (Centro Unido de Detallistas) has stated that it is an “open

28
     See El Nuevo Día, July 15, 2005, pages 8-9 and July 16, 2005, page 26.


                                                      34
secret” that in the agencies that grant permits, such as ARPE, the Planning Board and the
Health Department, among others, “money is passed under the table” to obtain the
permits.29 In recent years, a number of government officials and employees have been
convicted in federal court on corruption-related charges in connection with the permitting
process. Examples include the Deputy Chief of Staff to the Governor in the first half of
the 1990s and, separately, an executive assistant to the governor in the latter portion of
the 1990s. Both accepted regular cash payments from contractors in return for access to
government officials and expedited permitting. One official’s services also included
efforts to encourage other government officials to relax construction requirements.30


4.5. Information Costs in the Permitting Process
         The process for obtaining construction permits and agency endorsements is
complex and lacking in transparency. In addition, there is no readily accessible central
source for the detailed information required to comply with the wide array of regulations.
These features of the permitting process raise the information costs of compliance,
increase uncertainty about approval, and add to the potential for unexpected delays and
bottlenecks. The nature of the bureaucratic regime compounds informational costs and
related problems by undermining the development of an experienced, apolitical
workforce in key regulatory agencies.
         Larger developers mitigate informational costs by employing permitting
specialists. These in-house specialists are drawn from former government workers at the
Planning Board or ARPE, engineers who have acquired experience in the permitting
process, and formerly independent permit specialists or facilitators (gestores). Developers
also retain independent permit specialists who handle the permitting maze for fees that
vary according to the specific tasks performed. There is an active market for these
independent permitting specialists and facilitators, often working in conjunction with law
and accounting firms.31 Businesses that lack the scale to efficiently employ an in-house


29
   See El Nuevo Día, Marian Díaz, January 5, 2005, p. 70.
30
   See United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit (2005a). The Court’s review of the facts is quite
instructive about the business climate surrounding the permitting process and the role of corruption.
31
   As another example of efforts to erect regulatory entry barriers, one segment of this market is currently
under attack by the College of Engineers and Surveyors. The College argues that non-engineers should not


                                                     35
permit manager, and that are unwilling to pay the fees commanded by independent
permitting specialists, must fall back on their own efforts to comply with regulations and
navigate the permitting process. This approach typically involves a great deal of trial and
error. Several interviewees mentioned the difficulties that confront entrepreneurs and
employees who attempt to deal with the permitting process without specialized
assistance.
         Interviewees also pointed out that even permit specialists often make mistakes
and present inadequate documentation to government agencies. Similarly, some
interviewees mentioned that a lack of knowledge and professional responsibility on the
part of some permitting specialists is a problem. Because many specialists obtain their
initial work experience in only one of the many agencies involved in the permitting
process, they are not always cognizant of the procedures and rules followed by other
agencies.


4.6. Coordination Problems and Inefficient Implementation
         Apart from high informational costs, the permitting process is also plagued by
inefficient implementation on the part of government agencies and the problem of “too
many cooks”. Certain stages of the permitting process can require the endorsements of
up to nineteen agencies. Each endorsing agency has the power to delay or halt the entire
development project, and this is more likely to occur when the project faces opposition
on political, commercial or environmental grounds. Renewal of agency endorsements
during an ongoing construction project can also be a problem. As a result, developers and
contractors face substantial uncertainties. The common practice of requiring
administrative and public hearings regarding permitting issues increases the need to rely
on attorneys to navigate the process.
         Many interviewees described the government agencies involved in the permitting
process as inefficient. This segment of the government bureaucracy is faulted for
excessive complexities, a shortage of personnel and resources, and inadequate employee
supervision. Communications with ARPE employees require excessive on-site visits for


be allowed to function as permit gestores, i.e., facilitators. Non-engineers who act as facilitators respond
that they work on permitting issues, not engineering issues.


                                                      36
reasons as mundane as the fact that phone calls often go unanswered. One of us
experienced the phone problem first hand on many occasions. On one occasion, several
efforts to contact ARPE by phone resulted in two calls that were answered and referrals
to several extension numbers of engineers who evaluate projects. However, none of these
extensions yielded a response and the effort to acquire information ended unsuccessfully
after half an hour of frustration. Similar communication problems were mentioned by
interviewees, who noted that it is often more efficient to obtain information in person at
the agency rather than by phone or from agency web pages.


4.7. Autonomous Municipalities
       The Autonomous Municipalities Law (Law No. 81 of August 30, 1991) allows a
municipality to bypass the Planning Board and ARPE for construction and development
projects confined to its boundaries. To do so, the municipality must meet certain financial
standards, be able to manage its own accounting system, have an approved territorial
organization plan, and meet other conditions. The municipality can then take over a
number of responsibilities from the central government, including management of the
permitting process and enforcement of zoning regulations. Although the Autonomous
Municipalities Law has been in effect for fourteen years, only six municipalities have
achieved autonomous status as of June 2005, and only 24 of 78 municipalities have an
approved territorial organization plan. Fiscal limitations and human resource constraints
apparently account for the inability or unwillingness of many municipalities to seek
autonomous status.
       The six autonomous municipalities are Bayamón, Caguas, Carolina, Cidra,
Guaynabo, and Ponce. An informal performance ranking (emerging from interviews)
suggests that the permitting process functions more smoothly under the autonomous
municipalities. Among autonomous municipalities, Ponce is generally praised for
efficiency and speediness and is reportedly the only municipality that has fully and
efficiently implemented the permitting process. Bayamón and Guaynabo are also classed
as efficient, followed by Caguas and Carolina. Interviewees had little experience with
Cidra. At the bottom, generally described as far less efficient than the autonomous




                                            37
municipalities, is the central government (ARPE). Nevertheless, interviewees did not
react positively to the idea of a decentralization of ARPE.
       The experience thus far indicates that a few municipalities can manage the
permitting process more efficiently than the central government. However, the approach
provided by the Autonomous Municipalities Law offers at best a partial solution to
problems in the permitting process. Fiscal problems at the municipal level have hampered
the process of becoming autonomous, and only two municipalities, Cidra and Guaynabo,
became autonomous between 1999 and 2005. Over time, many public services have been
transferred from the central government to the municipal level, but there has not been a
corresponding increase in municipal financial resources. In fact, as we discussed in
Section 3, certain tax incentives enacted into law have cut the flow of revenues to
municipalities. In addition, as mentioned by several interviewees, many municipalities
lack the scale, infrastructure and human resources to efficiently oversee the permitting
process.


4.8. Other Public Policy Responses
       In addition to the Autonomous Municipalities Law, there have been several other
government initiatives to streamline or otherwise improve the permitting process. The
government’s Express Center for Procedures (Centro Expreso de Trámite, CET) began
operations in 2002. The CET follows an earlier One-Stop Procedure established in 1998
(Law No. 264 of September 4, 1998). In principle, the CET offers concurrent project
evaluations by nine agencies, including ARPE, and consideration of environmental
issues. While the CET mechanism is helpful, it does not greatly simplify the permitting
process, in large part because the CET lacks authority to grant permits. Instead, it
functions as a messenger service to other agencies. The proponent submits basic
information about its project over the Internet, and then visits the CET with required
documents. The CET process reduces paperwork, but filing requirements remain
burdensome. For instance, consider projects that require a location consultation (consulta
de ubicación) with the Planning Board. By obtaining agency endorsements and comments
through the Center, the proponent need file only ten copies of certain documents instead




                                             38
of nineteen. Otherwise filing requirements are the same. Most important, the CET takes
the regulations as given and cannot issue permits on its own authority.
       In an effort to promote ethical conduct and control the operation of the agency,
the government created the ARPE Governmental Ethics Committee and the Internal
Auditing Office of ARPE in 2000. Other efforts to streamline the permitting process
include a recent reform of the Puerto Rico Environmental Public Policy Act. Prior to the
reform, the Planning Board issued its own environmental evaluation of proposed
construction and development projects, duplicating the efforts of other government
agencies and increasing paperwork burdens, filing requirements and government costs.
Effective March 2005, the reform delegates the environmental assessment to other
government agencies, eliminating the redundant assessment by the Planning Board. This
reform streamlines the permitting process somewhat, but it merely eliminates one of the
many bureaucratic steps concerning the Planning Board location and approval process
sketched above.
       Despite awareness that many elements of the permitting process are
counterproductive, restrictive regulations continue to proliferate. For example, Law 270
of September 14, 2004, amends the Regulations and Permits Law to require a favorable
report, through a certification issued by the Puerto Rico Tourism Company, before
approving a construction permit for a hotel, parador, or other project of tourist interest.
This amendment, ostensibly designed to ensure the quality of tourist-oriented facilities,
adds one more hurdle in an already burdensome permitting process.


5. Summary and Concluding Remarks
   Puerto Rico has struggled with an employment shortfall of stunning dimensions. The
employment rate among working-age persons stood at nearly 50 percent in the early
1950s, then declined over the rest of the decade and again after 1971 to reach levels
below 35 percent in the early 1980s. In the past thirty years, Puerto Rican employment
rates range from 55 to 65 percent of U.S. rates. This enormous shortfall holds for men
and women, cuts across all education groups, and is deeper for persons without a college
degree – about four-fifths of Puerto Rico’s working-age population.




                                             39
   To help shed light on the reasons for Puerto Rico’s persistently low rate of
employment, we investigated several aspects of its employment structure. In this regard,
two results stand out. First, the employment shortfall is concentrated in the private sector,
particularly the free enterprise segment comprised of businesses that operate in the formal
economy without large subsidies, special regulatory advantages, or heavy-handed
oversight by government bureaucracies. Even by rather relaxed criteria, less than one
quarter of working-age Puerto Ricans hold a job in the free enterprise segment of the
economy. By the same criteria, more than half hold free enterprise jobs in the United
States. The strikingly underdeveloped state of the private sector supports the view that
Puerto Rico suffers from an inhospitable business climate.
   Second, Puerto Rico’s industry structure has for decades been grossly misaligned
with the human capital mix of its population. The average schooling level of working-age
persons in Puerto Rico is, and remains, below that of any state. Yet, in terms of the
schooling intensity of its industry structure, Puerto Rico ranks among the top third of
U.S. states. Put differently, the missing jobs in Puerto Rico are concentrated in labor-
intensive industries that rely heavily on less-educated workers. For example, Puerto
Rico’s employment rate in Eating, Drinking and Lodging is lower than the rate for any
state in recent decades and less than one-third the rate in Hawaii. The persistent inability
of the Puerto Rican economy to generate jobs that fit the human capital mix of its
population testifies to a profound failure of industrial and employment policy.
   The evidence does not support the view that more schooling can, by itself, resolve
Puerto Rico’s employment problems. Very large gains in schooling attainment in recent
decades have accompanied very modest employment gains. Relative to the United
States, Puerto Rico’s employment shortfall exceeds ten percent of the population for
college-educated persons and twenty percent or more for groups with less education.
Thus, if and when Puerto Rico matches U.S. schooling levels, very large employment
shortfalls will persist in the absence of deep reforms.
   No single policy or institutional deficiency fully accounts for Puerto Rico’s huge
employment shortfall, underdeveloped private sector, and misaligned industry structure.
Indeed, the list of significant contributing factors is long and varied:




                                              40
•   Large government transfer payments undermine work incentives and
    contribute to a deficit of work experience and marketable skills.
•   Minimum wage laws discourage the hiring of less skilled workers, suppress
    the growth of employment in industries and activities that rely heavily on less
    educated workers, and diminish opportunities to acquire experience and
    training on the job.
•   Historically, the large role for public sector employment and production in
    Puerto Rico has softened competitive pressures on the island and discouraged
    the emergence of a vibrant private sector.
•   Section 936 of the U.S. tax code and other federal tax incentives have helped
    create an industry structure in Puerto Rico that is poorly aligned with the type
    of job opportunities needed by its population. At best, Section 936 provided
    for a modest number of jobs in Puerto Rico at enormous cost to the U.S.
    treasury.
•   Puerto Rico’s own tax code is replete with provisions that benefit special
    business interests at the expense of the general welfare. These tax code
    provisions both reflect and contribute to a business climate in which
    profitability and survival too often rest on the ability to obtain favors from the
    government, rather than the ability to innovate, raise productivity, and serve
    consumers.
•   Puerto Rico’s regulatory environment deters business entry, hampers job
    creation and erodes competitive pressures in many ways. Occupational
    licensing requirements create artificial entry barriers, restricting the supply of
    services and raising prices to consumers. Government oversight of business
    entry and location decisions raises entry costs and affords commercial rivals
    the opportunity to block entry. “Buy local” laws insulate business interests
    from foreign competition and raise prices for consumers. Like many
    provisions of the tax code, these aspects of the regulatory environment serve
    special business interests at the expense of the general welfare. They reflect
    and promote a business culture focused on rent seeking.




                                      41
       •   The permitting process – whereby the government oversees construction and
           real estate development projects, the commercial use of equipment and
           facilities, and the periodic renewal of various business licenses – suffers from
           several serious problems. These problems raise the costs of doing business,
           undercut the drive for employment growth, and retard economic development.
       As part of our study, we interviewed more than one hundred persons who have
expertise on or first-hand experience with the permitting process. Among the
interviewees, there are widely shared views that the permitting process is excessively
slow and costly, fraught with uncertainty, subject to capricious outcomes, prone to
corruption, and susceptible to manipulation by business rivals, politicians and special
interest groups. Independent evidence from public sources supports these claims.
       Efforts to reform the permitting process have met with very limited success. A
partial exception is the Autonomous Municipalities Law of 1991 that allows municipal
governments to take over much of the permitting process from the Governor’s Office, if
the municipality meets several conditions. Many interviewees stated that the permitting
process functions much more smoothly in a handful of autonomous municipalities.
Fourteen years after the Law’s enactment, however, only six municipalities have
achieved autonomous status. For reasons of insufficient scale, limited financial resources
and lack of personnel, it is doubtful whether the other 72 municipalities can efficiently
manage the permitting process, at least in its current form.
       Our study emphasizes employment outcomes, but the policies and institutional
arrangements we consider also lower real incomes and living standards by undermining
productivity. Transfer payments and minimum wage laws lower worker productivity by
contributing to a deficit of work experience. Special-interest tax subsidies distort market
price signals that would otherwise guide capital and labor to their best uses, lowering
productivity in the process. Inefficiencies in the permitting process raise the cost of doing
business, lowering productivity directly. Regulatory entry barriers, “buy local” laws, and
a large role for the public sector soften competitive pressures on the island. In turn, softer
competition weakens the pressure to innovate and provide value for customers. Artificial
entry barriers and inefficiencies in the permitting process also retard the type of creative
destruction process that transformed the U.S. retail sector in recent decades, bringing



                                             42
dramatic productivity gains for businesses and lower prices and wider product selections
for consumers. Finally, institutional arrangements that foster rent-seek behavior lower
productivity, because they encourage socially wasteful efforts to curry favor with
government officials and secure preferential treatments, rather than socially productive
efforts to better serve customers, improve products and expand markets.




                                            43
                                            References

Alesina, Alberto and Edward L.Glaeser. 2004. Fighting Poverty in the U.S. and Europe: A
       World of Difference. Oxford University Press.

Alm, James and Ramon Cao Garcia. 2005. “Fiscal Policies in Puerto Rico.” Georgia State
       University and the University of Puerto Rico. Forthcoming in Economic Growth in
       Puerto Rico, edited by Barry Bosworth, Susan Collins and Miguel A. Soto.

Basker, Emek. 2005a. “Job Creation or Destruction?: Labor-Market Effects of Wal-Mart
       Expansion.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 87, no. 1, 174-183.

Basker, Emek. 2005b. “Selling a Cheaper Mousetrap: Wal-Mart’s Effect on Retail Prices.”
       University of Missouri, March.

Becker, Gary S. 1993. Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis with Special
       Reference to Education, third edition. The University of Chicago Press.

Bosworth, Barry and Susan M. Collins. 2005. “Economic Growth in Puerto Rico.” The
      Brookings Institution. Forthcoming in Economic Growth in Puerto Rico, edited by Barry
      Bosworth, Susan Collins and Miguel A. Sot

Burtless, Gary and Orlando Sotomayor. 2005. “Effect of Public Transfers on Puerto Rican
       Labor Supply.” The Brookings Institution and the University of Puerto Rico.
       Forthcoming in Economic Growth in Puerto Rico, edited by Barry Bosworth, Susan
       Collins and Miguel A. Soto.

Cao García, Ramón J. 2004. Impuestos en Puerto Rico: Treinta Años de Experiencias y
      Estudios. San Juan: Grupo Editorial Akron.

Carlton, Dennis W. and Jeffrey M. Perloff. 2000. Modern Industrial Organization, third
       edition. Reading, Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley.

Castillo-Freeman Alida, and Richard Freeman. 1992. “When the Minimum Wage Really Bites:
        The Effect of the U.S.-Level Minimum on Puerto Rico.” In Immigration and the Work
        Force, edited by George Borjas and Richard Freeman. University of Chicago Press.

Corneo, Giacomo and Hans Peter Gruener. 2002. “Individual Preferences for Political
      Redistribution.” Journal of Public Economics 83, no. 1 (January): 83-107.

Davis, Steven J. and Magnus Henrekson. 2005a. “Tax Effects on Work Activity, Industry Mix
       and Shadow Economy Size: Evidence from Rich-Country Comparisons.” In Labour
       Supply and the Incentives to Work in Europe, edited by R. Gomez Salvador et al.
       Edward Elgar Press.




                                                 44
Davis, Steven J. and Magnus Hernrekson. 2005b. “Wage-Setting Institutions as Industrial
       Policy.” Labour Economics 12, no. 3 (June): 345-377.

Díaz, Mirian. 2005. “Ideas Del Sector Privado al Cogobierno.” El Nuevo Día (January 5): 70.

Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez de Silanes and Andrei Schleifer (2002). The
      Regulation of Entry.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(1): 1-37.

Dunn, Thomas A. and Douglas J. Holtz-Eakin. 2000. “Financial Capital, Human Capital, and
      the Transition to Self-Employment: Evidence from Intergenerational Links.” Journal of
      Labor Economics 18, 2: 282-205.

Enchautegui, Maria E. and Richard B. Freeman. 2005. “Why Don’t More Puerto Rican Men
      Work? The Rich Uncle (Sam) Hypothesis.” Presented at a conference on the Puerto
      Rican economy sponsored by the Center for the New Economy and the Brookings
      Institution in San Juan, Puerto Rico, May 10-11, 2005. Forthcoming in Economic
      Growth in Puerto Rico, edited by Barry Bosworth, Susan Collins and Miguel A. Soto.

Eslava, Marcela, John Haltiwanger, Adriana Kugler and Maurice Kugler. 2004. “The Effect of
       Structural Reforms on Productivity and Profitability Enhancing Reallocation: Evidence
       from Columbia.” Journal of Development Economics (December): 333-371.

Estudios Técnicos. 2004. La Economía Informal en Puerto Rico, vols. 1-3, prepared for the
       Puerto Rico Department of Labor and Human Resources.

Fairlie, Robert W. and Alicia Robb. 2003. “Families, Human Capital, and Small Business:
         Evidence from the Characteristics of Business Owners Survey.” Yale University
         Economic Growth Center Discussion Paper No. 871.

Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger and C.J. Krizan. 2004. “Market Selection, Reallocation and
        Restructuring in the U.S. Retail Trade Sector in the 1990s.” Working paper, U.S. Bureau
        of the Census.

Galdon-Sanchez, Jose E. and James A. Schmitz, Jr. 2002. “Competitive Pressure and Labor
      Productivity: World Iron Ore Markets in the 1980s.” American Economic Review 92
      (September): 1222-1235.

Gonzáles, Joanisabel. 2005. “La Abultada Agenda del Comisionado.” El Nuevo Día (January
      5): 70.

Hashimoto, Mansori 1982. “Minimum Wage Effects on Training on the Job.” American
      Economic Review 72, no. 5 (December): 1070-1087.

Hausman, Jerry and Ephraim Leibtag. 2004. “CPI Bias from Supercenters: Does the BLS Know
     that Wal-Mart Exists?” NBER Working Papers No. 10712.




                                                  45
Hexner, J. Tomas and Glenn Jenkins. 1998. Puerto Rico: The Economic and Fiscal Dimensions.
      Citizens Educational Foundation at www.puertorico-herald.org/issues/vol2n03/hexner-
      jenkins.shtml.

Holmes, Thomas J. 2005. “The Diffusion of Wal-Mart and Economies of Density.” Preliminary
      draft presented at the NBER Summer Institute in Cambridge, Massachusetts, July 2005.

Holmes, Thomas J. and James A. Schmitz, Jr. 2001. “Competition at Work: Railroads vs.
      Monopoly in the U.S. Shipping Industry.” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
      Quarterly Review 25, no. 2 (Spring): 3-29.

Hout, Michael and Harvey S. Rosen. 2000. “Self-Employment, Family Background, and Race.”
       Journal of Human Resources 35 (Fall): 670-692.

Hunter, Lawrence A. 2003. “Leave No State or Territory Behind: Formulating a Pro-Growth
       Economic Strategy for Puerto Rico.” Institute for Policy Innovation (IPI) Policy Report
       no. 117 (August).

Jacobson, Louis, Robert J. LaLonde and Daniel G. Sullivan. 1993. “Earnings Losses of
       Displaced Workers.” American Economic Review 83, no. 4 (September): 685-709.

Krueger, Alan. 1995. “The Effect of the Minimum Wage When It Really Bites: A
      Rexamination of the Evidence from Puerto Rico.” Research in Labor Economics 14: 1-
      22.

Ladd, Helen F. and Francisco L. Rivera-Batiz. 2005. “Education and Economic Development in
       Puerto Rico. Presented at a conference on the Puerto Rican economy sponsored by the
       Center for the New Economy and the Brookings Institution in San Juan, Puerto Rico,
       May 10-11, 2005. Forthcoming in Economic Growth in Puerto Rico, edited by Barry
       Bosworth, Susan Collins and Miguel A. Soto.

Lawrence, Robert Z. and Juan Lara. 2005. “Puerto Rico: Trade Performance and Industrial
      Policy.” Presented at a conference on the Puerto Rican economy sponsored by the Center
      for the New Economy and the Brookings Institution in San Juan, Puerto Rico, May 10-
      11, 2005. Forthcoming in Economic Growth in Puerto Rico, edited by Barry Bosworth,
      Susan Collins and Miguel A. Soto.

Markiewicz, Kira, Nancy Rose and Catherine Wolfram. 2004. “Does Competition Reduce
      Costs? Assessing the Impact of Regulatory Restructuring on U.S. Electric Generation
      Efficiency.” NBER Working Paper No. 11001.

McKinsey Global Institute. 2001. U.S. Productivity Growth, 1995-2000. Washington, D.C.:
     McKinsey Global Institute.

Mincer, Jacob. 1962. “On-the-Job Training: Costs, Returns, and Some Implications,” Journal of
      Political Economy 70, no. 5, Part 2 (October): 50-79.



                                                  46
Mincer, Jacob. 1984. “The Economics of Wage Floors.” Research in Labor Economics 6: 311-
      333.

Nakamura, Leonard. 1999. “The Measurement of Retail Output and the Retail Revolution.”
     Canadian Journal of Economics, 32, no. 2 (April), 408-425

Neal, Derek. 1995. “Industry-Specific Human Capital: Evidence from Displaced Workers.”
       Journal of Labor Economics 13 (October): 653-677.

Neumark, David and Olena Nizalova. 2004. “Minimum Wage Effects in the Longer Run.”
     NBER Working Paper No. 10656.

Odishelidze, Alexander and Arthur Laffer. 2004. Pay to the Order of Puerto Rico: The Cost of
       Dependence to the American Taxpayer. Allegiance Press.

Parent, Daniel. 2000. “Industry-Specific Capital and the Wage Profile: Evidence from the
        National Longitudinal Survey of Youth and the Panel Study of Income Dynamics.”
        Journal of Labor Economics 18: 306-321.

Pelzman, Joseph. 2002. “Imported Capital Dependency as an Economic Development Strategy:
      The Failure of Distortionary Tax Policies in Puerto Rico.” George Washington
      University, European Research Center, Occasional Paper No. 50.

Reynolds, Lloyd and Peter Gregory. 1965. Wages, Productivity, and Industrialization in Puerto
      Rico. Richard Irwin, Inc.

Rivera-Batiz, Francisco L. and Carlos E. Santiago. 1996. Island Paradox: Puerto Rico in the
       1990s. Russell Sage Foundation.

Rodríguez Santiago, Elizabeth (2005). “Los Arbitrios sobre la Cerveza y el Ron en Puerto Rico y
      la Obligación del Trato Nacional del GATT: Comparación con la Jurisprudencia de la
      OMC sobre Impuestos a las Bebidas Alcohólicas.” Working Paper No. 1, Center for
      Business Research and Academic Initiatives, Faculty of Business Administration,
      University of Puerto Rico-Río Piedras, March.

Santiago, Carlos. 1989. “The Dynamics of Minimum Wage Policy in Economic Development:
       A Multiple Time-Series Approach. Economic Development and Cultural Change 38, no.
       1 (October): 1-30.

Schmitz, James A., Jr., and Arilton Teixeira. 2004. “Privatization’s Impact on Private
      Productivity: The Case of Brazilian Iron Ore.” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
      Research Department Staff Report 337.




                                                  47
Schmitz, James A., Jr. 2005. “What Determines Productivity? Lessons from the Dramatic
      Recovery of the U.S. and Canadian Iron Ore Industries Following their Early 1980s
      Crisis.” Journal of Political Economy 113: 582-624.

Sieling, Mark, Brian Friedman and Mark Dumas. 2001. “Labor Productivity in the Retail Trade
        Industry, 1987-99.” Monthly Labor Review, December, 3-14.

Sivadasan, Jagadeesh. 2003. “Barriers to Entry and Productivity: Micro-Evidence from Indian
       Manufacturing Sector Reforms.” University of Chicago Graduate School of Business.

Smith, Adam. 1976. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations. Edited by
       Edwin Cannan, with a preface by George J. Stigler. Chicago, Illinois: University of
       Chicago Press.

Solá, Ricardo. 2004. “La Necesidad de Simplificar la Compleja Relación entre los Procesos
       Ambientales, de Planificacion, Consultas, Endosos y Permisos,” Columna Vol 2 (4): 14-
       17.

Syverson, Chad. 2004. “Market Structure and Productivity: A Concrete Example.” Journal of
       Political Economy 112: 1881-1222.

U.S. Bureau of the Census. 2005. Statistical Abstract of the United States, 12th edition. U.S.
       Government Printing Office.

United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit. 2005a. United States v. María de la Angeles
       Rivera-Rangel. Appeal from the U.S. District Court for the District of Puerto Rico,
       Opinion No. 03-2544, February 8.

United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit. 2005b. Walgreen Co., Walgreen of San
       Patricio, and Walgreen of Puerto Rico v. John V. Rullan, Secretary of the Puerto Rico
       Health Department. Appeal from the U.S. District Court for the District of Puerto Rico,
       Opinion No. 03-2542, April 22.

U.S. General Accounting Office. 1993. “Tax Policy: Puerto Rico and the Section 936 Tax
       Credit,” Report to the Chairman, Committee on Finance, U.S. Senate (June).

World Bank. 2004. Doing Business in 2005: Removing Obstacles to Growth. Washington,
      D.C.: The World Bank and Oxford University Press.




                                                   48
Table 1. Employment Rates in Puerto Rico Compared to the U.S. Mainland

A. Percent of Persons 16-65 Years Old, All Schooling Levels, Working in:
                  Overall         Private          Free             Public
                 Economy          Sector          Enterprise        Sector
      Year       U.S. P.R.      U.S. P.R.         U.S. P.R.       U.S. P.R.
      1980       65.2 38.5      53.0 25.3         46.9 21.8        12.2 13.2
      1990       70.0 42.3      58.4 29.1         51.1 24.9        11.6 13.2
      2000       68.8 37.5      58.2 28.2         51.0 24.0        10.6    9.3

B. Percent of Persons 16-65 Years Old with 14+ Years of Schooling Working in:
                  Overall         Private         Free             Public
                 Economy          Sector        Enterprise         Sector
      Year       U.S. P.R.      U.S. P.R.       U.S. P.R.         U.S. P.R.
      1980       78.8 66.1      56.8 33.8       49.6 28.7        21.9 32.3
      1990       84.5 70.6      64.0 39.6       55.4 33.3        20.5 31.0
      2000       82.5 61.6      63.9 40.7       56.8 35.9        18.6 20.9

C. Percent of Persons 16-65 Years Old with 16+ Years of Schooling Working in:
                  Overall         Private         Free             Public
                 Economy          Sector        Enterprise         Sector
      Year       U.S. P.R.      U.S. P.R.       U.S. P.R.        U.S. P.R.
      1980      83.4 76.8       55.5 34.1       47.9 27.5         27.9 42.6
      1990      85.5 75.2       62.7 39.8       53.6 32.6         22.8 35.4
      2000      83.3 65.5       63.1 41.3       55.7 35.5         20.2 24.2

Notes: The Public Sector includes all employees of federal and sub-federal governments,
and the Private Sector encompasses the rest of the economy. The Free Enterprise segment
of the Private Sector excludes non-governmental employees in Public Utilities and
Sanitary Services, Primary and Secondary Education, Colleges and Universities,
Construction and several small industries for which public sector employment exceeds 35
percent of industry employment in Puerto Rico. In 1990, these industries are Museums,
Galleries and Zoos; Business, Trade and Vocational Schools; Bus Service and Urban
Transit; Research, Development and Testing; Social Services, n.e.c.; Forestry, and
Libraries. (The foregoing list is only a subset of industries with public sector employment
shares greater than 35% in Puerto Rico.) The definition of the Free Enterprise segment
uses a nearly identical set of excluded industries in 1980 and a slightly narrower set in
2000. Unpaid family workers are not counted among the employed.

Source: Authors’ calculations on household census data for 1980, 1990 and 2000




                                            49
                                                                                                                   !                "
                                                               " #$%$& '             (
                                                  (                                                )                        )
        '                                                              *                                                        *
                                                  !                             !                          !                            !
        #+,-                                                      &#            ..                  + -    #$/0             #$$$        #,+&
                   -       / '          #/   ,                    0/   #        &$   #              &.+    ## ,             #/0&        #..+
                   &       , '           -   ,    +               /    ,        $/                  ./$    #0.&             #& +        #,$-
                                         #   0   #+   ,           0,   $        $-   $              $&-    ##&#             #&#-        #&/.
                   )   1          2*1    0   &   00   $           $0   0        ,    /             ##&&    #,-              #.//        #+./
                                        ##   -   #.   ,           $    $        ,#   #             ##/.    #.0.             #.&.        #,,#
                             1           &   -    ,   ,           ,0   ,        +#   0             #$      #++#             #+0,         -,#
                              1          0   .    ,   &           ,&   .        +    -             #.#0      -#+             --,         ##&
        #++-                                                      &    .        ..   0             #- .    #$.&             #.#0        #+0/
                   -       / '           + ,      # +             0#   0        &$   /              &,#    ##-0             #/,.        #. +
                   &       , '          #&        / ,             0+   +        &,   /              .0     # ,              #&-         #.,-
                                           &      #. .            0,   $        &.                  .#0    #-+/             #& /        #&#,
                   )   1          2*1    0 ,       . ,            $#   +        ,-   /             ##+$    #.$              #.00        #+,-
                                        #$ +       $ +            $    .        ,#   +             # //    #.+-             #.,/        #+//
                             1           , &      #0 /            .+   #        +-   -             #$./      -#,            #+,+         # /
                              1          0 0       . &            ,&   ,        +    #             #,$.      # +             -,/           ,
        ---                                                       //   ,        ./   -             #- /    #$,-             #. -        #++#
                   -       / '           &   ,     #   ,               #        &-   /              /.     ##$+             #/&0        #.$&
                   &       , '          #          /   -           +            &/   $              $ &    # /.             #/$+        #,
                                         #   $    #$   .           + #          &#   .              $##    #-/0             #/,-        #&/$
                   )   1          2*1    /   .     $   +          /. 0          ./   &             ##-.    #.#0             #.-$         -#0
                                         #   +     .   ,          &&            .+                 # ..    #.+,             #..-         --0
                             1           +   +    #/   $          $+ &          ,,                 #$&0      -&             #+&.         #,&
                              1          /   -     ,              ..            ,+                 #, 0      # +             -$/          $0
3   4          *             (                    (             5          6                   (       5               5        (              (
                                                                ( 5         5                              ( 5          5                          ((
                                   (                           "                 ((                        (

    4          7                                           (   #+,-" #++-                ---
                         0                                                                             !               "
                                                           " #$%$& '               (

                                                 (                                       )                 )
    '                                                        *                                                    *
                                             !                            !                      !                    !
    #+,-                                                     .   #        &0   .          /$#    +#/       #&&$       #/ ,
               -       / '          #&   +    #    ,         ,   ,         +   $          #/     /+&       #/#        #/#
               &       , '          #+   &    ,    #        #/   /        0/   -           0$    &+        #/-$       #/0
                                    #+   /    -    0        #/   +        0+   $           0/    &+,       # ++       ##.&
               )   1          2*1    0   .   /-             0&   +        &$   ,          $0$   #--/       #$#.       #/+,
                                    #0       #.    .        /0   &        $    #          ./0   #-$        #&+,       #/#+
                         1           $        .    0        $,   $        $,   /         ##&0   ##/0       #$./       #/+#
                          1              #    /    .        .#   ,        ..   /         # .    #0#,       #.0.       #&$
    #++-                                                    0    .        $    ,          $--   ## +       #&+.       #&&0
               -       / '           + .       #   $         +   ,        00   -          #.-    &,&       #0,#       #/.
               &       , '          #0 &       /   -        #&   #        0/   &           $0    $ /       #/-$       #///
                                    #+ +     #$    +        #$   #        /    -           .+    $$        #0-.       # #0
               )   1          2*1            0#             0/   #        $    /          $ #   ##0.       #&$&       #&,0
                                     - 0       ,   +        /0   #        .#   -          ..+   # +-       #&$,       #&$+
                         1          ## $     #              $+   0        ..   &         #0#+   #/ #       #.+0       #$.0
                          1            ,       &            ..   /        ,0   ,         #&/0   #&.,       #,&.       #..#
    ---                                                     0-   .        $0   .          $/0   # #0       #&$0       #$0+
               -       / '           & -      #    &         ,   /        0#   .          #$-    $0#       #00        #/,-
               &       , '          #-        0             #-   #        00   &          #+#    $&$       # ./       #/./
                                    #. ,     #/    .        ##   #        /#               #/    $$        ##$+       # #$
               )   1          2*1      0      .    -         &            $#   $          &#.   ##+/       #/$0       #$&$
                                     & /     0#    0        0,   .        .-   $          ,-,   #0//       #&0#       #$/0
                         1          #& 0     #&    #        &+   .        .$   &         # +    #/,+       #./-       #../
                          1          / -      .             $.   .        ,#             #/&/   #$0-       #,##       #,$$




4          7                                           (   #+,-" #++-              ---




                                                                     51
        Table 4. College-Educated Workers in the Private Sector and the Free Enterprise,
                 Segment as a Percentage of Persons 16-65 Years of Age

              Working in the Private Sector    Working in Free Enterprise
    Year    Puerto Rico United States Ratio Puerto Rico United States Ratio
    1980        2.9           8.1        2.8    2.3          7.0         3.0
    1990        5.2          10.1        1.9    4.3          8.7         2.0
    2000        6.9          14.2        2.1    5.9         12.6         2.1

See the notes to Table 1 for a definition of the Free Enterprise segment of the economy.

Source: Authors’ calculations on household census data for 1980, 1990 and 2000.
   Table 5. Public Sector Employment in Puerto Rico Compared to the U.S. Mainland

A. Public Sector Employment Relative to Total Employment
          Government Employment as                                     Puerto Rico’s
          Percent of Paid Employment           Puerto Rico’s            Industry Mix
        U.S. Mainland       Puerto Rico        Industry-Level             Evaluated
Year                                       Shares for Government       At U.S. Shares
                 Sub-              Sub-
                                           Employment Evaluated       for Government
       Total Federal Total Federal          At U.S. Industry Mix        Employment
1980 17.3        13.2      33.9    30.1             24.2                    26.7
1990 16.6        11.7      31.4    27.6             22.6                    25.9
2000 15.4        11.8      24.9    21.6             19.3                    21.5


B. Government Employment as a Percent of Paid Employment in Selected Industries
                                           Puerto Rico       U.S. Mainland
                Industry                1980 1990 2000 1980 1990 2000
Electric Light and Power                93    79     83    15     13     13
Telephone                               62    65           1      1
Wired and Other Telecom Carriers                     0                   0
Sugar and Confectionary Manufacturing 55      32     16    1      1      0
Residential Care w/o Nursing            83    46     32    30     19     12
Nursing Facilities                      70    39     33    17     10     8
Child Day Care                          66    55     55    19     8      7
Job Training, Vocational Rehabilitation 80    62           38     24
Vocational Rehabilitation                            80                  19
Hospitals                               68    53     32    28     21     15
Museums, Galleries, and Zoos            63    48     79    37     26     34
Sanitary Services                       88    86           68     52
Waste Management and Remediation                     48                  19
Construction                            20    13     6     9      7      5

Notes: There are 232 Census industry codes in 1980, 243 in 1990, and 264 in 2000. Some
industries listed in Panel B are not fully comparable over time because of changes in
census industry classifications.

Source: Authors’ calculations on household census data for 1980, 1990 and 2000.




                                          53
       Table 6. Selected Industry Shares, Puerto Rico Compared to the United States,
                     Percent of Employed Persons, 16-65 Years of Age


                          Puerto   United    50 States      State with
Year Industry Group        Rico    States     Range          Highest       Selected State
                                                             Percent
1980                    7.3        5.8      3.7 – 9.9     Wyoming        Hawaii        6.4
1990    Construction    7.5        6.2      4.8 – 8.8     Nevada         Hawaii        7.0
2000                    8.4        6.8      5.2 – 9.4     Nevada         Hawaii        5.6
1980    Sugar and       0.65       0.11     0 – 1.14      Hawaii         N.Dakota      0.30
1990    Confectionary   0.23       0.08     0 – 0.60      Hawaii         N.Dakota      0.24
2000    Manufacturing   0.12       0.06     0 – 0.43      N. Dakota      Hawaii        0.20
1980                    2.0        0.2      0 – 1.3       New Jersey     Indiana       0.7
1990    Pharmaceuticals 2.8        0.2      0 – 1.2       New Jersey     Indiana       0.7
2000                    3.0        0.3      0 – 1.5       New Jersey     Indiana       0.6
1980    All Other       17.5       22.1     5.2 – 31.9    Rhode Island   Hawaii        5.6
1990    Manufacturing   13.7       17.4     5.1 – 25.6    N. Carolina    Hawaii        5.1
2000                    10.6       13.8     3.0 – 22.5    Indiana        Hawaii        3.0
1980    Utilities and   2.3        1.4      0.9 – 2.5     Tennessee      Hawaii        1.0
1990    Sanitary        2.0        1.3      0.8 – 2.4     Wyoming        Hawaii        0.9
2000    Services        1.8        1.2      0.9 – 2.2     W. Virginia    Hawaii        1.1
1980    Eating,         3.6        5.3      3.7 – 19.5    Nevada         Hawaii        11.4
1990    Drinking, and   3.4        5.8      4.2 – 17.4    Nevada         Hawaii        12.6
2000    Lodging         5.5        6.1      4.5 – 14.1    Nevada         Hawaii        12.7
1980    Entertainment   0.7        1.1      0.5 – 9.3     Nevada         Hawaii        1.5
1990    and Recreation 1.0         1.4      0.6 – 9.0     Nevada         Hawaii        1.7
2000    Services        0.9        1.7      0.9 – 11.9    Nevada         Hawaii        2.3
1980    Elementary and 8.7         5.9      4.2 – 7.8     Alaska         Hawaii        4.5
1990    Secondary       7.7        5.5      3.8 – 8.2     Wyoming        Hawaii        4.3
2000    Schooling       7.2        6.0      4.2 – 7.9     Wyoming        Hawaii        5.8
1980    Public          12.5       5.2      3.5 – 14.2    Maryland       Hawaii        8.9
1990    Administration 14.0        4.8      3.2 – 11.7    Maryland       Hawaii        7.5
2000                    10.7       4.8      3.3 – 10.8    Alaska         Hawaii        7.3


Notes: Figures for the United States include the District of Columbia, but the 50 States
Range does not. The state-level employment figures reflect the location of the worker’s
residence, not the location of the job. Thus, for example, Public Administration accounts
for a relatively high percentage of Maryland employment, because many Maryland
residents commute to government jobs in the District of Columbia.

Source: Authors’ calculations on household census data for 1980, 1990 and 2000.




                                            54
       Table 7. Employees by Establishment Size in Four Major Industry Groups,
                  Puerto Rico Compared to the United States, 1997


                                         Percent of All Paid Employees
                                              in the Industry Group
                      Number of          Construction       Manufacturing
                      Employees         United     Puerto United Puerto
                   at Establishment     States      Rico States Rico
                         1 to 4          13.5         2.8     1.5    0.8
                         5 to 9          13.9         5.0     2.5    1.1
                       10 to 19          15.7         7.6     4.6    3.2
                       20 to 49          20.8       15.9     10.6    7.3
                       50 to 99          13.1       18.3     11.7    7.2
                      100 to 249         12.1       24.4     20.4   16.2
                      250 to 499          5.4       13.8     16.2   23.4
                         500+             5.4       12.3     32.5   40.7
                                         Retail Trade      Wholesale Trade
                                        United     Puerto United Puerto
                                        States      Rico States Rico
                           1              0.3         1.8     1.2    0.7
                           2              0.7         2.6     1.7    1.3
                        3 or 4            2.1         6.2     4.2    3.3
                        5 or 6            2.6         5.5     4.4    7.5
                        7 to 9            3.6         7.3     5.9    6.4
                       10 to 14           4.2         9.0     8.5    8.8
                       15 to 19           2.6         6.7     6.7    6.6
                       20 to 49           7.6       24.5     22.4   23.8
                         50+             76.3       36.4     44.9   41.5

Notes: Size distribution statistics are for paid employees, and they exclude unpaid family
workers and the proprietors and partners of unincorporated businesses. The size
categories above reflect the finest breakdowns available on a consistent basis for both the
United States and Puerto Rico in the Economic Census of 1997. The Economic Census
does not report measures of economic activity by firm size for Puerto Rico.

Sources: The 1997 Economic Census of Puerto Rico and the Island Areas at
http://www.census.gov/csd/ia/p_puerto97.htm, and 1997 Economic Census at
http://www.census.gov/epcd/www/econ97.html. The Economic Census of Puerto Rico is
not available for a more recent year as of June 2005.




                                            55
   Table 8. Employees of Unincorporated Enterprises in Four Major Industry Groups,
                  Puerto Rico Compared to the United States, 1997


                                        Percent of All Paid Employees
                                            in the Industry Group
                                        Construction       Manufacturing
                                       United    Puerto United Puerto
                                       States     Rico States Rico
                     Individual                                   1.4 to
                   Proprietorships      9.6        8.4      1.7    1.7
                   Unincorporated
                    Partnerships        3.4       16.0   1.9       0.6
                                        Retail Trade    Wholesale Trade
                                       United    Puerto United Puerto
                                       States     Rico States Rico
                     Individual
                   Proprietorships       6.2      15.6    2.8      7.8
                   Unincorporated
                    Partnerships         2.2       1.1    2.3       0.8

Notes: Statistics are for paid employees, and they exclude unpaid family workers and the
proprietors and partners of unincorporated businesses. Certain figures for Puerto Rico are
available only within a range.

Sources: The 1997 Economic Census of Puerto Rico and the Island Areas at
http://www.census.gov/csd/ia/p_puerto97.htm, and 1997 Economic Census at
http://www.census.gov/epcd/www/econ97.html. The Economic Census of Puerto Rico is
not available for a more recent year as of June 2005.




                                            56
                     Table 9. World Bank Business Climate Indicators for 2004

                                                         Latin
                                                       America &
                                           Puerto      Caribbean                        United
                                            Rico Chile  Islands  OECD Ireland Singapore States
(1) Starting a Formal Business
Number of required procedures                7     9       11         6       4        7        5
Time to complete procedures (days)           7    27       70        25      24        8        5
Cost to complete procedures, excluding
 bribes (% of annual income per capita)     7.0   10.0    62.8      8.0     10.3      1.2      0.6
Minimum capital to register business
 (% of annual income per capita)            1.0   0.0      28.9     44.1     0.0      0.0      0.0
(2) Hiring and Firing Workers
Difficulty of Hiring Index                 22.0   17.0    44.4      26.2    28.0       0        0.0
Rigidity of Hours Index                    20.0   20.0    53.3      50.0    40.0       0       0.0
Difficulty of Firing Index                 20.0   20.0    34.3      26.8    20.0       0       10.0
Rigidity of Employment Index               21.0   19.0    44.0      34.4    29.0       0        3.0
Firing costs (weeks of wages)               0.0   51.0    70.8      40.4    52.0       4       8.0
(3) Getting Credit
  Cost to create and register collateral
(% of income per capita)                    0.1   5.3     19.4      5.2      3.2       0.3     0.1
Legal Rights Index                          6.0   4.0     3.8       6.3      8.0      10.0     7.0
Credit Information Availability Index       5.0   6.0     4.7       5.0      5.0      4.0      6.0
 Public credit registry coverage
 (borrowers per 1000 adults)                0.0   290     85.7      76.2     0.0      0.0      0.0
  Private credit bureau coverage
(borrowers per 1000 adults)                 643   220     325.1    577.2    1000      335      1000
(4) Enforcing a Debt Obligation
Number of required procedures               43     28      35        19      16       23        17
Time to complete procedures (days)         270    305     462       229     217       69       250
Recovery cost (% of debt)                  21.0   10.4    23.3      10.8    21.1      9.0      7.5
(5) Closing an Insolvent Business
Time required (years)                       3.8   5.6      3.7      1.7      0.4      0.8      3.0
Cost of insolvency process
 (% of estate value)                       8.0    18.0    15.8      6.8     8.0        1        8.0
Recovery rate (percent)                    61.4   19.3    26.6      72.1    88.9      91.3     68.2

Source: World Bank (2005) and the World Bank Doing Business Database at
http://www.doingbusiness.org/Default.aspx (accessed on August 21, 2005).

Notes: The indexes under (2) range from 0 to 100, with higher values indicating more rigid
regulation. The Legal Rights Index ranges from 0 to 10, “with higher scores indicating that
collateral and bankruptcy laws are better designed to expand access to credit.” The Credit
Information Availability Index ranges from 0 to 6, with higher values indicating greater
availability. See the source publication for additional information about the indicators and their
construction.
  Table 10: Illustrative Business Incentives Enacted into Law by the Puerto Rican Government
                                from August 2001 to August 2002



17-Aug-01
            Grants a 50 percent tax credit, under certain conditions, for the acquisition of a business in
 Law 109
            the process of closing operations in Puerto Rico.
            Raises the tax credit on the purchase of products manufactured in Puerto Rico by certain
 Law 110
            enterprises from 10 to 25 percent.
            Grants certain businesses the option of recognizing a deduction for spending on the
 Law 112
            purchase or construction of buildings, structures, and equipment and machinery.
            Grants double deductions for spending on employee training and on research and
 Law 113
            development.
            Liberalizes administrative restrictions on credit cooperatives to allow them to act as agents
 Law 115
            in selling mortgage loans and in launching new products.
            Creates the Credit and Guarantees Fund for Agricultural Loans (Fondo de Credito y
            Guarantias de Prestamos Agricolas). If a farmer cannot meet a loan obligation to a private
 Law 117
            bank, the farmer can request a grant from the Fund to cover the debt. The Fund is
            authorized to grant up to $100 million during a four-year period.
            Creates the Corporation for the Development of the Arts, Sciences, and Film Industry of
 Law 121    Puerto Rico. The Corporation offers incentives and administers the funds financing
            productions.
4-Oct-01
          Exempts associations of legal owners of vacation clubs from income taxes, promoting the
 Law 141
          time-share industry.
          Exempts fees earned by financial institutions for issuing guarantees or letters of credit to
  Law 143
          finance tourism development projects from income taxes.
          Provides tax incentives to innovative technology industries that establish operations in
  Law 145 Puerto Rico and that generate high skill scientific, technological, and managerial
          employment.
3-Dec-01
          Amends the 1994 Internal Revenue Code to grant eligible businesses a tax credit equal to
  Law 169
          10% of the purchase value for products manufactured in Puerto Rico.
          Grants excise tax exemptions to enterprises for the purchase of machinery and equipment
          to fulfill environmental, security, and health requirements. This law also grants income tax
  Law 174
          credits on machinery and equipment acquired for businesses devoted to call centers
          established in Puerto Rico.
14-Dec-01
          Permits the Industrial Development Company (Compania de Fomento Industrial) to rent
  Law 163 space at low cost to nonprofit organizations for the establishment of factories that employ
          handicapped workers.
29-Aug-02
          Reduces the income tax rate on call center operations to 4 percent or 2 percent, depending
  Law 225 on geographic service area. It also grants full exemption from real estate taxes, municipal
          patents, and other municipal taxes during the first five years afte the law takes effect.
          Grants full exemption from income taxes and partial exemption on municipal patents and
  Law 226 other municipal taxes to certain businesses located in Vieques, Culebra, or any other
          municipality with similar economic or unemployment situations.




                                                    58
                      Figure 1: Employment as a Percent of Persons 16 and Older, 1947 to 2001




                                                       Puerto Rico

90%                                                                                                                          All
                                                                                                                             Men
80%
                                                                                                                             Women
70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%
      1947

             1950

                    1953

                           1956

                                  1959

                                         1962

                                                1965

                                                       1968

                                                              1971

                                                                     1974

                                                                            1977

                                                                                   1980

                                                                                          1983

                                                                                                 1986

                                                                                                        1989

                                                                                                               1992

                                                                                                                      1995

                                                                                                                              1998

                                                                                                                                     2001
                    Figure 1 (continued): Employment as a Percent of Persons 16 and Older, 1947 to 2001



                                                                            United States

90

80

70

60

50                                                                                                                                                                              All
                                                                                                                                                                                Men
40
                                                                                                                                                                                Women
30

20

10
     1947
            1949
                   1951
                          1953
                                 1955
                                        1957
                                               1959
                                                      1961
                                                             1963
                                                                    1965
                                                                           1967
                                                                                  1969
                                                                                         1971
                                                                                                1973
                                                                                                       1975
                                                                                                              1977
                                                                                                                     1979
                                                                                                                            1981
                                                                                                                                   1983
                                                                                                                                          1985
                                                                                                                                                 1987
                                                                                                                                                        1989
                                                                                                                                                               1991
                                                                                                                                                                      1993
                                                                                                                                                                             1995
                                                                                                                                                                                    1997
                                                                                                                                                                                           1999
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2001
                                                                                                 60
Figure 2. Schooling Intensity of State’s Industry Mix
       Versus Mean Schooling Years of Its Adult Population

          Schooling Intensity
          13.1
                                        1980

          12.9   Puerto Rico



          12.7



          12.5



          12.3
              9.6     10     10.4 10.8 11.2 11.6    12 12.4 12.8 13.2
                           Mean Schooling Years, Persons 16-65

          Schooling Intensity
          13.6
                                       1990
          13.4      Puerto Rico



          13.2



          13.0



          12.8
             10.7 11.1 11.5 11.9 12.3 12.7 13.1 13.5 13.9 14.3
                      Mean Schooling Years, Persons 16-65

          Schooling Intensity
          13.8
                                       2000

          13.6   Puerto Rico



          13.4



          13.2



          13.0
             11.5 11.9 12.3 12.7 13.1 13.5 13.9 14.3 14.7 15.1
                     Mean Schooling Years, Persons 16-65
Figure 3 Schooling Intensity of State’s Industry Mix
     Versus Mean Schooling Years of Its Workers

    Schooling Intensity
    13.1
                                       1980

    12.9
                Puerto Rico


    12.7



    12.5



    12.3
       11.4           11.8      12.2      12.6       13   13.4
                       Mean Schooling Years of Workers

    Schooling Intensity
    13.6
                                       1990

    13.4         Puerto Rico



    13.2



    13.0



    12.8
           12         12.4      12.8      13.2     13.6    14
                       Mean Schooling Years of Workers

    Schooling Intensity
    13.8
                                        2000

    13.6                 Puerto Rico




    13.4



    13.2



    13.0
       12.5           12.9      13.3     13.7      14.1   14.5
                       Mean Schooling Years of Workers

                               62
Figure 4: Bird’s Eye View of the Permitting Process for Construction
        and Real Estate Development Projects in Puerto Rico
                                     Notes to Figures:

Figure 1: The charts show employment as a percentage of the civilian population for
persons who are 16 years and older. Data for the Puerto Rican chart were supplied by
Orlando Sotomayor and derive from two sources: Serie Histórica de Empleo, Desempleo
y Grupo Trabajador, 1947-1970, Negociado de Estadisticas, Departamento de Trabajo y
Recursos Humanos, Puerto Rico, 1978; and Serie Histórica de Empleo, Desempleo y
Grupo Trabajador, 1970-2001, Negociado de Estadisticas, Departamento de Trabajo y
Recursos Humanos, Puerto Rico, 2003. Data for the U.S. chart are annual averages of
monthly values in the Current Population Survey, as tabulated by the U.S. Bureau of
Labor Statistics.

Figure 2: Mean schooling years of persons is calculated as the simple mean years of
completed schooling among residents who are 16-65 years old. For education codes not
specified in terms of years of schooling, we assigned approximate values. For example,
“associate degree” in 1990 and 2000 becomes 14 years of schooling. The schooling
intensity of the state's industry employment mix is an index constructed in two steps.
First, compute the schooling intensity of each Census industry as the hours-weighted
mean years of completed schooling among all U.S. workers in the industry. Industry
affiliation reflects the worker’s current primary job, defined as the one that generates the
largest earnings. The hours worked measure pertains to the reference week in the 1980
and 1990 Census and to usual hours worked per week during the previous calendar year
in the 2000 Census. Second, compute the schooling intensity index for the state or
commonwealth industry distribution as the employment-weighted mean of the industry-
level schooling intensity values. By construction, an industry has the same schooling
intensity in all states and in Puerto Rico. The index quantifies the extent to which a state's
industry mix tilts toward schooling-intensive industries, as measured by the industry
workforce in the United States.

Figure 3: Mean schooling years of workers is calculated as the simple mean years of
completed schooling among employed persons who are 16-65 years old. In other
respects, the calculations follow those used in Figure 2. Note that the range of the
horizontal axes is 2.0 years in Figure 3, as compared to 3.6 years in Figure 2.

Figure 4: As prepared by Ricardo Solá (2004), an experienced Puerto Rican construction
engineer. Acronyms in the diagram are defined below.




                                              1
                              Acronyms in Figure 4

DIA: Declaración de Impacto Ambiental, Environmental Impact Statement
CET: Centro Expreso de Trámites, Express Center for Procedures
ARPE: Administración de Reglamentos y Permisos, Regulations and Permits
Administration
FCC: Federal Communications Commission
DDEC: Departamento de Desarrollo Económico y Comercio, Department of Economic
Development and Commerce
CT: Compañía de Turismo, Tourism Company
DA: Department of Agriculture
DV: Departamento de la Vivienda, Department of Housing
DE: Departamento de Educación, Department of Education
FWS: US Fish and Wildlife Service
DRD: Departamento de Recreación y Deportes, Department of Recreation and Sports
EPA: Environmental Protection Agency
FAA: Federal Aviation Administration
AAA: Autoridad de Acueductos y Alcantarillados, Aqueduct and Sewage Authority
C of E: Corps of Engineers
AEE: Autoridad de Energía Eléctrica, Electric Power Authority
MUN: municipality
DTOP: Departamento de Transportación y Obras Públicas, Department of Transportation
and Public Works
ACT: ACT: Autoridad de Carreteras y Transportación, Highways and Transportation
Authority)
ICP: Instituto de Cultura Puertorriqueña, Institute of Puerto Rican Culture
DRNA: Departamento de Recursos Naturales y Ambientales, Department of Natural and
Environmental Resources
ADS: Autoridad de Desperdicios Sólidos, Solid Waste Authority
SHIPO: State Historic Preservation Office
CSP: Comisión de Servicio Público, Public Service Commission
DS: Departamento d Salud, Health Department
JCA: Junta de Calidad Ambiental, Environmental Quality Board
CBPR: Cuerpo de Bomberos de Puerto Rico, Fire Corps of Puerto Rico
PRTC: Puerto Rico Telephone Company
DTRH: Departamento del Trabajo y Recursos Humanos, Department of Labor and
Human Resources
USPS: United States Postal Service




                                         2
