                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          HOUSING TENURE, UNCERTAINTY, AND TAXATION




                       Harvey S. Rosen


                       Kenneth T. Rosen


                     Douglas Holtz—Eakin




                    Working Paper No. 1168




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge MA 02138

                          July 1983




We are grateful to Richard Quandt for useful suggestions. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
Taxation and project in Government Budgets. Any opinions expressed
are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                     BER Working Paper #1168
                                                     July 1983




                Housing Tenure, Uncertainty, And Taxation



                                ABSTRACT




Modern empirical work on the choice between renting and owning focuses
on the concept of the "user cost" of housing, which integrates into a single
measure the various components of housing costs. The standard approach
implicitly assumes that households know the user cost of housing with
certainty. However, the ex post user cost measure exhibits substantial
variability over time, and it is highly unlikely that individuals believe
themselves able to forecast these fluctuations with certainty. In this
paper, we construct and estimate a model of the tenure choice that explicitly
allows for the effects of uncertainty. The results suggest that previous
work which ignored uncertainty may have overstated the effects of the
income tax system upon the tenure choice.




Harvey S. Rosen           Kenneth T. Rosen            Douglas Holtz-Eakin
Department of Economics   School of Business          Department of Economics
Princeton University      University of California    Princeton University
Princeton, NJ   08544     Berkeley, CA 94720          Princeton, NJ 08544
                                                                    1.




I. Introduction

  The personal income tax provisions associated with homeownership have

come under increasing scrutiny by both policymakers and academic researchers.

This renewed interest has come about primarily because of the tremendous

acceleration of real house prices in the past decade and the belief that

Americans invest "too much" in owner-occupied housing relative to investment

in more productive plant and equipment. (Feldstein [1982], Hendershott

£1982].) Both phenomena are blamed in part on the interaction of inflation

and the treatment of owner-occupied housing in the federal income tax sy:em.

The non-taxation of implicit rental income, the deductibility of nominal

interest payments and property taxes, and the virtual exclusion of housing

capital gains from taxable income are all believed to provide incentivc    for

households to become owner-occupiers.

   Modern empirical work on the choice between renting and owning focuses

on the concept of the "user cost" of housing, which integrates into a single

measure the various components of housing costs: interest rates, property

and income taxes, maintenance, depreciation, expected capital gains, etc.

A typical approach is to compute theex post value of the user cost of owner

occupation each period, and then estimate a regression of the proportion of

owner-occupiers in the population on the user cost and other variables. This

approach has been fairly successful in explaining the movement of the homeowner-

ship ratio over time. (Rosen and Rosen [1980], Hendershott and Shilling [1980].)

   The standard approach implicitly assumes that households know the user

cost of housing with certainty. However, the expost user cost measure

exhibits substantial variability over time, and it is highly unlikely that

individuals believe themselves able to forecast these fluctuations with
           -                                                               2.



certainty. Since housing decisions are usually made over time horizons of

several years, this uncertainty can have important consequences for behavior.

Ignoring it can lead to incorrect predictions of how people will behave under

certain conditions. Consider these two examples:

   1) During a period of time, housing prices increase substantially year

after year. Ex post measures of the user cost of owner-occupation suggest

that families should become homeowners in order to reap the capital gains.

However, individuals do not know ex ante that these gains will occur. Indeed,

past price increases may increase their subjective uncertainty concerning

future movements in price. To the extent that they are risk averse, this increase

in uncertainty will discourage people from becoming homeowners.1

   2) The government announces that it will begin taxing housing capital

gains at the same rates as ordinary income. Focusing only on the ex post

user cost suggests that such a policy will decrease the incidence of owner—

occupation in the population. But the policy also lowers the variance of

the user cost of homeownership--the government in effect becomes a silent

partner, sharing both gains and losses. If individuals are   risk-averse,   this

will tend to increase the attractiveness of owner-occupation, ceteris paribus.

   In this paper, we construct and estimate a simple model of the tenure

choice that explicitly allows for the effects of uncertainty. Section II

presents the basic model and Section III discusses econometric issues involved

in its estimation. Section IV presents the results and some of their

implications. Price uncertainty is shown to have a statistically significant




   11n fact, during the 1O's, substantial increases in house prices
occurred with barely any movemc; ts in the proportion of homeowne's (See
Rosen [1981].)
                                                                             3-



and quantitatively large impact on the percentage of cwner-occupiers. The

results suggest that previous work which ignored uncertainty may have ov'—

stated tax effects on tenure choice. Section V provides a summary and

suggestions for additional research.



II. The Model

   In this section we develop a model of household tenure choice which

focuses on the role of price uncertainty. Assume that an individual': utility

depends upon his consumption of housing services and of a composite of all

other goods. Housing services are assumed available in either of two inuually

exclusive modes; renting or owning. For simplicity, renting and owning are

modelled as distinct commodities with characteristics which differ. For

example, it may be difficult to rent a single unit with a large backyard.

Similarly,   it   may   be impractical for a homeowner to contract for the kind of
maintenance services      available to a renter.2 Algebraically, if G       quantity

of the composite good, H =       quantity.   of housing services consumed in owner-

occupation mode, and R = housing services consumed in rental mode, then


                             U = U(G,H,R)


where U() is the utility function, and HXR =            0

   At the time the tenure choice is made, the future real prices of both modes

are uncertain. As will be shown below, the real cost of owner-occupation (P)

depends inter alia upon future housing capital gains, interest rates, and




   2Henderson and loannides [1983] provide a useful discussion of the
distinctions between renting and owning.
                                                                                  14.




federal income tax rates; none of which is known with certainty. Similarly,

in the absence of long run indexed leases for rental housing, uncertainty

also surrounds its real price (Q) .                 The price of the composite good is

assumed to be known with certainty, and is equal to unity.

      The individual makes his choice by comparing the outcomes of two sub—

problems. The first is maximizing utility, assuming that owner occupation

is selected, and the second is maximizing utility assuming that renting is

selected. Let V'(P,y) be the maximum utility associated with owning,

and Vr(Q,Y) be the maximum utility associated with renting; where y is permanent

income over the planning period. An individual elects to own if:


            E[Vh(P, y) —         Vr(Q,   s,)] >


      Defining the expected prices of horneownership and renting as P and

Q, respectively, and taking a second-order Taylor series expansion of
 h                           .
                                     —
V (F, y) around the point (F, y) yields:


                      y)]                 y) + .-   V1(,y)
where V1 :2 and                            E(P )2            Similarly:



            ECV'(Q, y)] V', y) + .!:                         y) .
                                                    v:1c•,
                2r
                ___                2_=       —2
where V     E          and               E(Q-Q)     .   Hence, we can write:
        1


            E[Vh(P,y) -     Vr(Q,Yfl                     -   V'(Q,y)   ÷v1(P, y)• 2 r(-Y).2



      One thus expects that (to a second or. r approximation) the

tenure choice will depend uDon: i) the expected prices f the

modes (F, Q) and ii) the variation of actual prices about                  the
                                                                                   5.




forecast (02 and                These latter terms (referred to herein as the forecast

error variances) figure importantly in our test of the relevance of uncertuinty

to tenure choice.4

   Our   focus has been on the tenure choice at          an individual le;el. Aggregation

presents   the   usual difficulties, but may be motivated by considering a

population with heterogeneous tastes and incomes, but identical expectations

for future prices. For individual i ,               define

                              E(Vh1 -


where        is a vector of taste parameters. Integrating over the joint

distribution of y1 and                in the population for year t yields the

relation

                          —     —     2        2
                     =
                         "Pt,                 5t'    ,                         (2.1)

where        is the aggregate proportion of homeowners.

   For purposes of empirical implementation, a specific functional form must

be adopted for (2.1). We assume the converient specification



    in C            =     +   lt + 2t + $30t + 8Lt + 5't +                     (2.2)
           i_e
where        is a random error. Symmetry in obtaining housing services via

renting and owning suggests

                    =
                         i                =                                    (2.3)

These restrictions will be tested below.


   3Note that as a consequence of the assumption that renting and ownership
are mutually exclusive, the covariance between the prices does not enter.. -
Further, it is assumed that permanent income is independent of the pricP, Q
   4Lt should be stressed that the variance terms are consequences of
underlying uncertainty in the price of housing, and not the result of asset
portfolio considerations. The interaction of housing and financial decisions is
beyond the scope of this paper.
                                                                     6.




III. Empirical Im1ementation

   We estimate equation (2.2) with annual U.S. data for 1956 -to 1979. In

this section we explain the construction of empirical counterparts to the

theoretical constructs of Section II. The sources of all data are documented

in Appendix B.

   1. The proportion of homeowners (&)

   Although a time series is available for census years,     had to be

constructed for noncensus years using a perpetual inventory method. (See

Appendix B for details.) Jaffee and Rosen [1979] argue that demographic

changes in the U.S. population have had a major effect on the rate of household

formation and hoineownership, and that meaningful comparison of homeownership

rates over time requires that such changes be taken into account. We adapt

the Jaffee-Rosen procedure, which consists of creating a series

which controls for the changing mix of household types due to changes

in the age distribution of the population and alterations in marriage

and divorce patterns.

   2. The expected price of owner-occupation ()

   Computation of the price of owner—occupation is complicated by the fact
that owners do not pay an explicit annual rent for housing. An important

part of the annual cost of owner-occupied housing services is the unobservable

opportunity cost of the owner's equity in the house. Moreover, the federal

income tax lowers the effective cost by allowing deductions of mortgage

interest payments and local property taxes.5 Finally, like any other asset,

anticipated capital gains on a house (either positive or negative) have an



   5See Congressional Budget Office £1981] for a detailed discussion of
the tax provisions related to husing.
                                                                                7.




impact upon its effective rental price. Readers familiar with the neoclassical

investment literature will recognize the similarity between ccstructing the

price of owner-occupied housing services and the "user cost of capital."

(See, e.g., Jorgenson [1971].)

   The construction of user costs for housing is now familiar, and there is

no need to go through the derivation again in detail.6 Let Vt =               the   market

value of a house in period t, r =            the   individual's opportunity cost of

capital, rmt          the mortgage rate, D depreciation, Mt = maintenance, and

Tt =    property    taxes. If the share of owner's equity in the house is

then the real annual cost of owner-occupied housing services in year t                ,



Pt,is
              -     (l_T)[yr0V    + Yt)rmtVt +
                                                     Tt]   +
                                                               ;.+               (3 1)
          t
                                             PL
where             is the marginal income tax rate in period t, V is the expected

capital gain in period t, and PLt is an index of the general price level.7

   Data on mortgage rates are not available for the entire sample period, nor

is there sufficient information to allow calculation of              .   We   therefore

assume that rmt =
                         rt    which makes         irrelevant. For r , the AAA
corporate bond rate is used. No time series data are available on the

depreciation arid maintenance costs of the stock of owner-occupied housing.

Following general real estate practice, we take depreciation and maintenance

each to be 1 percent of the house value, V .            Property taxes are computed
as the average noncommercial property tax per owner-occupied dwelling. The


  6Dougherty and Van Order [1982] provide a careful derivation.

  7Expression (3.1) ignores transactions costs.
                                                                          8.




term        is the average marginal tax rate on income as calculated by Joines

[19811.8 PLt is the implicit price deflator for total consumption expenditures

with base year 1972. (PL1972 =    1.0.)
     Substituting all of these variables into (3.1) gives us only the ex post

cost of owner-occupation in year t ,      while   our theory suggests that tenure

decisions are based upon the expected annual cost over the relevant horizon.

Only if expectations are myopic will people expect the current real price to

continue into the future. Because expected housing prices are not directly

observable, they must be constructed on the basis of some model. There has

been a long and sometimes acrimonious debate on just how expectations are


formed.    (Nuch of the discussion is reviewed by Friedman [1979].)

We use the optimal ARIMA forecasting procedure suggested by Box

and Jenkins [1970]. The Box-Jenkins model produces forecasts of a variable

based only on past values. Conditional on this information, the forecasts

are rational. In principle, one might want to forecast using a completely

specified econometric model. This, however, would require forecasting all of

the model's exogenous variables into the future. In a similar context,

Feldsteifl and SummerS [1978] argue, "There is no reason to expect that the
                                          estimates of monetary and fiscal 'olicy
more general procedure that requires

for    many years ahead would ye1d better forecasts than the simpler Box-Jenkins
procedure." (pp. 2-6).
   Forecasts made at any given time are based only on information available
                                                  included in the information set,
at    that time. (Current year prices are not

but all lags are. Thus, it is recessary to estimate a separate


   8cr a variety of reasons, it is diffiu1t to say exactly which tax rate
is relevant.   L.rst of all, not all horrcwners itemize their deductior.
Secon;ly, Hendershott and Slemrod Cl92l. r.e that the appropriate variable
is the average tax savings er dollar due to homeowoarship. We believe that
the marginal rate used here provides a good approxiition.
                                                                          9.



equation for each year, based upon observations prior to that year. It is

not obvious how far into the past the observatious for each forecasting

equation should go. One possible procedure is to choo3e some arbitrary lengti

of time (say 10 years) and assume that individuals use data only within that

period to make their forecasts. Each year a new observation is added, and

simultaneously the observation at the end of the sample is dropped. This

method is sometimes called 'troiling regression."9

   Another possibility is that as more information becomes available over

time, individuals employ it, but continue to use the older inf:rrntion as

well. Thus, the number of observations grows each year.      People

believe that the basic economic structure generating the observations remains

the same, but they use new information to update their estimates of the

structure's parameters. For practical purposes, a starting point is

needed. If World War   II   is perceived as an important breaking point in

economic history, then starting somewhere in the late 1940's is sensible.

Essentially, this is no different than the typical practice of using all

available post-War data to estimate macroeconomic relationships.

   There is not much theoretical basis for choosing between the two assumptions

on how information is processed. We tried both and found that the second

performed better in the sense of lsading to a statistically superior

explanation of the tenure choice. The results presented below are based on

this method.

   After some preliminary analysis of the time series on        ,   we selected

an ARIMA (1,1,0) equation to make forecasts in year T


    9Some justifications for rolling regression are discussed by Friedman
[1979]. Feldstein and Summers [1978] use it to generate a time series of
expected inflation rates.
                                                                                       10.


       —
            P)   =
                     4)(T)(Pi
                                —         +   Ut ,   (to,... ,T—1)                  (3.2)




where u is a normally distributed white noise error and 4)(T) is a

parameter to be estimated)0 Again, note that (3.2) is re-estimated each year

T with observations from year 0 to T-l .               Within   a given time period 4)(T)

is constant, but as the time period changes, so does 4)(T) .              (In   practice,

year 0 is 1946, and the first        4)   is   estimated for 1956.)


    Given an estimate of 4)(T) , say           T) , equation      (3.2) can be solved

 recursively to generate forecasts of the price of homeownership for as many

 future years from time T as desired. This raises the question of the

 horizon people consider when making their tenure choice decisions. One

 possibility is that individuals look only to the end of the current year,

 reasoning that they can always change tenure status after that time. More

 realistically, substantial transactions costs are involved in             moving, and
 one expects that people are concerned about the course of prices at least

 several years into the future. We assume that people form expectations not

 only for the current year but four years into the future, and base their

 tenure choice on the five year average. That is, if we denote T+5 as

 the simple average of the first five forecasts generated by the Tth version

 of equation (3.2), then P-g is entered as the observation for P

 equation   (2.2). To test the sensitivity of our substantive results to this

 assumption on horizon length, we also estimated the tenure choice equation

 asurning that decisions are made on a one-year basis. These re:ults are 1so

 reported below.


       101t is possible to view the ARIMA(1,1,O) mod1 of equ.3tiorl (3.2)              a:
 the .'R(2) model   =        +
                                    2-2 + u with the con:tra.rit    +               2=
A test on this c istraint using observations from 1939 to 1979 indicated that
it 'z consistent with the data--F(l,37)    2.08, while the critical level at a
0.05 significance level is i4.08. Nce also that with the normazy assumptior,
the distribution of P. can be :hacterized by its mean and vr.ar.ce with no
element of apDroximatin.
      11For an estimate of the transactions costa associ3ted w.th moving, see
Vt    nd  Wise 11982].
                                                                        11.


   Figure   3.1 shows the value of 3(T) for each year. Note that the estimates

vary substantially as new information becomes available. Hence, attempts

to model expectations formation on the basis of a single ARIMA model esi'. 'ed

for the entire period would likely produce misleading inferences. To the

extent there is a trend, the value of 3(T) tends toward zero. As equation

(3.2) indicates, a decrease of c(T) in absoL.te value suggests that relatively

more weight is being placed on the most recent observation. This may he due

to the increased volatility in        which occurred during the 1970's. This

phenomenon, associated mainly with movements in nominal interest rates and

capital   gains, reduced the value of "old" information.
   Figure   3.2 exhibits for each year the expected price of owner—occupation
over a five year period,   P.g. , and compares them to the average of the

actual (ex post) prices for the same period. Due to the nature of the learning

process imposed by equation (3.2), individuals react to turning points with a

one period lag. Note that in the 1970's, people often expected the cos of

housing to be higher than its ex post value. This may help explain the

relatively small change in the homeownership rate during that decade.

      It should be noted that our procedure assumes that people form

expectations of the real user cost,      as a whole. It is equally plausible

that agents forecast each component of the user cost and then aggregate.

The latter procedure,however, is difficult to implement. The investigator

must specify and estimate an ARIMA model of each component. Correctly

aggregating involves, at a minimum, computing the covariances between

separate ARIMA models. The non-linear nature of equation 3.1 complicates

matters further. For these reasons, our simpler procedure was adopted

for the bulk of the anslysis.
                               FIGURE 3. i                  12.


                 ESTIMATES OF EQUATIONS (3.2)
      —Q• L




      —0.5-




P
i-I




      —0.6-




      —0.7—
         1.955    958   1961          1367   1370   1573   1376   .979
                                     TE.
                                                                                                                13.

                                                               FKURE 3.2

                  EX POST AND EX ANTE (—--)
     200—
     1100-
     1000-
      900-
                                                   /
      800                       /                  /                                   F.
                                            \ •1
      70o:                  /               'I                                     /        \
      600-
                                             V
                                                                               /
                                                                                                               1'

      50O:
                    /
                                                                                                              I'
                                                                                                              J1
                                                                                                                         —




      1400-

                                                                                                        I
                                                                                                                    'I
0
0     2O0-
L     lOO-1
L
A

5

     -200    -
     -1400

     -500
     —600-
     -700
     -800-
     -900
    -1.000    -
              I         $



        1955       1956             1.361              13614       1.967     1.970              1.973       1.376        •t379
                                                                   T EIRI9
                                                                              1L..




                                               estimates based on
     Also reported below however, are

a model in which real capital gains are the only source of uncertainty. This

assumption has been used in earlier studies of tenure choice (Hendershott

and Shilling [1980], Rosen and Rosen [1980]) and studies of business

investment (Jorgenson [1971]).


    3. The forecast error variance of the price of owner occupation (a).

    The same equations used to generate the expected price of owner occupation

 can be used to produce a series of the forecast error variances. From

 equations (3.2), at he start of year T the one year ahead forecast,
                                                                                     ,   is

                    =
                        (1+$(T))PT_l_11(T)PT...2

 The true value one year hence (conditional on 3.2) is



               =                            + UT
                   (l+(T))PT_l_(T)PT_2
                                                      at the start of year T is (P.,. -
 The error in the one year ahead forecast made

 and its variance


           a2 =    &2(T) + E {(3(T)$(T))(PTf T-2 -        Ea(T)_(T))c-PT_2)}2

 where a2(T) is the year T estimate of the variance of

     Two simplifying assumptions can be made:

     (a) The covariance of 3(T) with the data on which it is estimated

                    is zero. To compute it is burdensome, and it is plausible
    1 'T-
  that people ignore. this source •f e'ror.        In this case, equation (3.t)

  reduces to


          a2        2(T) + T—i T-2(T)
                                                       Q(T), computed as usual as
  where aT) is the estimated ,ariance of
                                                                                       15.




                  -i-

   (b) (T) =      0    .   This simplifying assumption is made in virtually all

ARIMA forecasting. (See Nelson [1973].) Intuitively, it is assumed that

there are enough observations so that errors of estimation are of second orcer

importance relative to       the     inherent uncertainty (UT   ' in   the world. We
then find


            (1   = â2(T)                                                           (3.5)



   Expressions (3.5) and (3.6) give alternative values for the forecast

error variance of a one year forecast. Our framework, however, requires

c.mputing the variance for a five year average. This leads to two complications:

   a. It must be assumed that 3(T) is known with certainty. Recall that

in the case of the one-year forecast, one can choose between assuming

that T) is known with certainty or uncertainty. For the former, equation

(3.6) is used; for the latter, equation (3.5) is relevant. Once we forecast

further into the future, the computational problem becomes intractable unless
                  2
we assume that
                      '(T)
                             =   0   .   This   is because each forecast error variance

contains expectations of third and higher order moments of T)


   In an attempt to gauge the importance of assuming 3(T) is known                 with
certainty, we estimated two different tenure choice equations with the

maintained hypothesis that one-year ahead forecasts were appropriate. In

the first             was estimated using (3.5); in the second, (3.6). The

results, which are presented below, indicate that the substantive results are

unaffected. Of course, we do not know that this would continue to be the

case for the five-year horizon; but the result is suggestive.
                                                                    16.



   b. The variance of the five year average is not siTnply the average of the

five variances. The computation must take into account the covariances between

the forecast errors for the various years. Some tedious but straightforward

calculations yield the following formula for the five year average forecast
                  12        2
error variance,            a



                                2        1 [a2 CT)   Zc.3
                                                          2

                                                    i=O


where



        [5 ÷ 43(T) +       3(T)2    ÷   23(T)3 + 3(T)4]
    = [Li. + 3(T)      +   23(T)2 + 3(T)3)




  Figure 3.3 shows how the five year average forecast error var.ance changed

over time. The general tendency has been for it to fall.13 This is reflective

of the pattern of actual prices depicted in Figure 3.2. Although prices in

the beginning of the period moved le5s than those at the end, they did so

in a less "predictable" way.



   12Details are provided in Appendix A.


  13A general downward trend interrupted in about 1975 was also found in
                                                                   model.
the forecast error variances generated by the "'olling regression"
                                                                17.
                                   FICURE 3.3

       FIVE YEAR FOREGAST ERROR iARLL\T1
                                       ui
    600-




    500—



I
H
0
U
c t400
A
N
0
S

0
F

0
0 300T
L
L
A
B
S

$
a   200-
U
A
B
E
0



    1.00-




      0—

      1955   1958   1961.   1564      1367      1.370   197   1.976   1975
                                      TERf9
                                                                                           18.




   LI..      The expected value and forecast error variance of the price of rental
             housing,         and

   The same strategy is used to compute                    and      as was used for

and              above. A series of equations of the form


             -            = (T)(Qi    -          +
                                                     v    (t0,... ,T-1)               (3.7)


are estimated, and the results are used to generate expected values and
      •
variances.
                  l4    Unlike the case of owner occupation, it is not necessary to

construct a time series on                .
                                              Explicit    rents are paid to landlords,
                                      15
and data on them are easily available.

      Over the period, the ex post real price of renting rises smoothly, as does

the forecast value. The forecast error variances of renting are very small

compared to that associated with owner-occupation. It seems likely

that risks associated with owning are most important to the tenure

decision.


      5. Other variables

      Our theoretical discussion suggested that permanent income should have an

effect on housing decisions. Muth [1960, p. 30J and others have noted that




      iLl.
                       this time series proc'.       was 1ected after prel mary investigation.
          Again,
                                                            that act to
   15There are, of course, a number of government pr..:ramS
subsidize rental housing. However, all that
                                             matters  from our point of view
                                       nd tnis i pre.ise1y what the tubiished
is the market price facing consumers,
data are intended to ref1ct.
                                                                                 19.



 current consumption is probably a better "proxy" for permanent income that is

 current income. We therefore include per capita real cons'rption C , as
                                   16
 a righthand side variable.

      An important issue in the housing literature is the extent to which credit

 rationing influences housing demand decisions. (See Arcelus and Meltzer

 [1973] and Swan [1973].) A rigorous examination of the impact of credit

rationing on the tenure decision would require specification and estimation

of a disequilibrium model as suggested by Fair and Jaffee [1972]. A simpler

approach is to include among the regressors a measure of the availability

of mortgage market funds. For this purpose, we create the variable CREDt

defined as the real growth in deposits at thrift institutions (mutual

savings banks and savings and loan associations) between years t-l and t.

One       expects that if    credit availability has been a factor in the homeownership

decision, then CRED will have a positive sign.



IV. Results

A. The Basic Model

     In    our basic   equation, expected prices and their forecast error variances

are computed over a 5 year horizon. In terms of quation (2.2),              =

a2    =          , and       and        are defined analogously. Under these assumptions,
                         S
and imposing constraints (2.3),17 ordinary least squares estimation of (2.2)



       16The consumption variable includes expenditures on housing. Conceptually,
this is appropriate, because the idea is to proxy permanent income, and all
components of the consumption stream "belong." Simultaneity is not likely to
be an important issue because the dependent variable is a function of the
homeownership ratio, notusing expenditures per'se. In any case,when consumption
net of housing expenditures is used the results are essentially unchanged.

      17preliminary invtigation indicated that the hypothesis that constraint
(2.3) is applicable could not be rejected by the data. The F-statistic for
the test was 3.28, and the critical value is F(2, 18) = 3.55 (5%) or 6.01 (1%).
                                                                                         20.




yields:


       ln(
             1-
                  )    =.125        —   '4.75     E(     —
                                                             t)
                                                                  x   ioj
                           (.145)       (1.92)

                       -    6.89
                                    [(      - ) x ioi        + 2.04 CC x
                           (1.74)                                 (o.3o)


                      D.W. =    1.44
                              = .989



The numbers in parentheses are standard errors. The Durbin-Watson statistic

is inconclusive at 5% and does not reject the null hypothesis at a 1% level.

In any case, when a first-order correction for autocorrelation is i.ade, the

outcome is virtually unchanged.

      The coefficient on                -        is   negative and statistically significant

at conventional levels. When the expected excess of the cost of owning over

renting increases, the proportion of owner-occupiers decreases. The elasticity

of        with respect to               -        is   _0.053.18 This result is qualitatively

consistent with earlier research.

     The key new variable introduced in our specification is the difference in

the forecast error variances of the costs of owning and renting,                     —


The coefficient on this term is negative and exceeds its standard error by

nearly a factor of 4. Greater uncertainty in the price of owning reduces

the proportion of homeowners, ceteris paribus. The elasticity of G with

respect to (c —        ) is         —0.188.

     The coefficient of the consumption variable is positive and statistically

significant, with an implied elasticity of 0.707. As in previous work using

   18A11 elasticities are evaluated at the average sample values fcr' 197—79.
Bec.use of the substantial volatility i the underlying data, the e1asicity
calculated for any si'7le year might be mis1eadirg.
                                                                               21.




 both cross sectional and time series data, there is a positive elaticshit

between real per capita permanent income (as proied by personal consumptior

expenditures) and the tendency to choose ow:er—occupjer status.

    One potential difficulty with our estimates is that they may be incnsistent

due to simultaneity bias. If i1creases in the proportion of owner occupiers

drives up the price of owner—occupied housing, then there will be correlatic:.

between (Pt -        and the error term       .
                                                  Recently,   Plosser, Schwert and

White [1981] proposed a specification test which can be used to investigate

whether this is a serious problem. Their procedure requires

estimating the model in levels and differenced form. tinder the null hypothesis

that      is i.i.d. and there is no simultaneity bias, the estirrtes will

be identical. The test statistic, chi-squared distributed with 3 degrees

of freedom, is 1.3214, indicating a failure to reject the null hypothesis by

a wide margin.

B. Alternative Specifications

   To test the robustness of the basic model several additional specifications

were estimated. In the first, the credit variable (CRED) described earlier

was added to the basic equation. The results are shown in column (2) of

Table I. (Column (1) reproduces the results of the basic equation for convenience.)

The results in column (2) show that the addition of CREDt leaves the basic

results essentially unchanged. The CREDt term itself is insignificant. At

least in our   formulation,   the availability of real mortgage credit does not

influence the homeownership decision. As stressed earlier, we do not regard

this as decisive "proof" that rationing is unimportant in the housing market.

  The basic model assumed that households used a five-year horizon for

tenure choice decisions. We estimated two alternative equations where a one—
                                                                   Table   I


                                                             PA1AMETER ESTIMATES*



                                                    (Dependent Variable = mE 1
                                                                                         t


Variable                                            (2)b                   (3)C                (1)d               (5)e      (6)f
                                   (1)


                                                                                                             .              -17.22
                              —
                l0J                14.75           -14.52
                                                                           - 5.12            -3.71               -5.02
C(Pt_Qt)x                                                                   (1.36)                               (2.65)     (11.71)
                                  (1.92)           (1.97)                                    (1.23)
            9                                                              —    7.72                              6.78     —206.0
                              —    6.89            —6.87                                     —5.37
[(o2_           x   oj
      t t                         (1.74)           (1.76)                      (1.26)         (0.91)             (2.27)     (75.0)


      x     i0]                   2.014              2.10                      1.91            2.22               2.36        2.38
                               (0.30)               (0.31)                     (0.22)         (0.16)             (0.292)     (0.31)

                                   --                                            --             -—                 --          --
 CRED                                                -. 0068
        t                                            (.0096)

                                  0.125              0.11'4                     0.168         0.00814            0.00081    —0.0378
 Constant
                               (o.i'5)              (o.1'47)                   (0.100)       (0.078)             (0.15)     (0.1L482)

                                  1.1414             1.141                      2.11          2.21               1.29        1.21
 D.W.

                                   .989                .989                      .993          .993                .987       .956
 R2

 *                                                                                                      The time period is 1956—1979.
  \ariables          are defined in the text.   Numbers in parentheses are standard errors.
 .        Basic     equatior--5 year horizon.
 b.       Basic equation with credit variable.
 c.       1 year horizon;  and 4' known with certainty.
 d.       1 year horizon; . and 4' uncertain.
 e.       Basic equation; V/IL only stochastic component of
 1.       Basic equation adjute for quality differences.
                                                                                 23.




year decision horizon was postulated. The results in coiumnC) are based on

the assumption that the autoregressive parameter in the equation that

generates price expectations is known with certainty. Hence,

             of equation (3.6); and     and       are computed &ia1ogousir.

Column 4 is based on the assumption that the autoregressive parame' is

uncertain--cy
                =      of   equation (3.5), and       is computed analogously.

Taken together, the results of columns (3) and (4) show that: Ci) fr-c basi'.

estimates of column (1) are not very sensitive to reasonabLe changes in the

time horizon, and (ii) neither are they sensitive to the assumption that the

autoregressive parameter in the price expectations equations is known with

certainty.

   Column (5) shows the results when the user cost of borne owning jF computed

 under the "traditional" assumption that the only unknown component is the

 expected real capital gain. Specifically, we estimated a series of ARIMA

 models for real capital gains, and used them to compute the expected value

 and forecast error variance over 5-year horizons, just as was done for the

 entire user cost in Section III. The other components of            were assumed

 known with certainty. As the results indicate, not much changes. This is

 not too surprising, since much of the variability in the           series is

 associated with changes in house value.

   Finally, we estimated a version of the model trying to take into account

changes in the qualities of owner-occupied and rental housing over the period.

The only dimension of housing quality for which time series data are available

is the average size of rental and owner-occupied units. Column (6) reports

results when the user costs were scaled by average number of rooms for owner—

occupied and rental housing. (A five-year horizon is again assumed.) The

qualitative results are similar to those previously obtained, although the
                                                                         24.


coefficients differ as a result of the scaling. Of course, this is a crude

adjustment for quality change, but it is the only one available over the time

period.

   C. Some Implications

   To get a better feel for the quantitative significance of our results,

it is useful to employ them as the basis for a number of simulations.

Typically, simulations of the impact of changes in the housing environment

focus exclusively on the effects upon the user cost of housing. However,

any exogenous force which changes mean expected prices will also affect the

forecast error variances. To accommodate this problem, the following

simulation procedure was adopted:

   1) A counterfactual was posed. For instance, "What would have been the

effect upon the homeownership ratio if the growth rate of real house values

had been constant over the sample period?" (discussed below)

   2) An artificial ex post user cost series was calculated by evaluating

equation (3.1) under the counterfactual hypothesis.

   3) Equations(3.2)were re-estimated on the artificial data series,

resulting in new estimates of T). These were used to calculate expected

prices of home ownership and forecast error variances under the counterfactual.

   4) The counterfactual series of price differentials and forecast error      variance
differentials were substituted into the estimated behavioral equationt

(equation (4.1))to predict the homeownership ratio which would have obtained

under the counterfactual. Th avoid peculiarities associated with any

particular year,comparisons of actual and rnulated homeownership ratios are

presented on the basis of 5 year averages over 1975-1979.

   The first proposition considered was the effect of a constant rj       rate
in real house values((Vt/PLt )   in   equation (3.1)). To irvestigat2 this, we

created an artificial series whose endpoints matched the hi3torical record,
                                                                       25.



but which grew   snoo.ly   at the rate of 3.l. yearly, and then fol1o:; the

simuiation procedure outlined above.

  T. results indicate that a steady real growth rate in housing prices

would   have increased the proportion of owner-occupiers tr: the late 1970's
by +0.033'4. It is useful to "decompose" this figure into the rts due to
the change in the expected price difference, and the part due to the change in the

difference in the forecast error variances. If         is held at its actual
value   and the artificial value of      is substituted into equation (Lii), we

find that the proportion of owner-occupiers falls by 0.0072. Under the

simulation, capital gains in the latter part of the period are smaller than

historical values, so on the basis of expected price alone, owner-ccupaIion

is less desirable than it was in reality. On the other hand, if         is

held at its actual value, and the artificial value of the forecast error

variance      used, then the proportion of owner-occupiers increases by 0.OL1OE.

Clearly, the encouraging effect of less uncertainty dominates the outcome.

For reference, these results are recorded in column (1) of Table II.

   We next gauged the impact of several proposed changes

in the tax treatment of housing. Suppose that during our sample period the

deduction of mortgage interest and property taxes had been disallowed, but

everything else had been the same. The results are recorded in column (2)

of Table II. Elimination of these deductions would have decreased the

proportion of owner-occupiers by 0.0O'iO. Most of the effect (.0036) comes

via changes in the expected price; elimination of the deductions does not

have much impact upon the forecast error variance.19


     19The magnitude of this effect is somewhat smaller than that found in
earlier studies such as Hendershott and Shilling 11980] and Rosen and Rosen
[1980]. This is due in part to the fact that the marginal income tax rates
used in those studies exceed those computed by Joines [1981], which are the
ones used here. Hence, removal of any given tax deduction has a smaller
dollar effect on the user cost of housing in this paper than in its
predecessors.
                                                                                26.


                                      TABLE   II
                  CHANGE IN AVERAGE PROPORTION OF HOMEOWNERSHIP

                                   DURING 1975 — 1979*




                         Constant                                           No Deductions,
                        Growth Rate of              No      Capital Gains   Capital Gains
                        Housing Prices        Deductions      Taxed             Taxed
                             (1)                     (2)       (3)               (4)

Total   Effect               +.0334                —.0040      +.0105           ÷.0063

Expected Price Effect        —.0072                —.0036      —.0051           —.0089

Forecast Error
Variance Effect              +.0406                —.0004      +.0156           +.0152




All comparisons are relative to the average fitted value of the basic equation for
1975-1979, 0.6833. The proportions are adjusted for changes in household composition
as described above.
                                                                             27.


     Another   tax reform possibility is to tax 1ousing capital gains at ordi:'y

 rates, but leave the other deductions in place. As shown in column (3) of

 Table II, this change would have incread the propor-ti n o owner-occupiez

 by 0.0105. This is a surprising result, but the other rigures in coJ (3)

reveal its source. On the basis of expected price alone, we would ve
predicted a decrease of -.0051. However, the encouraging EFfect of the ix-
 induced   reduction in the forecast error variance dominates the outcome.

This kind of result is familiar from the literature on taxati. and

uncertainty (Tobin [1958]). As far as we know, its reevance to the issue

of housing tenure choice has not been established before.

     Finally, oDlumn (14.) records the results when the interest and prcerty tax

deductions are removed and housing capital gains are taxed. 3n balance,

there is a very srill increase in the proportion of owner-occupiers. The

variance effect so strongly present in column (3) is mitigated to some extent

by the expected price effect of column(2)



V.   Conclusions
     In this paper, we investigate the effects of price uncertainty on the

tenure choice decision. Estimates on data from 1956-1979 indicate that

uncertainty over the course of relative prices has significantly depressed

the aggregate proportion of homeowners.

     Proposals to modify the tax treatment of housing affect both the expected

price differential between renting and owning and the difference in the

forecast error variances. Previous analyses of policy changes may be misleading

because the two effects can work in opposite directions. For example, our

results suggest that taxation of capital gains at marginal personal income

tax rates would have increased the horneownership rate, despite the increased
                                                                           28.




 expected cost of owning. The reduction in price variance is sufficiently

 attractive to dominate the outcome. Other results indicate that eliminating

 property   tax and interest payment deductions would have reduced the homeownership
 rate, but that the combination of no deductions with capital gains taxation
would have resulted in a slightly higher proportion of homeowners.

   These results provide some explanation for the puzzling behavior of the

homeownership ratio in the late 1970's. In that period ex post costs of

homeowning fell greatly relative to renting. Despite this, the aggregate

proportion of homeowners changed little. Our evidence suggests that this

was largely due to the erratic nature of housing costs which made
                                                                    ownership
commitments unattractive.

   The chief limitation of this analysis is its omission of the
                                                                  relationship
between housing and other financial decisions. From a theoretical point of

view, one expects that the housing decision will be part of a broader portfolio

allocation problem. As an empirical issue, the relevanze of this consideration

is not clear-—in 1966, only 50% of homeowning households had other assets worth

more than $1500. (Diamond and Hausman [1982]) Nevertheless, this is a topic

worthy of further investigation.
                                                                              29.




                                          Appendix A



     This appendix details the calculations of the forecast error va:iare of

a projection based on the simple average of the first five future observations.

     We can write the process for generating prices as:


                  -              =              -       +                     (A1)
                      P÷-.i
where      is assumed to be known.
                                                                               -
     Using the lag operator, (A.1) implies:


                            =
            (l_L)P÷             (L)(l_L)P+      ÷ t+j

or

            (l_L)(1_L)P+ ut+.

                  =                                                           (A.2)
Finally,
                      (l-L)(l-L)
     Expanding (A.2) yields an expression for               as a weighted average of

past shocks:


                                c(k)                                          (A.3)
            t+j           k=O          Ut÷j_k

where

           c(k)       1 +       + 2•••     ÷                                  (A.L)

           c(O)       1


The expected price,                  at time t is calculated by taking the
                                                                                                        -
                                                                                                            30.


expectation of (A.4) conditional on information known                               at      time t (which

excludes ut):

                 =                  c(k)
                                              Ut+j_k
                         k=j+l

   Thus,   the forecast error is:


                —              =
e+.                                k0     c(k)ut+jk


   Let w0, w1, w2, w3, w4 be weights. Then the 5 period weighted average

forecast error is:

           4
   e Z w.e
         it+i
          i=0

      =
          W0
                k=0
                        c(k)uk +              1     k=0
                                                               c(k)ut+lk +   W2
                                                                                  k=O
                                                                                        c(k) Ut+2k ÷
                                                                                                            3 k=Ot+3

      +
          w4
                k=Ot+
Collecting coefficients on the shocks:

                                                           3                            2
      =             E    w1c(i) +.                       E w.1c(i) +
                                                        i=O
                                                                              u2        E w.2c(i)
                                                                                        i0
                    1
      ÷ u13 Z w.+3c(1) +                      u÷4w4c(o)
                 i=0


Clearly E(e) = 0           .       Thus       Var() =           E(e2).   Since the u's       are independently,
identically, distributed, all covariance terms disappear and the result is:

                               —          2
                        Var(e) = a                 E ci.
                                        U      •        :i.



where:
                                                              31 -



   0
       = Z w.
            i c(i)
            3
       =
           I =0 w1c(i)
            Z




           0
  ci.
      = E w.÷1c(i)

In the case referred to in the text, w. = 1/5   for all i -
                                                                              32.




                               Appendix B


  This appendix describes the methodology used to construct our data series.

The source of our raw data is also documented. HS refers to Historical

Statistics of the United States: Colonial Times to 1970 (1975) and SA refers

to various editions of Statistical Abstract of the United States.


1. Proportion of owner—occupied dwellings, adjusted for demographic

compositiOfl 8
   Three different sources of data were utilized. From 19Ll5 to 1959 the

iterative perpetual inventory method described in Rosen and Rosen (1980)

was used. From 1960 to 1973 data on the proportion of owner-occupied housing

starts were taken from Housing Vacancy Survey, U.S. Bureau of the Census,

Publication #111. From l97 to 1980, the owner-occupancy data were taken

from the Annual Housing Survey, U.S. Bureau of the Census and Department of

Housing and Urban Development. The owner-o:cupied rates were then adjusted

for changing demographic composition of the population following Jaffee and

Rosen (1979).

2. Price of owner-occupied housing: P

   As noted in the text, the price of owner-occupied housing is:


             -   (1_t)[yrtVt   +
                                   (l_yt)rmtVt   +
                                                     T] +    +    -v
         t                             PL
where rt* is the AAA bond rate, Vt is the market value of a house, Tt

is the property tax per single family housing unit, D is depreciadon,

                          is the expected capital gain,            is the marginal
Mt is maintenance, V
tax rate for the household with average taxable income,                 is t

 share of owner's equity in the house, and            is the implicit price deflator

 for total consumption expenditures.
       It was assumed r                r
                                                                                -3.




   The AAA bond rate series was taken from HS arci SA. Follcwing actual

real estate practice, depreciatior. and maintenance were each set at 1 percent

of the house's value. The tax rate               was taken from Joines, 1Gl, •.       210j.
After 1975, the 1975 tax rate of .lL79 was used.

   The market value of owner-occupied housing, Vt , was derived L first

splicing two housing price ;eries and using the results to compute annual

rates of change of house prices,            .    The values of      were then applied

to census-year numbers on the median value of owner-occupied uni in :rdr

to derive an annual series comparable with the census-year numbers. In n

iterative process, the values of                were changed proportionately untii the

values of the constructed price series for census years exactly matched those

of the census. Median values of owner-occupied units in census years were

found in HS. For 19,4 to 1956,          was computed using FHA sales price data

as reported in various editions of the FHA Yearbook. For 1957 to 1980,

was calculated from various editions of Existing Home Sales, a publication of

the National Association of Realtors [1980].

   The property tax per owner-occupied unit was calculated by dividing the

residential portion of all federal, state, and local property taxes by the

number of owner-occupied units:

                                 x
                                     PTTt
        T
                           os
where           is total property tax revenue, 1(R is net private residential

capital stock at current cost, KN is net private nonresidential capital stock

at current cost, and 0S is the number of owner-occupied units. For years

prior to 1971, these series were taken from HS; for 1971 to 1980, they

were from SA.
                                                                         34.




3. Price of rental housing:

     An annual rate of change of the rental price of housing was computed using

the rental component of the CPI (HS prior to 1971, SA for 1971 to 1980).

This rate of change series was then applied to census-year numbers on the

median rent of renter-occupied units in order to derive an annual series

comparable with the census-year numbers. In an iterative process, the annual

changes in rental prices were adjusted until they exactly replicated the

census—year   numbers.
4.    Real consumption: C
     Real per capital consumption expenditures were taken from the Economic

Report of the President (1982).

5. Real growth in deposits at savings and loan associations and mutual

savings banks: CREDt
     The savings data were from HS forthe 1949 to 1970 and from SA for 1971

to 1980.

6. Quality adjustment for rental and owner-occupied housing.

     An annual time series on the number of rooms in renter and owner—occupied

housing was developed from census data prior to 1973, and from the Annual

Housing Survey since 1973. The price variables for renter and owrier—occuped

housing were then recalculated on a per room basis.
                                                                              35.



                                   References



Arcelus, Francisco and Allan H. Meltzer, "The Markets r :ousing and Hou3.

   Services," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 5, No. 1, pt. 1, February

   1973   ,   pp. 78—99.
Congressional Budget Office, The Tax Treatment of Horneownership: iSSUE

   and   Options, Congress of the United States, September, 1981.

Box, G.E.P. and G. M. Jenkins, Time Series Analysis (San Francisco: Holde...-

   Day), 1970.

Diamond, Peter A. and J. A. Hausrnan, "Individual Retirement and    Savings
   Behavior," rnimeo, M.I.T., August, 1982.

Dougherty, Ann and Robert Van Order, "Inflation, Housing Costs and the

   Consumer Price Index," The American Economic Review, vol. 7 no. 1,

   March, 1982, pp. 1541614.

Fair, Ray C. and Dwight M. Jaffee, "Methods of Estimation for Markets in

   Disequilibrium," Econometrica 140, No. 3, May, 1972, pp. 14g7_5lLl..

Feldstein, Martin, "Inflation, Tax   Rules   and the Accumulation of Residential

   and Non-Residential Capital," Scandinavian Journal of Economics 814,

   no. 2, 1982, pp. 293—311.

Feldstein, Martin S. and Lawrence Summers, "Inflation, Tax    Rules,   and the

   Long-Term Interest Rate," N.B.E.R. Working Paper No. 232, January, .978.

Friedman, Benjamin M., "Optimal Expectations and the Extreme Information

   Assumptions of 'Rational Expectations' Macro-Models," Journal of Monetary

   Economics 5, 1979, pp. 23-41.
                                                                          36.



Hendershott,   Patric H., "Government Policies and the Allocation of Capital

  between Residential and Industrial Uses," National Bureau of Economic

  Research, Working Paper No. 1036, December, 1982.

Hendershott,   Patric H. and James D. Shilling, "The Economics of Tenure Choice
  1955-79," N.B.E.R. Working Paper No. 5'43, September, 1980.
Hendershott,   Patric H. and Joel Slemrod, "Taxes and the User Cost of Capital

  for Owner—Occupied Housing," mimeo, The Ohio State University, 1981.

Henderson, J. V. and Y. M. loannides, "A Model of Housing Tenure Choice,"

  American Economic Review, vol. 73, no. 1, March, 1983, pp. 98-113.

Jaffee, Dwight M. and Kenneth T. Rosen, "Mortgage Credit Availability and

  Residential Construction,'t Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2,

  1979, pp. 333—76.

Joines, Douglas H., "Estimates of Effective Marginal Tax    Rates   on Factor

   Income," Jcarnal of Business, vol. 5L,   no.   2, 1981, pp. 191-226.

Jorgenson, Dale W., "Econometric Studies of Investment Behavior: A Survey,"

  The Journal of Economic Literature 9, December 1971, pp. 1Ul_lltl.7.

Muth, Richard F., "The Demand for Non-Farm Housing," in The remand for flurabi

  Goods, edited by Arnold C. Narberger, Chicago, University of Chicago

  Press, 1960.

National Association of Realtors, Existing Home Sales, Washington: National

  Association of Realtors, 1980.

Nelson, Charles R., Applied Time Series Analysis for Managerial Forecstg,

   San Francisco: Holden-Day, 1973.
                                                                            37.




Plosser, Charles, C. William Schwert and Halbert White, "Differencing As ..

   Test of Specification," International Economic Peview, vol. 23, no. 3,

   October, 1982, pp. 535—552.

Rosen, Harvey S., "Comments," in Aaron, H. J. and J. A. Pechman (eds.),

   How Taxes Affect Economic Behavior. Brookings,        pp. 323-326.

Rosen, Harvey S. and Kenneth T. Rosen, "Federal Taxes and Homeownership:

   Evidence From Time Series," Journal of Political Economy 88, February,

   1980, pp. 59—75.

Swan, Craig, "The Markets for Housing and Housing Services: A Comment,"

   Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 5, No. 4., November, 1973, pp. 960—72.

Tobin, James, "Liquidity Preference as Attitudes Toward Risk,"

   Review of Economic Studies 25, February 1958, pp. 65-86.

U.S. Bureau of the Census, Department of Housing & Urban Developnent, Annual

   Housing Survey, U.s. Government Printing Office, 1g7L-198O.

U.S. Bureau of the Census. Historical Statistics of the United States:

   Colonial Times to 1970. Washington: Government Printing Office, 1975.

U.S. Bureau of the Census. Housing Vacancy Survey, U.S. Government Printing

  Office, 197L1.—1980.

U.S. Bureau of the Census. Statistical Abstract of the United States.

   Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, various editions.

U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. FRA   Yearbook. Washington: U.S.
   Government Printing Office, various editions.

U.S. President, Economic Report of the President. Washington: U.S. Governnent

   Printing Office, various issues.

Venti, Steven F. and David A. Wise, "Moving and Housing Expenditure:

   Transactions Cos and Disequilibrium," Harvard University, mimeo, 1982.
