                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         CAPITAL FLOWS IN A GLOBALIZED WORLD:
                         THE ROLE OF POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS

                                             Laura Alfaro
                                        Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan
                                          Vadym Volosovych

                                         Working Paper 11696
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11696


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2005




Prepared for the NBER Conference on Capital Controls and Capital Flows in Emerging Economies: Policies,
Practices and Consequences, December 17-18, 2004. The authors thank Franklin Allen, Sebastian Edwards,
Martin Feldstein, Jeff Frieden, Gerd Haeusler, Ayhan Kose, Gian-Maria Milesi-Ferretti, Simon Johnson,
David Papell, Eswar Prasad, Nouriel Roubini, Bent Sorensen and participants at the NBER Conference on
International Capital Flows and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York Conference on Financial
Globalization for valuable comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Laura Alfaro, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and Vadym Volosovych. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Capital Flows in a Globalized World: The Role of Policies and Institutions
Laura Alfaro, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and Vadym Volosovych
NBER Working Paper No. 11696
October 2005
JEL No. F21, F41, O1

                                           ABSTRACT

We describe the patterns of international capital flows in the period 1970 - 2000. We then examine

the determinants of capital flows and capital flows volatility during this period. We find that

institutional quality is an important determinant of capital flows. Historical determinants of current

legal institutions have a direct effect on foreign investments. Policy plays a significant role in

explaining the changes in the level of capital flows over time and their volatility.

Laura Alfaro
Harvard Business School

Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan
University of Houston
Department of Economics
Houston, TX 77204
and NBER
sebnem.kalemli-ozcan@mail.uh.edu

Vadym Volosovych
University of Houston
1        Introduction

Controversy regarding the costs and benefits of globalization has taken center stage in policy and
academic circles. While concerns over the benefits of capital mobility once voiced by John Maynard
Keynes during the design of the Bretton-Woods System were nearly forgotten in the 1970s and
1980s, the crises of the last decade have revived the debate over the merits of international financial
integration.
        The most powerful argument in favor of international capital mobility, voiced among others
by Stanley Fischer, Maurice Obstfeld, Kenneth Rogoff, and Larry Summers, is that it facilitates
an efficient global allocation of savings by channelling financial resources to their most productive
uses, thereby increasing economic growth and welfare around the world. But some other prominent
academics are among the skeptics of international financial integration. Paul Krugman, for example,
argues that countries that experience full-blown crises should use capital controls. Dani Rodrik
claims that international financial liberalization creates higher risk of crises for developing countries.
Even Jagdish Bhagwati, a fierce proponent of free trade, wonders if the risks of international
financial integration might outweigh its benefits. As a result, recent research has focused on how to
minimize the instability of international capital markets. Without a comprehensive understanding
of the determinants of capital flows and their volatility, however, it is difficult to evaluate the
different proposals that have been put forth to mitigate the negative effects of international capital
mobility.
        The determinants of international capital flows and their consequences for economic growth have
been one of the most important issues in the international macroeconomics literature.1 However,
there is no consensus. Mainly, this is due to the fact that different researchers focus on different
samples of countries (OECD countries versus emerging markets), different time-periods (1970s
versus 1980s versus 1990s), and different forms of capital flows (foreign direct investment/portfolio
equity flows versus debt flows or public flows versus private flows). For example, Calvo, Leiderman
and Reinhart (1996) focus on the role of external (push) and internal (pull) factors as potential
determinants of foreign investments using a cross-section of developing countries. They find that
low interest rates in the U.S. played an important role in accounting for the renewal of capital
flows to these countries in the 1990s. Edwards (1991) shows that government size and openness
are important determinants of inward foreign direct investment (FDI) from OECD to developing
countries, during the period 1971–1981. Wei (2000) and Wei and Wu (2002) use data on bilateral

    1
        See Prasad, Rogoff, Wei and Kose (2003) for an extensive review.



                                                            1
FDI from 18 industrialized source countries to 59 host countries during 1994–1996 and find that
corruption reduces the volume of inward FDI and affects the composition of flows by increasing the
loan-to-FDI ratio during this period.2 Using data on bilateral portfolio equity flows from a set of 14
industrialized countries during 1989–1996, Portes and Rey (2005) find evidence that imperfections
in the international credit markets can affect the amount and direction of capital flows. Among a
set of developing countries, Lane (2004) also finds credit market frictions to be a determinant of
debt flows during 1970–1995.
    These papers have not paid particular attention to the overall role institutions play in shaping
long-term capital flows among a cross-section of developed and developing countries. This is a task
we started investigating in Alfaro, Kalemli-Ozcan, and Volosovych (2003) (henceforth AKV). AKV
find institutional quality to be a causal determinant of capital inflows, where current institutions
are instrumented by their historical determinants.3,4 In this paper, we re-establish our results from
AKV for a different sample using Balance of Payments (BOP) statistics from the IMF.5 We then
extend our original analysis in significant ways by asking three main questions: Is there any direct
effect of the legal system on foreign investments other than through its effect on institutions? Is
there any role for policy over institutions? Does institutional quality influence the volatility of
capital flows?
    Our evidence shows that the historical legal origin of a country has a direct impact on capital
inflows during 1970–2000. We interpret this finding as evidence that legal origins measure different
components of institutional quality, such as investor protection. What about policies? There is an
important distinction between policies and institutions. Institutions are a set of rules constraining
human behavior.6 Policies are choices made within a political and social structure, i.e., within a set
of institutions. As mentioned, we find institutional quality to have a first order effect over policies
as a determinant of capital flows. Given this, it is important to know if there is any role left for
policymaking. In order to investigate this question, we look at the changes in the level of capital
inflows and regress them on the policy changes and institutional quality changes from the first half

   2
     They also investigate the determinants of bilateral bank flows from 13 industrialized source countries to 83 host
countries showing similar results.
   3
     The institutional quality is measured as a composite political safety index. It is the sum of all the components
rated by an independent agency PRS Group in the International Country Risk Guide (ICRG). The components are:
government stability, internal conflict, external conflict, no-corruption, militarized politics, religious tensions, law and
order, ethnic tensions, democratic accountability, and bureaucratic quality.
   4
     See Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001, 2002) for the historical determinants of current institutions.
   5
     AKV calculate inflows using data on foreign-owned stocks estimated by Lane and Milessi-Feretti (1999, 2001)
and Kraay, Loayza, Serven, Ventura (2000).
   6
     See North (1994, 1995).



                                                             2
to the second half of the sample period. In those regressions, both changes in institutions and policy
variables, such as inflation, capital controls, and financial development, are shown to have a role
in explaining the changes in capital inflows. This result has important policy implications in the
sense that improving institutions and domestic policies can increase the inward foreign investment
to a country over time.
       Finally, we examine the determinants of the volatility of capital flows and study whether insti-
tutions and policies play a role in reducing the instability in the international financial markets.
Theoretical research has linked capital flows volatility to periods of liberalization. One argument is
that the unprecedented globalization of the securities market in the 1990s resulted in high volatil-
ity of capital flows.7 Other researchers model how frictions in the international financial markets
together with weak fundamentals lead to excessive volatility of capital flows.8 The empirical work
focuses more on financial crises. That literature shows that bad policies, such as fiscal deficits,
inflation, and bank fragility seem to matter for the financial crises, which may be regarded as
episodes of extreme volatility.9 Our evidence suggests that both low institutional quality and bad
policies, in particular bad monetary policies, have played a role explaining the long-run volatility
of capital flows during 1970–2000.10
       The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a preliminary discussion on capital mo-
bility, institutions and policies. Section 3 presents extensive data and overviews the stylized facts
related to capital flows mobility and volatility of these flows during 1970–2000. Section 4 presents
results on the determinants of capital flows, changes in capital flows overtime and capital flows
volatility. Section 5 concludes.

   7
      See Calvo and Mendoza (2000a, 2000b) and Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2000).
   8
      See Chari and Kehoe (2003).
    9
      See Frankel and Rose (1996), Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999), Corsetti, Pesenti and Roubini (2001), Kaminsky
(2003), Frankel and Wei (2004). McKinnon and Pill (1996) model how financial liberalization together with distortions
can make boom-bust cycles even more pronounced by fuelling lending booms that lead to the eventual collapse of
the banking system. Aizenman (2004) links financial crises to financial opening. Other researchers have found
that stabilization programs cause large capital inflows at the early stages of the exchange-rate-stabilization reforms,
followed by high capital flows reversals when the lack of credibility behind the peg fuels an attack against the domestic
currency. See Calvo and Vegh (1999).
   10
      Eichengreen, Hausmann and Panizza (2003) examine the relation between original sin (the inability of countries
to borrow abroad in their own currencies) and capital flows volatility for 33 countries. The work by Gavin and
Hausmann (1999) and Gavin, Hausmann and Leiderman (1997) establish the volatility patterns for Latin American
countries up to the early 1990s and relates them to external shocks and internal policies; see also the IADB Report
(1995).




                                                           3
2         Capital Flows and Institutions

Despite the surge in capital mobility over the last decade, capital flows from rich to poor countries
have been at much lower levels than predicted by the standard neoclassical models.11 This particular
pattern is usually referred to as the “Lucas paradox.”12 Lucas (1990) examines the question
of international capital movements from the perspective of rich and poor countries. Under the
standard assumptions—such as countries producing the same goods with the same constant returns
to scale production function, same factors of production and same technology— and where there is
free capital mobility, new investment will occur only in the poorer economy, and this will continue
to be true until the returns to capital in every location are equalized. Hence, Lucas argues that
given the implications of the frictionless neoclassical theory, the fact that more capital does not
flow from rich countries to poor countries constitutes a “paradox.”
         Lucas’ work has spawned an extensive theoretical literature. Researchers, including Lucas him-
self, show that with slight modifications of the basic neoclassical theory, such as changing the pro-
duction structure, adding an internationally immobile factor such as human capital, or introducing
frictions, the “paradox” disappears. The main theoretical explanations for the “Lucas paradox,”
can be broadly grouped into two categories.13 The first group includes differences in fundamentals
that affect the production structure of the economy. Researchers have explored the role of omitted
factors of production, government policies, institutions, and differences in technology.14 The second
group of explanations emphasizes international capital market imperfections, mainly sovereign risk
and asymmetric information. Although capital is potentially productive and has a high return in

    11
     Section 3 documents this and other facts related to international capital flows.
    12
     The “Lucas paradox,” the lack of flows from rich to poor countries, is related to some of the major puzzles
in the literature: the high correlation between savings and investment in OECD countries (the Feldstein-Horioka
puzzle); the lack of investment in foreign capital markets by home country residents (the home bias puzzle); the low
correlations of consumption growth across countries (the lack of risk sharing puzzle). All of these puzzles deal with
the question of the lack of international capital flows. See Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000) for an overview of the major
puzzles in international economies.
  13
     For a recent overview of the different explanations behind the “Lucas Paradox,” see Reinhart and Rogoff (2004).
  14
     For the role of different production functions, see King and Rebelo (1993); for the role of government policies,
see Razin and Yuen (1994); for the role of institutions see Tornell and Velasco (1992); for the role of total factor
productivity (TFP), see Glick and Rogoff (1995) and Kalemli-Ozcan et al. (2005). Note that it is very difficult to
differentiate both theoretically and empirically between the effect of institutions and the effect of TFP on investment
opportunities, given that institutional quality is also a determinant of TFP. Prescott (1998) argues that the efficient
use of the currently operating technology or the resistance to the adoption of new ones depends on the “arrangements”
a society employs. Kalemli-Ozcan et al. (2005) study capital flows between U.S. states, where there is a common
institutional structure. They show these flows to be consistent with a simple neoclassical model with total factor
productivity (TFP) that varies across states and over time and where capital freely moves across state borders. In
this framework capital flows to states that experience a relative increase in TFP.




                                                          4
developing countries, it does not flow there because of market failures.15
       Empirical research on the “Lucas paradox” is rather limited. As far as indirect evidence goes,
O’Rourke and Williamson (1999) find that before World War I British capital chased European
emigrants, when both were seeking cheap land and natural resources. Clemens and Williamson
(2004), using data on British investment in 34 countries during the 19th century, show that two
thirds of the historical British capital exports went to the labor-scarce New World and only about
one quarter to labor abundant Asia and Africa for similar reasons. Direct evidence is provided by
AKV, who investigate the role of the different explanations for the lack of inflows of capital (FDI,
portfolio equity, and debt) from rich to poor countries—the “paradox.” Using cross country re-
gressions, and paying particular attention to endogeneity issues, AKV show that during 1970−2000
institutional quality is the most important causal variable explaining the “Lucas paradox.”
       What about pre-1970 capital flows? Obstfeld and Taylor (2004) characterize four different
periods in terms of the “U-shaped” evolution of capital mobility.16 An upswing in capital mobility
occurred from 1880 to 1914 during the Gold Standard period. Before 1914, capital movements were
free and flows reached unprecedented levels. The international financial markets broke up during
World War I. In the 1920s, policymakers around the world tried to reconstruct the international
financial markets. Britain returned to the gold standard in 1925 and led the way to restoring
the international gold standard for a short period. Capital mobility increased between 1925 and
1930. As the world economy collapsed into depression in the 1930s, so did the international capital
markets. World War II was followed by a period of limited capital mobility. Capital flows began to
increase starting in the 1960s, and further expanded in the 1970s after the demise of the Bretton
Woods system. In terms of the “Lucas paradox,” Obstfeld and Taylor (2004) argue that capital was
somewhat biased towards the rich countries in the first global capital market boom in pre-1914, but
it is even more so today. In the pre-1914 boom, there was little difference between net flows and
gross flows because most of the flows were uni-directional from rich core to the periphery. Post 1970,
however, gross flows (both inflows and outflows) increased tremendously. But net flows (inflows
minus outflows) held constant at relatively low levels for the last thirty years. This is consistent
with the fact that most flows are between rich countries (so-called north-north as opposed to north-
south). Obstfeld and Taylor (2004) conclude that modern capital flows are mostly “diversification
finance” rather than “development finance.”

  15
     Gertler and Rogoff (1990) show that asymmetric information problems might cause a reversal in the direction of
capital flows relative to the perfect information case. Gordon and Bovenberg (1996) develop a model with asymmetric
information that explains the differences in corporate taxes and, hence, differences in real interest rates.
  16
     See also Eichengreen (2003), and O’Rourke and Williamson (1999).


                                                        5
    If the “Lucas paradox” characterized to a certain extent the pre-1914 global capital market,
and if it persists today to the extent that poorer countries receive even less flows than during the
pre-1914 boom, what is the explanation? We argue that it is differences in institutional quality
among the poor and rich countries. Institutions are the rules of the game in a society. They
consist of both informal constraints (traditions, customs) and formal rules (regulations, laws, and
constitutions). They create the incentive structure of an economy. Institutions are understood to
affect economic performance through their effect on investment decisions by protecting the property
rights of entrepreneurs against the government and other segments of society and preventing elites
from blocking the adoption of new technologies. In general, weak property rights owing to poor
quality institutions can lead to lack of productive capacities or uncertainty of returns in an economy.
    Lucas (1990) argues that “political risk” cannot explain the lack of flows before 1945 since dur-
ing that time most poor countries were subject to European legal arrangements imposed through
colonialism. He uses the specific example of India to argue that Indian investors were governed by
the same rules and regulations as investors in the U.K. However, the recent work on institutions
and growth by Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001, 2002) illustrates how conditions in the
colonies shaped today’s institutions. The British institutions in India do not necessarily have the
same quality as the British institutions in the U.S. and Australia. They argue that the identity of
the colonizer or the legal origin do not matter in terms of shaping institutions, but whether the
European colonialists could safely settle in a particular location. If the European settlement was
discouraged by diseases or surplus extraction was beneficial via an urbanized and prosperous popu-
lation, the Europeans set up worse institutions. This is also consistent with Reinhart and Rogoff’s
(2004) argument, who emphasize the relationship between sovereign risk and historical defaults and
conclude that sovereign risk must be the explanation for the “Lucas paradox.” Historically bad
institutions are strong predictors of sovereign risk and, hence, historical serial default.
    In the next section we present an overview of the general patterns of international capital
mobility and capital flows volatility over the last 30 years. These data show that, despite the
dramatic increase in capital flows over the last two decades, most capital flows to rich countries.


3     International Capital Flows: 1970−2000

3.1   Data

We use data on annual capital flows from the International Financial Statistics (IFS) issued by the
International Monetary Fund (IMF). Although there are other data sources, the IMF, IFS provides


                                                   6
the most comprehensive and comparable data on international capital flows.17 These data are
described in detail in Appendix.
       From the perspective of the financial account (formerly called the capital account), one usually
thinks of changes in liabilities as positive (inflows) and changes assets as negative (outflows). In
practice, both changes in liabilities and assets are reported as net of any disinvestment and con-
sequently both can have any sign. In the balance of payments accounts, an increase (decrease) in
liabilities to foreigners is entered as positive (negative) while an increase (decrease) in foreign assets
held by locals is entered as negative (positive).18,19 Following this convention, net flows of capital
are calculated as the sum of the flows of foreign claims on domestic capital (change in liabilities)
and the flows of domestic claims on foreign capital (change in assets) in a given year. Gross flows
of capital are calculated as the sum of the absolute value of the flows of foreign claims on domestic
capital and the absolute value of the flows of domestic claims on foreign capital in a given year.
Hence, they are always positive.
       The main categories of capital flows are foreign direct investment (FDI), portfolio equity in-
vestment, and debt flows. In what follows, we describe the definition and measurement of these
categories in great detail.


3.1.1      Total Equity Flows

For FDI, we use direct investment abroad (line 78bdd) and direct investment in reporting economy
(line 78bed). These categories include equity capital, reinvested earnings, other capital and financial

  17
      The Balance of Payments (BOP) statistics, also issued by the IMF, presents the same data. But only BOP
presents detailed data for portfolio equity investment and portfolio equity securities. There are two presentations of
the BOP data: Analytical and Standard. IFS and BOP Analytical present the same data and report “exceptional
financing” as a separate line. BOP Standard, on the other hand, does not report “exceptional financing” as a separate
line and instead includes it in the “other investment” category. Items reported under “exceptional financing” vary
from country to country and are described in the country profiles in the corresponding BOP manual.
   18
      The balance of payment is a record of a country’s transactions with the rest of the world. The financial account
within the balance of payments, broadly speaking, keeps track of transactions in financial assets. It reports changes
in the asset position (assets and liabilities) of a country vis a vis the rest of the world. For example, if a U.S. firm
imports goods from Switzerland for $10M and pays with a check drawn on a U.S. bank, the corresponding transaction
in the financial account is recorded as an increase in U.S. liabilities to foreigners (a credit of $10M). If the payment is
drawn against an account the U.S. firm has in a Swiss bank, the corresponding transaction in the financial account
is recorded as a reduction in U.S. assets (a credit of $10M). Note that a country’s balance of payment record is kept
according to the principles of double entry book keeping. The corresponding balancing transaction would be a debit
(-$10M) in the current account (import of goods).
   19
      A specific example is as follows: On September 1st, 1998, as part of a broader set of policies to restrict capital
outflows, the Malaysian government eliminated the offshore trading of the Malaysian ringgit by requiring all ringgit
offshore to be repatriated within a month. By the end of 1998 the account other investment was -4604 million U.S.
dollars. This amount, among other transactions, reflects the repatriation of the ringgit, which will show as a reduction
in Malaysian liabilities.



                                                            7
derivatives associated with various intercompany transactions between affiliated enterprises. For
portfolio equity investment, we use equity security assets (line 78bkd) and equity security liabilities
(line 78bmd) which include shares, stock participations, and similar documents (such as American
Depository Receipts) that usually denote ownership of equity.
      Direct investments include greenfield investments and equity participation giving a controlling
stake. When a foreign investor purchases a local firm’s securities without exercising control over
the firm, the investment is regarded as a portfolio investment. The IMF classifies an investment
as direct if a foreign investor holds at least 10 percent of a local firm’s equity while the remaining
equity purchases are classified under portfolio equity investment. In the regression analysis, we do
not distinguish between minority and majority shareholders, as this distinction is not important
to our analysis. In addition, because of missing or lack of portfolio data (some countries tend not
to receive portfolio flows, in part due to lack of functioning stock markets), we prefer to use total
equity flows in the analysis, which is the sum of flows of FDI and flows of portfolio equity.


3.1.2      Debt Flows

For debt flows, we use debt security assets (IFS line 78bld) and debt security liabilities (line 78bnd)
as well as other investment assets (line 78bhd) and other investment liabilities (line 78bid). Debt se-
curities include bonds, debentures, notes, and money market or negotiable debt instruments. Other
investments include all financial transactions not covered in direct investment, portfolio investment,
financial derivatives, or other assets. Major categories are trade credits, loans, transactions in cur-
rency and deposits, and other assets.
      Note that the IMF data include both private and public issuers and holders of debt securities.
Although the IMF presents some data divided by monetary authorities, general government, banks
and other sectors, this information is unfortunately not available for most countries for long periods
of time. The World Bank’s Global Development Finance database, which focuses on the liability
side, provides data on official and private creditors but not on the debtors. These data are available
only for developing countries. As Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2001) note, for developing countries
there are discrepancies between the loan flows reported in the IMF BOP Statistics and the changes
in external debt stocks as reported by the World Bank’s Global Development Finance Database.20

 20
      We thank Gian-Maria Milesi-Ferretti for pointing this out to us and helping us with the data in general.




                                                          8
3.1.3    Data Issues

Although the IMF data are the most comprehensive data, there are several issues associated with the
compilation of the BOP Statistics, as discussed in greater detail by Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2001).
Substantial data are missing for many countries, in particular developing countries. In addition,
some countries do not report data for all forms of capital flows. Unfortunately, it is difficult to verify
whether the data are in fact missing as opposed to simply being zero. For example, portfolio equity
data for most countries were negligible until recently. There are additional misreporting issues
related to the fact that several countries tend to report data for liabilities only and no data for
assets. This is particularly the case for foreign direct investment flows. Some of these data, reported
in the liability line, seem to correspond to net flows, i.e., liabilities minus assets. For debt data, there
are additional issues. Consequent to the debt crisis there are a number of measurement problems
related to different methodologies for recording non-payments, rescheduling, debt forgiveness, and
reductions.21 Finally, the time coverage of the data varies substantially from country to country.
Most developed countries begin reporting data in the early 1970s, and a substantial subset of
developing countries in the mid 1970s. For other countries, data are not available until the mid
1980s or early 1990s.


3.1.4    Stocks versus Flows and Valuation Effects

The IMF, IFS reports BOP transactions as flows of equity and debt. In 1997, the IMF began to
report international investment position for each country, that is, the stocks. However stocks are
not just cumulative flows but they also depend capital gains and losses, defaults, i.e., on valuation
adjustments. These stocks reported by the IMF are reported by countries themselves. Some
calculate them in a pretty sophisticated fashion (surveys etc), while others cumulate flows with
valuation adjustments. Kraay, Loayza, Serven, and Ventura (2000) (KLSV) and Lane and Milesi-
Ferretti (1999, 2001) (LM) construct consistent estimates of foreign assets and liabilities and their
subcomponents for different countries in the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s, paying particular attention
to these valuation effects. LM estimate stocks of equity and foreign direct investment based on
the IMF flow data adjusted to reflect changes in financial market prices and exchange rates. In
order to estimate FDI stocks, the authors accumulate flows and adjust for the effects of exchange
rate changes. For equity stocks, they adjust for changes in the end of year U.S. dollar value of the
domestic stock market. KLSV argue against the valuation of stocks using financial market prices

  21
     As noted by Lane and Milessi-Feretti (2001) these issues create large discrepancies among debt data reported by
different methodologies.


                                                         9
maintaining that capital listed on the stock market and the corresponding share prices—especially
in developing countries—are not representative of the stock of capital of a country or of the value
of a firm. Instead, they use the price of investment goods in local currency, which is the investment
deflator. They also adjust for exchange rate changes. LM found the correlation between the first
difference of foreign claims on capital and current account to be generally high but significantly
below unity for several countries, confirming the importance of valuation adjustments.


3.2      Some Stylized Facts

We express all flows in 1995 U.S. dollars using the U.S. consumer price index (CPI) taken from the
World Bank, World Development Indicators. We divide these flows by the corresponding country’s
population taken from the same source. We believe that data expressed as real dollars per capita
are consistent with the neoclassical theory and provide a better picture of the evolution of the
global capital markets over the last three decades. In terms of the sample, we exclude countries
with populations of less than half a million. Small countries tend to distort the picture of capital
flows per capita and the volatility thereof relative to the other countries in the sample. We have
data on 72 countries for FDI, 68 countries for portfolio equity, and 122 for debt flows.22
       Total inflows of capital per capita as well as each of the components increased substantially
throughout the sample period for most of our countries. Average inflows of capital per capita
within our sample grew by 4.8% per year during the sample period. There is, however, variability
in terms of the composition. Figure 1 plots the evolution of the composition of inflows of capital
per capita for the countries in our sample.23 The increasing role of FDI and portfolio flows is
evident. Based on 72 countries, average inflows of FDI per capita grew by 6.2% over the last thirty
years and became the main source of private capital for developing countries during the 1990s. For
our sample of 68 countries, average inflows of portfolio equity per capita grew by 9.3%. Finally,
based on 122 countries, average inflows of debt per capita grew by 3.3%. Although their role is
quite dominant, debt inflows clearly contracted following the 1980s debt crisis. Figure 2 plots the
evolution of the composition of the gross flows per capita. The patterns overall are similar to those
in Figure 1.
       Figures 3, 4, and 5 plot the evolution of FDI, portfolio equity, and debt flows per capita
respectively. FDI flows have remained relatively stable for most of the sample period, then increased

  22
     In calculating total equity flows, we treat missing portfolio equity data as zero. We then add zero and FDI for
that country. So we also have 72 countries for the total equity flows. The 4 countries with FDI data but no portfolio
equity data are Bolivia, Central African Republic, Mauritius, and Papua New Guinea.
  23
     See Appendix Tables 13 and 14 for the list of countries.


                                                         10
steadily around the mid 1990s. Portfolio equity flows rose as well but fluctuated more. Debt flows
also fluctuated, increasing during the 1970s, then crashing following the wake of the 1980s debt crisis
and reviving only in the 1990s. Figures 4 and 5 show that net portfolio flows and net debt flows
become negative after 1995, a circumstance driven mainly by industrialized countries. With the
few countries, in particular the U.S., almost all of the developed countries have negative financial
accounts including Japan, Norway, Switzerland, Belgium, and Luxembourg. This is consistent with
the results of Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2001) which show net foreign asset positions on average to
be increasing since 1995 for developed countries.
   Figure 6a shows total equity inflows, which is the sum of inflows of FDI and inflows of portfolio
equity investment for 20 OECD and 52 developing countries. The difference between the two is a
stark demonstration of north-north flows, or the “Lucas Paradox.” Figure 6b shows the share of
total equity inflows to total capital inflows for the OECD and developing countries. Since 1990,
almost half of the total inflows were composed of FDI and portfolio equity investment for both rich
and poor countries. Total equity flows are clearly an important part of the big picture, especially
for poor countries.
   Tables 1–4 present a variety of descriptive statistics on the various forms of capital flows for
our sample of countries from 1970 to 2000. Table 1 provides descriptive statistics for inflows of
capital per capita. Total capital inflows vary from -44.94 to 8320.9 with a mean of 406.29 dollars
per capita. During the sample period, debt inflows averaged 284.07 dollars per capita; FDI inflows
169.44 dollars per capita, and total equity inflows 232.70 dollars per capita. Table 2 shows the
increasing role of FDI and portfolio inflows per capita over debt inflows per capita for all regions
(Sub-Saharan Africa is the exception, where all type of inflows have a declining trend). These
trends notwithstanding, the bulk of capital still flows to high income countries which attract 80%
of all capital inflows.
   Table 3 presents summary statistics on the volatility of inflows of capital per capita. The
volatility of inflows of capital is calculated as the standard deviation of the corresponding inflows
per capita divided by the mean of gross flows over the sample period, which is the average of
the absolute value of the inflows and the absolute value of the outflows per capita (hence always
positive). Normalization prevents spuriously higher volatility in the recent period due to higher
flow volume. FDI flows are generally less volatile than portfolio flows as they tend to be driven by
long term considerations. Debt flows also exhibit higher volatility relative to FDI. Table 4 shows
the volatility of the different forms of inflows of capital to have been lower during the 1990s. Inflows
of portfolio and debt experienced higher volatility during the 1980s consequent to the debt crises


                                                  11
and the increasing role of portfolio flows in the aftermath of the crises. As expected, the volatility
of each component of inflows of capital is lower for high income countries than for developing
countries. The volatility of inflows has remained relatively constant for South Asian countries,
with a slight increase during the 1990s driven by increased volatility of inflows of portfolio in the
period before and after the Asian crisis of the late 1990s. Recently opened up countries in Eastern
Europe experienced a dramatic increase in the volatility of all forms of inflows of capital during the
1990s. For Latin America, on the other hand, the 1980s were turbulent years mostly driven by the
debt crisis. The volatility of inflows of capital has declined during the 1990s. A similar pattern is
observed for Sub-Saharan Africa. The volatility of inflows of capital increased substantially in the
1990s for the Middle-Eastern and North African countries.24


4         Empirical Analysis

4.1        Determinants of Capital Flows

For the regression analysis, we exclude countries with substantial missing data. In addition, there
are various outliers in terms of capital flows per capita. This, of course, should be considered in
the econometric analysis. Table 5 lists the countries used in the regression analysis.25
         The dependent variable is inflows of capital per capita, which is inflows of total equity (FDI and
portfolio equity) investment averaged over the sample period. We believe inflows to be a better
measure for capturing the foreign investors’ prospective points of view. We also believe per capita
measures to be more in line with the theoretical literature. We prefer to abstract our analysis from
debt flows for the following concerns. First, as mentioned in Section 3.1, following the debt crisis

    24
      Note that a very volatile form of foreign capital is foreign aid which is driven by a host of factors as shown by
Alesina and Dollar (2000) and not the focus of this study.
   25
      We keep track of the series of countries that have data throughout the whole sample period as shown in Appendix
Table 15. The table provides descriptive statistics for a sub-sample of 47 countries for which there is data for both total
equity and debt flows throughout the different decades. This sub-sample exhibits similar overall patterns with our
regression sample. The 47 countries of this sub-sample are shown in bold letters in Appendix Table 13. Unfortunately,
we cannot use this sample in the regressions because there are several outliers. In addition, some of our independent
variables do not exist for this sub-sample. Bene-Lux and Singapore are outliers in terms of large inflows. Bahrain,
Botswana, Gabon, Burkina Faso, and Niger do not have human capital data. Central African Republic, Fiji, Libya,
Mauritius, Swaziland, and Chad are outliers in terms of other independent variables. This leaves us with a sample of
34 countries. In order to increase the number of observations we add the countries shown in italics. Although data
for these countries start later in the sample period, there is enough data to construct averages over the period. Out
of these 23 late starters, we cannot use Burundi, Switzerland, China, Kuwait, Latvia, Mauritania, Namibia, Slovenia,
Trinidad and Tobago, and Uruguay. Switzerland and Kuwait are outliers in terms of large inflows. China is an outlier
in terms of very low levels of GDP per capita. Latvia and Slovenia do not have human capital data. The rest are
outliers for the other independent variables. So we add the remaining 13 to our 34 and have our 47 country sample
for the regression analysis as shown in table 5. Ending up again with a sample of 47 is pure coincidence.


                                                            12
there are important measurement discrepancies in the debt flows data versus the changes in the debt
stocks data.26 Second, in general, debt flows tend to be shaped by different decisions than equity
flows. Specifically, flows of debt tend to be shaped by government decisions to a greater extent
than flows of equity.27 In addition, in many countries bank loans have usually been intermediated
through poorly regulated financial systems. Hence, in many cases this form of external capital
has not responded to market incentives.28 As mentioned above, we would like to capture market
decisions.29
       Table 6 provides descriptive statistics for our regression sample of 47 countries averaged over
the sample period 1970–2000. Following AKV, we use the initial level of human capital (years of
total schooling in total population) and institutional quality averaged over the sample period as
independent variables to capture the fundamentals of the economy. We use International Country
Risk Guide’s (ICRG) political safety variables as our measure of institutional quality. This is a
composite index is the sum of the indices of government stability, internal conflict, external conflict,
no-corruption, non-militarized politics, protection from religious tensions, law and order, protection
from ethnic tensions, democratic accountability, and bureaucratic quality.
       In the empirical capital flows literature, distance has been used as a proxy for the international
capital market failures, mainly asymmetric information.30 We construct a variable called distant-
ness, which is the weighted average of the distances from the capital city of a particular country to
the capital cities of the other countries, using the GDP shares of the other countries as weights.31
       We use additional variables on the right-hand side to capture domestic distortions associated
with government policies and also with the financial structure of the economy. These are inflation
volatility, capital controls, sovereign risk, corporate tax, and bank credit all averaged over the sam-
ple period. Inflation volatility captures macroeconomic instability. It is measured as the standard
deviation divided by the mean of the inflation rate over the sample period. Normalization by mean

  26
     See Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2001).
  27
     Until the mid 1970s—following the shutting down of the international markets in the 1930s—debt flows to
most developing countries were generally restricted to government/international organizations-to-government loans.
During the late 1970s, banks replaced governments of industrial countries as lenders to developing countries. After
1982, following the debt crisis, official creditors once again dominated lending to developing countries. In addition,
throughout this period an important share of debt lending to developing countries was captured by governments.
  28
     See Henry and Lorentzen (2003) and Obstfeld and Taylor (2004).
  29
     Debt data include both private and government debt and it is difficult to break the debt data down by pri-
vate/public lender and recipient.
  30
     Portes and Rey (2005) use a similar interpretation of distance in the context of bilateral capital flows and Wei
and Wu (2002) in analyzing the determinants of FDI and bank lending. See also Coval and Moskowitz (1999, 2001).
  31
     We construct this variable following Kalemli-Ozcan, Sorensen, and Yosha (2003). We use Arcview software to get
latitude and longitude of each capital city and calculate the great arc distance between each pair. The GDP weights
capture the positive relation between trade volume and GDP.


                                                         13
is crucial given the differences in average inflation levels across time for the different countries. Our
capital controls measure is the average of four dummy variables constructed using data collected
by the IMF’s Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions (AREAER).
These dummy variables are; exchange arrangements, payments restrictions on current transactions
and on capital transactions, and repatriation requirements for export proceeds. Bank credit is
the share of credit provided by deposit money banks, which includes commercial banks and other
financial institutions entitled to accept deposits from the public.32
       It is clear that there is extensive cross-sectional variation on these variables. The institutional
quality index varies from 3.4 to 7.3 with a mean of 5.5. Human capital varies from 1 to 10 years
with a mean of 4.7 years. Table 7 presents the correlation matrix. Some of our independent
variables are highly correlated, such as institutional quality and human capital, and sovereign risk
and institutional quality. Hence, it is essential to employ a multiple regression framework with
many robustness tests.33
       Table 8 shows the results. Institutional quality, human capital and distantness are all important
determinants of capital inflows.34 Other potential determinants turn out to be insignificant.35
Sovereign risk is borderline significant when distantness is left out. Obviously, both are capturing
information/market frictions. Figure 7 shows the partial correlation plot for the Institutional
Quality variable for the regression shown in column (1) of Table 8. The slope of the fitted line is
5.56 as shown in that column.36 The strong positive relation between the institutional quality and
the inflows of capital per capita is evidently not due to the outliers.
       What about endogeneity? It is possible that capital inflows affect the institutional quality of
a country. More inflows can generate incentives to reform and create an investor friendly envi-
ronment by improving property rights. Moreover, because most institutional quality measures are

  32
      In AKV we used a wider range of additional right hand side variables, such as GDP per capita, inflation,
government consumption, government budget, trade openness (share of exports plus imports in GDP), restrictions
on foreign investment, incentives on foreign investment, government infrastructure (percent of paved roads), stock
market capitalization, reuters (number of times the country’s name is mentioned in Reuters), foreign banks (share of
foreign banks in total), and accounting (an index of accounting standards of corporate firms). In that work, out of
all these variables only sovereign risk, corporate tax, and bank credit were significant depending on the specification.
Hence, we check their role here again.
   33
      We refer the reader to AKV for a sensitivity analysis with a wider range of variables.
   34
      In AKV, we also explored the role of each of the components of the composite index that is used as a proxy for
the institutional quality. We find institutional quality indicators that are closer proxies of property rights protection,
such as the no-corruption index and protection from expropriation, to be important determinants of capital inflows.
   35
      We also investigate the effect of the exchange rate regime. The results remain the same.
   36
      We first regressed inflows of capital per capita on human capital and distantness. We took the residuals and
regressed them on the residuals from a regression of institutional quality on human capital and distantness. Frisch-
Waugh theorem says the coefficient from this regression is exactly the same as the one in the multiple regression.
The figure plots these two sets of residuals against each other.


                                                           14
constructed ex-post, analysts might have a natural bias towards ‘assigning’ better institutions to
countries with higher capital inflows. One way to solve this problem is to find variables not subject
to reverse causality that can account for the institutional variation.37 AKV instrument institutional
quality with its historical determinants mainly with settler mortality rates from Acemoglu, John-
son, and Robinson (2001, 2002) (AJR) and show that the effect of institutional quality on capital
inflows is causal.38 AJR argue that the historical mortality rates of European settlers in colonized
countries is a good instrument for current institutions of former colonies since if the European
settlement there was discouraged by diseases then the Europeans set up worse institutions.
    In this paper we investigate whether or not there is any direct effect of some other historical
determinants of institutions such as legal origins and legal system. La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes,
Shleifer, and Vishny (1997, 1998) emphasize the importance of the historical legal origins in shaping
the current financial institutions. They examine the effect of legal origin on the laws governing
investor protection, the enforcement of these laws, and the extent of concentration of firm ownership
across countries. Most countries’ legal rules, either through colonialism, conquest, or outright
borrowing, can be traced to one of four distinct European legal systems: English common law,
French civil law, German civil law, and Scandinavian civil law. These legal origin variables have
been adopted as exogenous determinants of institutional quality, in particular financial institutions,
in the economic growth literature. On the other hand, AJR claim that legal origin is a weak
instrument for institutional quality, in particular for institutions that protect property rights. They
claim it is hard to make a case that legal origins do not have any direct effect on the relevant outcome
variables such as income levels.39 Thus we investigate whether legal origins have a direct effect on
capital inflows in addition to their partial effect on institutional quality by adding legal origin as
an additional right hand side variable.
    Table 9 shows the results. As shown in columns (1)−(4) French legal origin has a negative
significant effect and British legal origin has a positive significant effect. It seems these effects are
first order in addition to institutions. If institutional quality is left out from the regressions, the

  37
     Another source of endogeneity can come from the possibility that both inflows and institutional quality might
be determined by an omitted third factor. We believe the extensive robustness analysis that is undertaken in AKV
shows that this is not the case.
  38
     AKV also use other instruments such as historical indicators of regime type and political constraints to the
executive power from the Polity data set and the fraction of the population speaking English.
  39
     AJR stress that successful instruments have to be theoretically excludable from the empirical model used by the
econometrician and undertaking overidentification tests are not enough. In addition overidentification tests have low
power in general. AJR show that in their first stage regression French legal origin is associated with worse institutions.
But in their second stage regression, where French legal origin is included as one of the explanatory variables and
institutions are instrumented with settler mortality rates, French legal origin has a positive effect on income. The
net effect of this variable on income (directly and indirectly via better institutional quality) is positive.


                                                           15
British legal origin variable is only significant at 10% level. We do not tabulate the details but we
found in our data that British legal origin is negatively correlated with institutions and this leads to
a downward bias in British legal origin when institutional quality is omitted. Column (5) displays
an IV regression that instruments institutions with log settler mortality rates from AJR, which is
only available for 21 ex-colonies in our sample.40 If there is a direct effect of legal origin on capital
inflows we expect it to be significant in this regression. We find this to be the case.41 Column
(5) also re-establishes the causal effect of institutions, which is already shown by AKV. Column
(6) reports the corresponding OLS regression for comparison. We only show the IV regression in
column (5) with British legal origin since our sample is composed of only British and French legal
origin countries. Thus, the corresponding IV regression with French legal origin is exactly the same
as in column (5) with a reverse sign on the French legal origin variable.42 We also investigated the
direct effect of the variables proposed by La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1997,
1998) to capture investor protection, such as shareholder rights, and found similar results. The
partial correlation plots given in Figures 8 and 9 show that the significant effects of French and
British legal origins are not due to the outliers but rather driven by the countries one would expect,
such as Turkey for French origin, and Australia for British origin.


4.2      Determinants of Changes in Capital Flows

Our results thus far suggest that institutional quality has a first order effect over policies in explain-
ing the pattern of capital flows in the period 1970-2000. Is there any role of left for policies? Can
a country that improves its institutions or macroeconomic policies expect to receive more inflows?
To investigate these questions we run change regressions. We calculate the change in inflows per
capita as the difference between average capital inflows per capita over 1970−1993 and average
capital inflows per capita over 1994−2000. We did the same for the independent variables and
we regress changes on changes. The reason for this division of the sample is the fact that visible
improvements, if any, in institutional variables occur in the late 1990s as shown in Figure 10.43
       The results are given in Table 10. We only consider the 23 developing countries out of our 47
country sample since for the OECD the institutional changes are basically zero and this distorts the

  40
     The corresponding first stage regression reports a coefficient of −0.21 on settler mortality rates with a t-statistic
of − 4.09.
  41
     Note that this regression is an interpretable version of an overidentification test.
  42
     Institutional quality is estimated to have a higher coefficient in the IV regression since 2SLS regression corrects
for the measurement error that causes attenuation bias in the OLS regression.
  43
     At first, we cut the sample in the middle and calculated the change from 1970−1985 to 1986−2000. However,
given the time invariant nature of our variables, this way of dividing the sample do not provide us with much variation.


                                                           16
picture. The results suggest that a country that improves institutions, decreases capital controls
and increases its growth is going to receive more capital inflows.44 The change in institutions is
not always very significant though. This is not surprising given the small sample size and low time
variation in this variable. Of course we have to interpret the results with caution since most of these
right hand side variables are endogenous such as the change in GDP per capita. An interesting
result is the positive significant distantness. This variable enters in levels since differencing this
variable is going to capture only the change in GDP weights. The result suggests that information
frictions have become less important for capital inflows in the 1990s since even the “remote and
distant countries” receive higher capital inflows in the 1990s, which is exactly what we expect to
find. Overall, these results suggest that there is a role for improved policy and institutions.


4.3    Determinants of Capital Flows Volatility

A natural intermediate step towards understanding the link between capital flows and financial
crises is to look at the determinants of volatility of capital flows. There has not been many empirical
papers that look at the determinants of capital flows volatility. As a preliminary investigation of
the patterns in the data, we run cross-country regressions for the period 1970−2000. We measure
volatility as the standard deviation of inflows of total equity per capita divided by the mean gross
flows over the sample period.
    Table 11 shows our results. We do find a significant effect of institutional quality on the
volatility of the inflows of total equity. However, this effect is sensitive to inclusion of some other
independent variables such as sovereign risk and capital controls. We also find the coefficient of
inflation volatility to be positive and significant. It appears that countries with lower levels of
inflation volatility tend to experience lower levels of uncertainty in terms of the inflows of external
capital. Bank credit is positive and significant. This can be due to several reasons. First, as noted
in the introduction, the literature has related high volatility of capital flows and currency crisis to
bank fragility. Financial liberalization, when not followed by proper regulation and supervision can
lead to both greater capital flows intermediated through banks and greater bank credit and later
to abrupt reversals in capital flows.45 Moreover, the positive correlation between bank credit and
capital flows volatility might be due to cronyism in the banking sector.46 We also control for stock

   44
      Note however, that the IMF measure for capital controls does not control for the fact that legal restrictions are
sometimes circumvented. See Edwards (2001) for criticisms to the use of this index.
   45
      Henry and Lorentzen (2003) argue that liberalization of debt flows exposes countries to the risk of crises stemming
from sudden changes in investors’ sentiments. Equity market liberalizations, on the other hand, have promoted growth
in almost every liberalizing country.
   46
      This finding is consistent with Wei (2000) and Wei and Wu (2002). The authors show that corruption within a


                                                           17
market capitalization and trade openness, both of which come in as insignificant.47
    Figures 11−13 show the partial correlation plots for institutions, inflation volatility and bank
credit with slopes -0.42, 0.24, and 0.37 as shown in column (1) of table 11 respectively. Clearly, these
significant relations are not due to outliers and driven by volatile countries of Latin America and
Asia. The last two columns investigate the role of legal origins, which turn out to be insignificant.
This phenomenon might be due to the fact that they work their effect via institutions.
    Table 12 looks at the issue of measuring volatility. Our results might be due to the fact that
some countries have liberalized their financial accounts over the last 30 years and received huge
inflows creating volatility due to this volume and an upward trend, both of which may not be
captured by our normalization. We experiment with different ways to deal with these problems:
we use standard deviation of inflows, standard deviation of de-trended inflows, and normalized
versions of these measures. In columns (1) and (3) volatility is measured as the standard deviation
of inflows. In (2) and (4), it is normalized standard deviation of inflows. Normalization is performed
by the average gross flows. In (5) and (7), it is the standard deviation of de-trended inflows. De-
trending is performed by regressing inflows on a constant and a linear trend and using residuals
from that regression as a proxy for inflows. In (6) and (8) it is normalized standard deviation of
de-trended inflows. Normalization is performed by the average gross flows.48 As it is clear, de-
trending does not matter and what matters is normalization. Columns (3), (4), (7) and (8) control
for the level of inflows on the right hand side. The main conclusion is that normalization does a
good job of controlling the volume and trend effects of the level of inflows. Figure 14 plots the
partial correlation plot out of column (6), with slope 0.44. Although this is a tighter fit, there are
no important differences relative to Figure 11. Figure 15 plots the partial correlation from column
(1), with slope 11.56. Scandinavian countries evidently have high volatility due to volume and our
normalization takes care of this.
    Overall, the results suggest that institutional quality and macroeconomic policy play an impor-
tant role for capital flows volatility. We should note, however, that we are establishing correlations
more than causality. For example, inflation volatility is probably endogenous to the volatility of
capital inflows and to institutional quality. Higher volatility can also cause an increase in bank
credit or capital controls. Finding good instruments for the policy variables is a rather difficult
task and not the focus of this study.

country increases the loan-to-FDI ratio.
  47
     Other measures of credit market and capital market development in general such as liquid liabilities, and total
value traded are also insignificant.
  48
     We also investigated the effect of a quadratic trend. The results were similar.


                                                        18
5    Conclusions

Over the last thirty years, international capital flows have experienced tremendous growth. The
surge in capital flows, and in particular, the crises of the last decade have revived the debate over
the merits of international capital mobility. Our objective in this paper has been to overview
the main stylized facts behind capital flows mobility over the last thirty years and establish the
empirical determinants of capital flows and capital flows volatility. We find institutional quality
to be an important determinant of capital inflows. Historical legal origins have a direct effect on
capital inflows during the period 1970−2000. Policy plays a significant role in explaining changes
in the level of inflows and their volatility.




                                                 19
References



Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson (2001), “ The Colonial Origins of Com-
    parative Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic Review 91, 1369–
    1401.

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson (2002), “Reversal of Fortune: Geogra-
    phy and Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution,” The Quarterly
    Journal of Economics 117, 1231–1294.

Aizenman, Joshua (2004), “Financial Opening: Evidence and Policy Options,” in Challenges to
     Globalization. Analyzing the Economics, eds.: R. Baldwin and A.Winters. The University of
     Chicago Press, Chicago.

Alesina, Alberto and David Dollar (2000), “Who Gives Foreign Aid to Whom and Why?” Journal
      of Economic Growth 5, 33–64.

Alfaro, Laura, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan and Vadym Volosovych (2003), “Why Doesn’t Capital Flow
      from Rich to Poor Countries? An Empirical Investigation,” mimeo.

Bacchetta, Philippe and Eric Van Wincoop (2000), “Capital Flows to Emerging Markets: Liberal-
     ization, Overshooting, and Volatility,” in Capital Flows and The Emerging Economies, editor:
     S. Edwards. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Calvo, Guillermo, Leonardo Leiderman and Carmen Reinhart (1996), “Inflows of Capital to De-
     veloping Countries in the 1990s,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives 10, 123–139.

Calvo, Guillermo and Enrique Mendoza (2000a), “Regional Contagion and the Globalization of Se-
     curities Markets,” Journal of International Economics 51, 79-113.

Calvo, Guillermo and Enrique Mendoza (2000b), “Contagion, Globalization, and the Volatility of
     Capital Flows,” in Capital Flows and The Emerging Economies, editor: S. Edwards. The
     University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Calvo, Guillermo and Carlos Vegh (1999), “Inflation Stabilization in Chronic Inflation Countries,”
     in Handbook of Macroeconomics 1C, editors: J.B. Taylor and M. Woodford. North-Holland,
     Amsterdam.

Chari V. V., Patrick Kehoe (2003), “Hot Money,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Staff Re-
     port 228.

Clemens, Michael and Jeffrey G. Williamson (2004), “Wealth Bias in the First Global Capital Mar-
     ket Boom, 1870-1913,” Economic Journal, 114(127), 304-337.

Corsetti, Giancarlo, Paolo Pesenti, and Nouriel Roubini (2001), “Fundamental Determinants of the
     Asian Crisis: The Role of Financial Fragility and External Imbalances,” in Regional and Global
     Capital Flows: Macroeconomic Causes and Consequences, editors: T. Ito and A. Krueger.
     The University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

                                               20
Coval, Joshua and Tobias J. Moskowitz (1999), “Home Bias at Home: Local Equity Preferences in
     Domestic Portfolios,” Journal of Finance 54, 2045–2073.

Coval, Joshua and Tobias J. Moskowitz (2001), “The Geography of Investment: Informed Trading
     and Asset Prices,” Journal of Political Economy 109, 811–841.

Edwards, Sebastian (1991), “Capital Flows, Foreign Direct Investment, and Debt-Equity Swaps in
    Developing Countries,” in Capital Flows in the World Economy, editor: Horst Siebert. J.C.B.
    Mohr, Tubingen.

Edwards, Sebastian (2001), “Capital Mobility and Economic Performance: Are Emerging Economies
    Different?” NBER Working Paper 8076.

Eichengreen, Barry (2003), Capital Flows and Crises. The MIT Press, Cambridge.

Eichengreen, Barry, Ricardo Hausmann and Ugo Panizza (2003), “Currency Mismatches, Debt In-
     tolerance,and Original Sin: Why They Are Not the Same and Why it Matters” NBER Work-
     ing Paper 10036.

Frankel, Jeffrey and Shang-Jin Wei (2004), “Managing Macroeconomic Crises,” NBER Working
     Paper 10907.

Frankel, Jeffrey and Andrew Rose (1996), “Currency Crises in Emerging Markets: An Empirical
     Treatment,” Journal of International Economics 41, 351-366.

Gavin, Michael and Ricardo Hausmann (1999), “Preventing Crisis and Contagion: Fiscal and Fi-
     nancial Dimensions,” International Development Bank WP 401.

Gavin, Michael, Ricardo Hausmann and Leondardo Leiderman (1997), “The Macroeconomics of Cap-
     ital Flows to Latin America: Experience and Policy Issues,”in Volatile Capital: Taming their
     Impact on Latin America, editors: R. Hausmann and L. Rojas-Suarez, Washington D.C.
     Inter-American Development Bank.

Gertler, Mark and Kenneth Rogoff (1990), “North-South Lending and Endogeneous Domestic Cap-
     ital Market Inefficiencies,” Journal of Monetary Economics 26, 245–266.

Glick, Reuven and Kenneth Rogoff (1995), “Global versus Country-Specific Productivity Shocks
      and the Current Account,” Journal of Monetary Economics 35, 159-92.

Gordon, Roger H. and A. Lans Bovenberg (1996), “Why is Capital so Immobile Internationally?
     Possible Explanations and Implications for Capital Income Taxation?”American Economic
     Review 86, 1057–1075.

Henry, Peter B. and Peter L. Lorentzen (2003), “Domestic Capital Market Reform and Access to
     Global Finance: Making Markets Work,” NBER Working Paper , 10064.

Inter-American Development Bank (1995), Hacia una Economia menos Volatil. Progeso Economico
      y Social en American Latin: Informe, The Inter-American Development Bank, Washington
      D.C.



                                              21
International Monetary Fund (2001), International Financial Statistics, CD-ROM. The Interna-
      tional Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.

International Monetary Fund, Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restric-
      tions, issues from 1970 to 1997. The International Monetary Fund, Washington D.C.

Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem, Bent Sorensen and Oved Yosha (2003), “Risk Sharing and Industrial Spe-
     cialization: Regional and International Evidence,”American Economic Review 93, 903–918.

Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem, Bent Sorensen, Ariell Reshef, and Oved Yosha (2005), “Capital Flows and
     Productivity: Evidence from U.S. States,” NBER Working Paper 11301.

Kaminsky Graciella and Carmen Reinhart (1999), “The Twin Crises: The Causes of Banking and
    Balance of Payment Problems,” American Economic Review 89, 473-500.

Kaminsky, Graciella (2003), “Varieties of Currency Crises,” NBER Working Paper 10193.

King, Robert and Sergio Rebelo (1993), “Transitional Dynamics and Economic Growth in the Neo-
     classical Model,” American Economic Review 83, 908–931.

Kraay, Aart, Norman Loayza, Luis Serven, and Jaume Ventura (2000), “Country Portfolios,” NBER
     Working Paper 7795.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny (1998), “Law and
     Finance,”Journal of Political Economy 106, 1113–1155.

Lane, Philip (2004), “Empirical Perspectives on Long-Term External Debt,”Topics in Macroeco-
     nomics 4, 1–21.

Lane, Philip and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti (1999), “The External Wealth of Nations: Measures
     of Foreign Assets and Liabilities for Industrial and Developing Countries, IMF Working Paper.

Lane, Philip and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti (2001), “The External Wealth of Nations: Measures
     of Foreign Assets and Liabilities for Industrial and Developing Countries,”Journal of Inter-
     national Economics 55, 263–294.

Lucas, Robert (1990), “Why Doesn’t Capital Flow from Rich to Poor Countries?” American Eco-
     nomic Review 80, 92–96.

McKinnon, Ronald and Huw Pill (1996), “Credible Liberalization and International Capital Flows:
    The Overborrowing Syndrome,” in Financial Deregulation and Integration in East Asia, ed-
    itors: T. Ito and A. Kruger. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

North, Douglass C. (1994), “Economic Performance Through Time,”American Economic Review
     84, 359–368.

North, Douglass C. (1995), “Institutions,”Journal of Economic Perspective 5, 97–112.

Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff (2000), “The Six Major Puzzles in International Macroe-
     conomics: Is There a Common Cause?” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000, editors: B.
     Bernanke and K. Rogoff. The MIT Press, Cambridge.

                                               22
Obstfeld, Maurice and Alan M. Taylor (2004), Global Capital Markets Integration, Crisis, and Growth.
     Cambridge University Press 2004, Cambridge.

O’Rourke, Kevin H. and Jeffrey G. Williamson (1999), Globalization and History: The Evolution
    of a Nineteenth-Century Atlantic Economy. The MIT Press, Cambridge.

The Political Risk Services Group (2001), International Country Risk Guide. The PRS Group,
     New York.

Portes, Richard and Helene Rey (2005), “The Determinants of Cross-Border Equity Transaction
     Flows,” Journal of International Economics 65, 269-296.

Prasad Eswar S., Kenneth Rogoff, Shang-Jin Wei, and M. Ayhan Kose (2003), “Effects of Finan-
     cial Globalization on Developing Countries: Some Empirical Evidence,” IMF Occasional Pa-
     per No.220, Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund.

Prescott, Edward (1998), “Needed: A Theory of Total Factor Productivity,” International Eco-
     nomic Review 39, 525–552.

Razin, Assaf and Chi-Wa Yuen (1994), “Convergence in Growth Rates: a Quantitative Assessment
     of the Role of Capital Mobility and International Taxation,” in Capital Mobility: The Impact
     on Consumption, Investment, and Growth, editors: Leonardo Leiderman and Assaf Razin.
     Cambridge University Press, New York.

Reinhart, Carmen and Kenneth Rogoff (2004), “Serial Default and the “Paradox” of Rich to Poor
     Capital Flows,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 94, 52–58.

Tornell, Aaron and Andres Velasco (1992), “Why Does Capital Flow from Poor to Rich Countries?
     The Tragedy of the Commons and Economic Growth,” Journal of Political Economy 100,
     1208–1231.

Wei, Shang-Jin (2000), “Local Corruption and Global Capital Flows,”Brookings Papers in Eco-
     nomic Activity 2, 303–346.

Wei, Shang-Jin and Yi Wu (2002), “Negative Alchemy? Corruption, Composition of Capital Flows,
     and Currency Crises,” in Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets, editors: S. Ed-
     wards and J. Frankel. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

World Bank (2002), World Development Indicators, CD-ROM. The World Bank, Washington, DC.




                                               23
Appendix: Data

Foreign Direct Investment: Direct Investment abroad (line 78bdd) and Direct Investment in Re-
porting Economy, n.i.e (line 78bed) include equity capital, reinvested earnings, other capital and
financial derivatives associated with various intercompany transactions between affiliated enter-
prises. Excluded are inflows of direct investment capital into the reporting economy for exceptional
financing such as debt-for-equity swaps. We include only countries with data for both direct in-
vestment abroad and direct investment in the reporting economy.

Portfolio Equity Investment: Equity Securities Assets (line 78bkd) and Equity Securities Liabili-
ties (line 78bmd) include shares, stock participations, and similar documents (such as American
depository receipts) that usually denote ownership of equity. These are divided in monetary au-
thorities, general government, banks and other sectors. We calculate net portfolio equity flows only
for countries with data both for equity security assets and debt security liabilities.

Debt Flows: Debt Securities Assets (line 78bld) and Debt Securities Liabilities (line 78bnd) cover
(i) bonds, debentures, notes, etc (divided into monetary authorities, general government, banks,
and other sectors) and (ii) money market or negotiable debt instruments (divided into monetary
authorities, general government, banks, and other sectors). Other investment assets (line 78bhd)
and other investment liabilities (line 78bid) include all financial transactions not covered in direct
investment, portfolio investment, financial derivatives or other assets. Major categories are trade
credits, loans (divided in monetary authorities, general government, and banks), transactions in
currency and deposits (monetary authorities, general government, and banks), and other assets
(monetary authorities, general government, and banks). We first calculate total debt assets as the
sum of debt securities assets and other investment assets; total debt liabilities correspond to the
sum of debt securities liabilities and other investment liabilities. We calculate net total debt flows
only for countries that had information for both total debt liabilities and total debt assets.

Total Equity Flows: Sum of foreign direct investment and portfolio equity flows.

Volatility of Inflows: Standard deviation of the corresponding inflows per capita divided by the
average of the absolute value of the inflows and outflows of capital per capita.


Independent Variables
Bank Credit: 1970-00, Average value of claims of deposit money banks on nonfinancial domestic
sectors as share of claims of central bank and deposit money banks on nonfinancial domestic sec-
tors, in percent.

Capital Controls: 1971-97, The mean value of four dummy variables: 1) Exchange Arrangements:
separate exchange rates for some or all capital transactions and/or some or all invisibles; 2) Pay-
ments Restrictions: restrictions on payments for current transactions; 3) Payments Restrictions:
restrictions on payments for capital transactions; 4) Surrender or Repatriation Requirements for
Export Proceeds. From International Monetary Fund, Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements


                                                 24
and Exchange Restrictions.

Corporate Taxes: Corporate tax rates from PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) for 1990-97, from Wei
(2000).

Distance: Thousand of Kms., from Arcview 3.x software.

GDP per Capita: 1971-00, 1995 U.S. dollars from World Bank, World Development Indicators
(2002).

Human Capital: 1970,75,80,85,90,95, Average years of secondary, higher and total schooling in the
total population over 25 years old, from World Bank, World Development Indicators (2002).

Legal Origin: Origin of a country’s formal legal code: English common-law, French civil law, Ger-
man civil law, and Scandinavian civil law, from La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny
(1997, 1998).

Inflation rate: Annual CPI inflation (World Bank, World Development Indicators).

Inflation Volatility: Standard deviation of inflation rate over the sample period divided by the
corresponding mean.

Institutional Quality: Composite political safety: 1984-98, Sum of all the rating components from
International Country Risk Guide except for Socioeconomic Conditions and Investment Profile.
Average yearly rating from 0 to 76, with a higher score meaning lower risk. Data from International
Country Risk Guide, the PRS Group.
   • Government Stability: 1984-98, The government’s ability to carry out its declared program(s),
     and its ability to stay in office. Average yearly rating from 0 to 12, with a higher score meaning
     lower risk. Data from International Country Risk Guide, the PRS Group.
   • Internal Conflict: 1984-98, Political violence in the country and its actual or potential impact
     on governance. Average yearly rating from 0 to 12, with a higher score meaning lower risk.
     Data from International Country Risk Guide, the PRS Group.
   • External Conflict: 1984-98, Assessment both of the risk to the incumbent government from
     foreign action, ranging from non-violent external pressure (diplomatic pressures, withholding
     of aid, trade restrictions, territorial disputes, sanctions, etc) to violent external pressure
     (cross-border conflicts to all-out war). Average yearly rating from 0 to 12, with a higher
     score meaning lower risk. Data from International Country Risk Guide, the PRS Group.
   • Non-corruption Index: 1984-98, Assessment of corruption within the political system. Aver-
     age yearly rating from 0 to 6, where a higher score means lower risk. Data from International
     Country Risk Guidee, the PRS Group.
   • Non-militarized Politics: 1984-98, Protection from the military involvement in politics. Aver-
     age yearly rating from 0 to 6, with a higher score meaning lower risk. Data from International
     Country Risk Guide, the PRS Group.

                                                 25
   • Protection from Religious Tensions: 1984-98, Protection from the religious tensions in soci-
     ety. Average yearly rating from 0 to 6, with a higher score meaning lower risk. Data from
     International Country Risk Guide, the PRS Group.

   • Law and Order: 1984-98, The Law sub-component is an assessment of the strength and impar-
     tiality of the legal system; the Order sub-component is an assessment of popular observance
     of the law. Average yearly rating from 0 to 6, with a higher score meaning lower risk. Data
     from International Country Risk Guide, the PRS Group.

   • Protection from Ethnic Tensions: 1984-98, Assessment of the degree of tension within a
     country attributable to racial, nationality, or language divisions. Average yearly rating from
     0 to 12, with a higher score meaning lower risk. Data from International Country Risk Guide,
     the PRS Group.

   • Democratic Accountability: 1984-98, Average yearly rating from 0 to 6, with a higher score
     meaning lower risk. In general, the highest number of risk points is assigned to Alternating
     Democracies, while the lowest number of risk points is assigned to autarchies. Data from
     International Country Risk Guide, the PRS Group.

   • Quality of Bureaucracy: 1984-98, Institutional strength and quality of the bureaucracy is
     another shock absorber that tends to minimize revisions of policy when governments change.
     Average yearly rating from 0 to 4, with a higher score meaning lower risk. Data from Inter-
     national Country Risk Guide, the PRS Group.

   • Protection from Government Repudiation of Contracts: 1982-95, Average yearly rating from
     0 to 10, with a higher score meaning lower risk. Data from IRIS Time-Series of International
     Country Risk Guide, the PRS Group.

   • Protection from Expropriation: 1984-98, Average yearly rating from 0 to 10, with a higher
     score meaning lower risk. Data from IRIS Time-Series of International Country Risk Guide,
     the PRS Group.

Sovereign Risk: Index based on Standard&Poor’s long term foreign currency denominated sovereign
debt ratings, average from 1971-97. Index ranges from 1 (an obligor rated AAA) to 23 (an obligor
rated SD (Selective Default)).




                                                26
       Table 1: Descriptive Statistics: Inflows of Capital (per Capita U.S. dollars)


                                      Sample: 122 countries (1970–2000)

                                                      Mean     Std. Dev.       Min.       Max.

                       FDI Inflows                   169.44       292.44     -122.51    1723.78
                       Portfolio Equity Inflows      104.82       273.12       -2.17    1769.21
                       Debt Inflows                  284.07       656.00      -83.56    4827.94
                       Total Equity Inflows          232.70       487.09     -122.51    3492.99
                       Capital Inflows               406.29      1012.32      -44.94    8320.92


Notes: Inflows represent flows of foreign claims on domestic capital (liability) divided by population based on IMF data
in 1995 U.S. dollars. FDI inflows correspond to Direct Investment in Reporting Economy (line 78bed) which includes
equity capital, reinvested earnings, other capital, and financial derivatives associated with various intercompany
transactions between affiliated enterprises. Portfolio equity inflows correspond to Equity Liabilities (line 78bmd)
which include shares, stock participations, and similar documents that usually denote ownership of equity. Data
on inflows of debt include Debt Securities Liabilities (line 78bnd) which include bonds, notes, and money market or
negotiable debt instruments; and Other Investment Liabilities (line 78bid) which include all financial transactions not
covered by direct investment, portfolio investment, financial derivatives, or other assets. Inflows of total equity are
the sum of FDI and portfolio equity investments. Inflows of capital are the sum of total equity and debt. Total equity
data are available for 72 countries; debt data are for 122 countries. See Appendix Tables 13 and 14 for countries in
the sample.




                                                          27
      Table 2: Inflows of Capital by Decade and Region (per Capita U.S. dollars)


                                     Sample: 122 countries (1970–2000)

                                                 1970-2000     1970-1980     1981-1990    1991-2000
              FDI Inflows

              US, Japan, Western Europe              348.93        115.73        170.23       684.52
              Latin America and Caribbean             92.67         60.18         44.26       158.93
              East Asia Pacific                      247.90        115.38        208.70       419.82
              South Asia                               1.96          0.45          1.73         2.87
              Europe and Central Asia                109.70          2.03          3.26       116.83
              Sub-Saharan Africa                      19.67         32.86         22.88         6.49
              Middle East and North Africa            55.31       -114.64         29.13       128.67

              Portfolio Equity Inflows

              US, Japan, Western Europe              223.24         11.55         92.02       442.02
              Latin America and Caribbean              9.06         -0.10          4.99        15.69
              East Asia Pacific                       33.93         24.72         54.59        53.98
              South Asia                               1.08          0.06          0.14         1.19
              Europe and Central Asia                 22.19          n.a.          1.11        22.26
              Sub-Saharan Africa                       7.91          3.49         -1.15        10.77
              Middle East and North Africa           150.73        329.64        113.75         2.62

              Debt Inflows

              US, Japan, Western Europe             1136.02        845.29      1048.38       1462.65
              Latin America and Caribbean             50.30        331.71       -62.97         39.55
              East Asia Pacific                      214.92        219.90       233.03        272.45
              South Asia                              12.05         11.14        15.19          9.59
              Europe and Central Asia                124.95         30.83        -1.73        127.13
              Sub-Saharan Africa                      20.65         44.17        33.10         -5.29
              Middle East and North Africa           204.00        382.60      -138.69        435.74

              Total Equity Inflows

              US, Japan, Western Europe              546.75        123.11        247.70      1114.20
              Latin America and Caribbean             84.05         65.86         38.08       139.61
              East Asia Pacific                      269.07        125.27        226.90       454.84
              South Asia                               4.00          1.00          2.80         6.39
              Europe and Central Asia                128.01          2.03          3.37       136.07
              Sub-Saharan Africa                      23.99         33.21         22.61        13.16
              Middle East and North Africa            77.86         54.20         32.59       129.51

              Capital Inflows

              US, Japan, Western Europe             1636.23        943.80      1277.15       2501.27
              Latin America and Caribbean             82.66        348.16       -41.51         92.47
              East Asia Pacific                      376.36        324.29       384.29        545.35
              South Asia                              14.12         11.74        16.31         13.43
              Europe and Central Asia                209.95         31.64        -0.60        229.18
              Sub-Saharan Africa                      30.23         56.37        42.61          0.17
              Middle East and North Africa           258.08        417.04      -117.95        528.89


Notes: Inflows of each category correspond to foreign claims on domestic capital (liability) divided by population.
Data are from IMF in 1995 U.S. dollars. Inflows of total equity represent the sum of FDI and portfolio equity
investment. FDI data are for 72 countries; portfolio data are for 68 countries, and debt data are for 122 countries.
              Table 3: Volatility of Inflows of Capital (per Capita U.S. dollars)


                                      Sample: 122 countries (1970–2000)

                                                              Mean      Std. Dev.      Min.    Max.

               Volatility   of   FDI Inflows                   1.03            2.64    0.12    22.35
               Volatility   of   Portfolio Equity Inflows      0.78            0.43    0.16     4.29
               Volatility   of   Debt Inflows                  0.74            0.43    0.14     4.42
               Volatility   of   Total Equity Inflows          1.02            2.58    0.12    22.35
               Volatility   of   Capital Inflows               0.75            0.68    0.07     7.26

Notes: Volatility of inflows is the standard deviation of the corresponding inflows per capita divided by the average
of the absolute value of the inflows and outflows of capital per capita over time for each country. Data are from IMF
in 1995 U.S. dollars. FDI inflows correspond to Direct Investment in Reporting Economy (line 78bed) which includes
equity capital, reinvested earnings, other capital, and financial derivatives associated with various intercompany
transactions between affiliated enterprises. Portfolio equity inflows correspond to Equity Liabilities (line 78bmd)
which includes shares, stock participations, and similar documents that usually denote ownership of equity. Data
on inflows of debt include Debt Securities Liabilities (line 78bnd) which cover bonds, notes, and money market or
negotiable debt instruments; and Other Investment Liabilities (line 78bid) which include all financial transactions
not covered by direct investment, portfolio investment, financial derivatives or other assets. Inflows of total equity
are the sum of FDI and portfolio equity investments. Inflows of capital are the sum of total equity and debt. FDI
data are for 72 countries; portfolio data are for 68 countries, and debt data are for 122 countries.




                                                         29
Table 4: Volatility of Inflows of Capital by Decade and Region (per Capita U.S. dollars)


                                       Sample: 122 countries (1970–2000)

                                                      1970-2000     1970-1980     1981-1990     1991-2000
           Volatility of FDI Inflows

           US, Japan, Western Europe                         0.58          0.30          0.33          0.39
           Latin America and Caribbean                       0.82          0.41          0.78          0.55
           East Asia Pacific                                 0.61          0.41          0.48          0.41
           South Asia                                        0.53          n.a.          0.34          0.44
           Europe and Central Asia                           0.69          0.35          0.63          0.57
           Sub-Saharan Africa                                2.41          0.63          0.78          0.78
           Middle East and North Africa                      0.86          0.64          0.83          0.66

           Volatility of Portfolio Equity Inflows

           US, Japan, Western Europe                         0.70          0.62          0.83          0.48
           Latin America and Caribbean                       0.92          0.70          3.85          0.74
           East Asia Pacific                                 0.68          0.42          0.49          0.72
           South Asia                                        0.77          n.a.          n.a.          0.77
           Europe and Central Asia                           0.75          n.a.          0.33          0.74
           Sub-Saharan Africa                                1.04          0.93          2.12          0.74
           Middle East and North Africa                      0.64          0.43          0.56          0.69

           Volatility of Debt Inflows

           US, Japan, Western Europe                         0.57          0.41          0.50          0.43
           Latin America and Caribbean                       0.86          0.52          0.85          0.63
           East Asia Pacific                                 1.04          0.35          0.64          0.53
           South Asia                                        0.47          0.32          0.32          0.45
           Europe and Central Asia                           0.68          0.57          0.67          0.60
           Sub-Saharan Africa                                0.77          0.52          0.72          0.51
           Middle East and North Africa                      0.72          0.49          0.64          0.67

           Volatility of Total Equity Inflows

           US, Japan, Western Europe                         0.62          0.32          0.42          0.38
           Latin America and Caribbean                       0.79          0.38          0.71          0.44
           East Asia Pacific                                 0.60          0.42          0.48          0.42
           South Asia                                        0.73          n.a.          0.41          0.58
           Europe and Central Asia                           0.64          0.35          0.58          0.53
           Sub-Saharan Africa                                2.39          0.62          0.77          0.71
           Middle East and North Africa                      0.81          0.65          0.79          0.64

           Volatility of Capital Inflows

           US, Japan, Western Europe                         0.51          0.34          0.44          0.37
           Latin America and Caribbean                       0.86          0.44          0.98          0.62
           East Asia Pacific                                 1.31          0.26          3.14          0.55
           South Asia                                        0.46          0.31          0.31          0.44
           Europe and Central Asia                           0.63          0.72          0.66          0.52
           Sub-Saharan Africa                                0.76          0.45          0.79          0.52
           Middle East and North Africa                      0.76          0.48          0.62          0.68


Notes: Volatility of inflows is the standard deviation of the inflows per capita divided by the average of the absolute
value of the inflows and outflows of capital per capita over time for each country. Data are from IMF in 1995
U.S. dollars. FDI data are for 72 countries; portfolio data are for 68 countries, and debt data are for 122 countries.
                   Table 5: Sample of Countries for the Regression Analysis

                                                   (1970–2000)


       Argentina       Cyprus            Israel               Pakistan                   Sri Lanka
       AustraliaO      Czech Rep.O       ItalyO               Papua New Guinea           SwedenO
       AustriaO        DenmarkO          JapanO               Paraguay                   Thailand
       Bolivia         Egypt             Jordan               Philippines                Tunisia
       Brazil          Estonia           Kenya                PolandO                    TurkeyO
       Cameroon        FinlandO          KoreaO               PortugalO                  United StatesO
       CanadaO         FranceO           Morocco              Romania                    United KingdomO
       Chile           GermanyO          NetherlandsO         Senegal
       Colombia        HungaryO          New ZealandO         South Africa
       Costa Rica      India             NorwayO              SpainO


                                                                  O
Notes: Base sample of 47 countries for the regression analysis.       OECD member countries.




                                                         31
                                           Table 6: Descriptive Statistics


                                                                 Sample       Mean        Std. dev.       Min        Max
      Inflows of Total Equity per capita                           47         173.81       199.93         1.68      697.97
      Vol. of Inflows of Total Equity per capita                   47          1.50         0.57          0.71       3.14
      Institutional Quality†                                       47          5.56          1.11         3.41       7.27
      Human Capital                                                47          4.65          2.64         0.54        9.55
      Distantness (000 kms)                                        47          7.64          2.48         5.13       14.06
      Inflation Volatility                                         47          0.90         0.71          0.30       4.64
      Capital Controls†                                            47          1.53          0.26         1.00       1.96
      GDP per capita (000 $s)                                      47          6.72         6.99          0.21      23.46
      Bank Credit (% total credit)                                 45         83.49         11.95        54.34      98.50
      Sovereign Risk†                                              36          6.69          5.06         1.00      13.86
      Corporate Taxes (%)                                          34         33.76         4.83         18.00      42.00
      French Legal Origin†                                         47          0.46          0.51         0.00       1.00
      British Legal Origin†                                        47          0.31          0.47         0.00       1.00

Notes: † Index. Inflows are calculated as net change in investment liabilities in a reporting economy. Volatility is calculated
as the normalized standard deviation of the inflows. Normalization is performed by average gross flows. Institutional Quality
is represented by the composite political safety index calculated as the sum of all the rating components from International
Country Risk Guide (ICRG), averaged from 1984 to 2000, divided by 10. The index takes values from 0 to 76 for each country,
where a higher score means lower risk. Human Capital is measured as the average years of total schooling over 25 years old in
the total population, in 1970. Distantness is the weighted average of the distances in thousands of km from the capital city of the
particular country to the capital cities of the other countries, using the GDP shares of the other countries as weights, averaged
from 1970 to 2000. Inflation Volatility is the standard deviation of the annual CPI inflation over the 1970–2000 normalized by
the average inflation for that period. Capital Controls is an index calculated as the mean value of the four dummy variables—
exchange arrangements, payments restrictions on current transactions, and capital transactions, repatriation requirements for
export proceeds, averaged from 1971 to 2000; it takes a value between 1 and 2. GDP per capita is measured in per capita 1995
U.S. dollars. Bank Credit is claims of deposit money banks on nonfinancial domestic sectors as share of claims of central bank
and deposit money banks on nonfinancial domestic sectors, in percent, average from 1970 to 2000 (without outliers Bolivia
and Hungary). Sovereign Risk is an index based on Standard& Poor’s long term foreign currency denominated sovereign debt
ratings. Index ranges from 1, an obligor rated “AAA”, to 23, an obligor rated “SD”—Selective Default (Data are available
for Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Denmark, Egypt, Finland, France,
Germany, Great Britain, India, Israel, Italy, Jordan, Japan, Korea, Morocco, the Netherlands, Norway, New Zealand, Pakistan,
Philippines, Portugal, Paraguay, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, and the United States). Corporate
Taxes represents the corporate income tax rate, single year value varying by country (Data are available for Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Czech Republic, Denmark, Egypt, Finland, France, Germany, Great
Britain, Hungary, India, Israel, Italy, Japan, Korea, Morocco, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Thailand, Tunisia, and the United States). French and British Legal Origin are dummy
variables taking the value of 1 if a country’s legal code can be traced to French civil law or British common law legal tradition.




                                                               32
                                       Table 7: Correlation Matrix

                                            47 country sample
                                         Main explanatory variables


                                                  HK            Dist

                                         Inst.    0.69          –0.41

                                         HK                     –0.19




                                         Other explanatory variables


                                      Infl.V     CCont.       Bank      SRisk   CTax

                              Obs.      47         47          45        36      34

                              Inst    –0.09      –0.64        0.61      –0.85   –0.20

                              HK       0.17      –0.51        0.37      –0.68   –0.18

                              Dist     0.24       0.30        –0.43     0.53    0.16



Notes: Correlations are for the logarithm of the variables. Upper panel reports the correlation matrix for the main
regressions with the 47 country sample. Lower Panel reports the correlation between the main explanatory variables
and the other independent variables. Sample sizes vary for these variables. Inst—Institutional Quality; HK—Human
Capital; Dist.—Distantness; Infl.V—Inflation Volatility; CCon.—Capital Controls; Bank—Bank Credit; SRisk—
Sovereign Risk ratings; CTax–Corporate Tax.




                                                         33
                                Table 8: Determinants of Capital Inflows

                          Dependent Variable: Inflows of Total Equity per capita


                                       (1)        (2)            (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)

                Countries              47         47             47        45        36        34

                Institutional        5.56***    5.29***    4.83***       5.83***   4.10**    6.30***
                Quality               (4.74)     (4.57)     (4.57)        (4.48)   (2.22)     (3.95)

                Human                0.47**     0.57**         0.42*     0.46*     0.70*     0.66**
                Capital              (2.00)     (2.40)         (1.85)    (1.81)    (1.88)    (2.00)

                Distantness          –1.16**    –1.04*     –1.11**       –1.27**    –1.56    –1.37**
                                     (–2.07)    (–1.92)    (–2.03)       (–2.03)   (–1.54)   (–2.06)

                Inflation               –        –0.36           –         –         –         –
                Volatility              –       (–1.29)          –         –         –         –

                Capital                 –          –            –1.58      –         –         –
                Controls                –          –           (–1.23)     –         –         –

                Bank                    –          –             –        –0.36      –         –
                Credit                  –          –             –       (–0.36)     –         –

                Sovereign Risk          –          –             –         –        –0.25      –
                                        –          –             –         –       (–0.46)     –

                Corporate Taxes         –          –             –         –         –        –0.75
                                        –          –             –         –         –       (–0.49)

                R2                    0.63       0.64           0.64      0.63      0.66      0.62

Notes: All regressions include a constant and are estimated by OLS with White’s correction of heteroskedasticity.
t-statistics are in parentheses denoting *** 1%, ** 5%, and * 10% significance. All variables are in logs. Samples:
45-country sample excludes outliers Bolivia and Hungary in terms of Bank Credit. 36-country sample includes
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Denmark, Egypt, Finland,
France, Germany, Great Britain, India, Israel, Italy, Jordan, Japan, Korea, Morocco, the Netherlands, Norway, New
Zealand, Pakistan, Philippines, Portugal, Paraguay, Spain, Sweden, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, the United States, and
South Africa. The rest of the countries do not have data on Sovereign Risk. 34-country sample includes Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Czech Republic, Denmark, Egypt, Finland, France,
Germany, Great Britain, Hungary, India, Israel, Italy, Japan, Korea, Morocco, the Netherlands, Norway, New Zealand,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Thailand, Tunisia, the United States, and South Africa. The rest of
the countries do not have data on Corporate Taxes.




                                                          34
             Table 9: Determinants of Capital Inflows: Historical Legal Origins

                         Dependent Variable: Inflows of Total Equity per capita


                                 (1)         (2)          (3)           (4)         (5)          (6)

                                OLS         OLS          OLS           OLS          IV          OLS

            Countries            47           47           47           47          21           21

            Institutional     5.04***     5.39***            –           –       6.91***      4.77***
            Quality            (5.01)      (5.69)            –           –        (2.90)       (5.84)

            Human              0.39*       0.45**       1.26***      1.39***       0.01        0.47*
            Capital            (1.90)      (2.32)        (5.96)       (5.99)      (1.40)       (1.70)

            Distantness       –0.97*      –1.44***     –1.90***     –2.31***       –0.12       –0.28
                              (–1.81)      (–2.77)      (–2.64)      (–3.34)      (–0.20)     (–0.34)

            French Legal      –0.56**         –         –0.57**          –           –            –
            Origin            (–2.01)         –         (–1.99)          –           –            –

            British Legal         –        0.84**            –        0.63*       0.94*      0.79****
            Origin                –        (2.51)            –        (1.64)      (2.27)      (2.50)

            R2                  0.64        0.66          0.51         0.51        0.80         0.84



Notes: All regressions include a constant and are estimated by OLS with White’s correction of heteroskedasticity.
t-statistics are in parentheses denoting *** 1%, ** 5%, and * 10% significance. All variables are in logs except the
legal origin variables.




                                                        35
      Table 10: Determinants of Changes in Capital Inflows: Developing countries

                  Dependent Variable: Change in Inflows of Total Equity per capita
                         between the periods of 1994–2000 and 1970–1993

                                          (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)

                  Countries               23           23           23           23

                  ∆Institutional        1.58*        2.27*         1.45         1.25
                   Quality              (1.70)       (1.61)       (1.33)       (1.52)

                  Distantness          0.21***      0.21***      0.20***      0.21***
                                        (3.34)       (3.40)       (3.80)       (3.60)

                  ∆Capital            –0.19***     –0.21***      –0.22***     –0.20***
                   Controls            (–4.73)      (–4.20)       (–4.41)      (–4.90)

                  ∆GDP per             0.81***      0.91***      0.84***      0.75***
                   capita               (3.68)       (3.14)       (4.18)       (3.19)

                  ∆Inflation               –          0.17           –            –
                   Volatility              –         (0.65)          –            –

                  ∆Human                   –            –          0.22           –
                   Capital                 –            –         (1.27)          –

                  ∆Bank                    –            –            –          0.87
                   Credit                  –            –            –         (1.49)

                  R2                     0.71         0.75         0.75         0.79


Notes: All regressions include a constant and are estimated by OLS with White’s correction of heteroskedasticity. t-
statistics are in parentheses denoting *** 1%, ** 5%, and * 10% significance. Sample: 23 developing country sample
includes Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Cameroon, Colombia, Costa Rica, Egypt, Hungary, India, Jordan, Kenya, Sri
Lanka, Morocco, Pakistan, Paraguay, Philippines, Poland, Romania, Senegal, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, and South
Africa (Bolivia, Cyprus, Israel, and South Korea are outliers and dropped). ∆ represents the difference between the
average value of the corresponding variable between the periods of 1994–2000 and 1970–1993.




                                                        36
                      Table 11: Determinants of Volatility of Capital Inflows

                   Dependent Variable: Volatility of Inflows of Total Equity per capita


                            (1)        (2)        (3)          (4)     (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)

        Countries           47          47         47          47       36        34         47         47

        Institutional     –0.42**    –0.50*     –0.47**     –0.33      0.04      –0.47     –0.50*    –0.44**
        Quality           (–2.29)    (–1.76)    (–2.55)    (–1.55)    (0.14)    (–1.53)    (–1.76)   (–2.25)

        Inflation         0.24**     0.23**     0.25**     0.26**      0.19     0.26**     0.23**     0.24**
        Volatility        (2.41)     (2.19)     (2.45)     (2.48)     (1.57)    (2.09)     (2.19)     (2.35)

        Bank              0.37**     0.38**     0.36**     0.43**      0.42    0.62***     0.38**     0.38**
        Credit            (2.22)     (2.29)     (2.23)     (2.08)     (1.27)    (2.64)     (2.29)     (2.19)

        Human                –         0.03        –            –       –          –          –          –
        Capital              –        (0.44)       –            –       –          –          –          –

        Distantness          –          –        –0.10          –       –          –          –          –
                             –          –       (–0.87)         –       –          –          –          –

        Capital              –          –          –         0.21       –          –          –          –
        Controls             –          –          –        (0.80)      –          –          –          –

        Sovereign            –          –          –            –      0.10        –          –          –
        Risk                 –          –          –            –     (1.53)       –          –          –

        Corporate            –          –          –            –       –        –0.35        –          –
        Taxes                –          –          –            –       –       (–1.31)       –          –

        French Legal         –          –          –            –       –          –        –0.07        –
        Origin               –          –          –            –       –          –       (–0.91)       –

        British Legal        –          –          –            –       –          –          –        –0.04
        Origin               –          –          –            –       –          –          –       (–0.48)

        R2                  0.20       0.21       0.21         0.21    0.14      0.26       0.22       0.21

Notes: Volatility is calculated as normalized standard deviation of inflows. Normalization is performed by average
gross flows. All regressions include a constant and are estimated by OLS with White’s correction of heteroskedasticity.
t-statistics are in parentheses denoting *** 1%, ** 5%, and * 10% significance. All variables are in logs except the
legal origin variables. Samples: 36-country sample includes Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Denmark, Egypt, Finland, France, Germany, Great Britain, India, Israel, Italy, Jordan,
Japan, Korea, Morocco, the Netherlands, Norway, New Zealand, Pakistan, Philippines, Portugal, Paraguay, South
Africa, Spain, Sweden, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, and the United States. 34-country sample includes Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Czech Republic, Denmark, Egypt, Finland, France,
Germany, Great Britain, India, Israel, Italy, Japan, Hungary, Korea, Morocco, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Thailand, Tunisia, and the United States.




                                                          37
      Table 12: Determinants of Volatility of Capital Inflows: Measurement Issues


                                  Dependent Variable: Various Estimates for Volatility
                                         of Inflows of Total Equity per capita


                       (1)         (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)             (6)            (7)               (8)

                     St.Dev.     St.Dev.      St.Dev.      St.Dev.     St.Dev.(dt1)    St.Dev.(dt1)   St.Dev.(dt1)      St.Dev.(dt1)
 Volatility                       M ean                     M ean                         M ean                            M ean

 Countries             47           47          47            47            47             47              47               47

 Institutional     11.56***     –0.42**     –3.37***      –0.63***       8.54***        –0.44**        –2.81***         –0.69***
 Quality            (4.26)      (–2.29)      (–2.77)       (–2.99)        (4.01)        (–2.54)         (–2.68)          (–3.74)

 Inflation           –0.22       0.24**       0.46*        0.25**         –0.21          0.13**          0.30            –0.15**
 Volatility         (–0.33)      (2.41)       (1.77)       (2.51)        (–0.43)         (2.03)         (1.45)           (–2.20)

 Bank                 0.61       0.37**        1.26        0.38**          0.30          0.29**          0.79             0.30**
 Credit              (0.30)      (2.22)       (1.45)       (2.30)         (0.21)         (2.15)         (1.32)            (2.18)

 Inflows of             –           –       19.77***        0.28            –               –          15.04***           0.33*
 Total Equity           –           –        (11.26)       (1.15)           –               –           (9.42)            (1.72)

 R2                   0.44         0.20        0.89           0.22         0.40           0.16           0.85              0.19


Notes: Volatility is calculated as; (1), (3) standard deviation of inflows; (2), (4) normalized standard deviation of
inflows; (5), (7) standard deviation of de-trended inflows divided by 100; (6), (8) normalized standard deviation
of de-trended inflows divided by 100; All regressions include a constant and are estimated by OLS with White’s
correction of heteroskedasticity. t-statistics are in parentheses denoting *** 1%, ** 5%, and * 10% significance. All
variables are in logs except for inflows of total equity per capita.




                                                         38
        Table 13: Appendix Table: Sample Countries – Total Equity Data



     Sample Total Equity                           Sample Total Equity by Decades


        All Countries             1970-1980             1981-1990            1991-2000

Algeria                           Algeria               Algeria              Algeria
Argentina                         Argentina             Argentina            Argentina
Australia                         Australia             Australia            Australia
Austria                           Austria               Austria              Austria
Bahrain                           Bahrain               Bahrain              Bahrain
Bene-Lux                          Bene-Lux              Bene-Lux             Bene-Lux
Bolivia                           Bolivia               Bolivia              Bolivia
Botswana                          Botswana              Botswana             Botswana
Brazil                            Brazil                Brazil               Brazil
Burkina Faso                      Burkina Faso                               Burkina Faso
Burundi             starts 1989                                              Burundi
Cameroon                          Cameroon              Cameroon             Cameroon
Canada                            Canada                Canada               Canada
Cent. Afri. Rep.                  Cent. Afri. Rep.      Cent. Afri. Rep.     Cent. Afri. Rep.
Chad                              Chad                  Chad                 Chad
Chile                             Chile                 Chile                Chile
China               starts 1982                         China                China
Colombia                          Colombia              Colombia             Colombia
Costa Rica                        Costa Rica            Costa Rica           Costa Rica
Cyprus              starts 1985                         Cyprus               Cyprus
Czech Republic      starts 1993                                              Czech Republic
Denmark                           Denmark               Denmark              Denmark
Egypt, Arab Rep.                  Egypt, Arab Rep.      Egypt, Arab Rep.     Egypt, Arab Rep.
Estonia             starts 1993                                              Estonia
Fiji                              Fiji                  Fiji                 Fiji
Finland                           Finland               Finland              Finland
France                            France                France               France
Gabon                             Gabon                 Gabon                Gabon
Germany                           Germany               Germany              Germany
Hungary             starts 1992                                              Hungary
India               starts 1993                                              India
Israel                            Israel                Israel               Israel
Italy                             Italy                 Italy                Italy
Japan                             Japan                 Japan                Japan
Jordan                            Jordan                Jordan               Jordan
Kenya                             Kenya                 Kenya                Kenya
Korea, Rep.                       Korea, Rep.           Korea, Rep.          Korea, Rep.
Kuwait              starts 1993                                              Kuwait
Latvia              starts 1992                                              Latvia




                                              39
             Appendix Table : Sample Countries – Total Equity Data (Cont.)


               Sample Total Equity                                         Sample Total Equity by Decades


                   All Countries                        1970-1980                   1981-1990                   1991-2000

 Libya                                                  Libya                       Libya                       Libya
 Mauritania                  non available 1990s        Mauritania                  Mauritania
 Mauritius                                              Mauritius                   Mauritius                   Mauritius
 Morocco                     starts 1991                                                                        Morocco
 Namibia                     starts 1989                                                                        Namibia
 Netherlands                                            Netherlands                 Netherlands                 Netherlands
 New Zealand                                            New Zealand                 New Zealand                 New Zealand
 Niger                                                  Niger                       Niger                       Niger
 Norway                                                 Norway                      Norway                      Norway
 Pakistan                    starts 1984                                            Pakistan                    Pakistan
 Papua New Guinea            n.a. after 1991            Papua New Guinea            Papua New Guinea
 Paraguay                                               Paraguay                    Paraguay                    Paraguay
 Phillipines                 starts 1993                                                                        Phillipines
 Poland                                                 Poland                      Poland                      Poland
 Portugal                                               Portugal                    Portugal                    Portugal
 Romania                     starts 1991                                                                        Romania
 Senegal                                                Senegal                     Senegal                     Senegal
 Singapore                                              Singapore                   Singapore                   Singapore
 Slovak Republic             starts 1992                                                                        Slovak Republic
 Slovenia                    starts 1992                                                                        Slovenia
 South Africa                starts 1985                                            South Africa                South Africa
 Spain                                                  Spain                       Spain                       Spain
 Sri Lanka                   starts 1985                                            Sri Lanka                   Sri Lanka
 Swaziland                                              Swaziland                   Swaziland                   Swaziland
 Sweden                                                 Sweden                      Sweden                      Sweden
 Switzerland                 starts 1982                                            Switzerland                 Switzerland
 Thailand                                               Thailand                    Thailand                    Thailand
 Trin. and Tobago            starts 1983                                            Trin. and Tobago            Trin. and Tobago
 Tunisia                                                Tunisia                     Tunisia                     Tunisia
 Turkey                      starts 1987                                            Turkey                      Turkey
 U.K.                                                   U.K.                        U.K.                        U.K.
 U.S.                                                   U.S.                        U.S.                        U.S.
 Uruguay                     starts 1986                                            Uruguay                     Uruguay

Notes: Total equity data are the sum of Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) and Portfolio Equity Investment data.
Countries for which either FDI or portfolio equity investment data are available are included in the sample. Countries
in italics have data only for certain periods as indicated in the table. Countries in bold have data for both equity and
debt flows throughout the whole sample period. FDI data correspond to Direct Investments Abroad (line 78bdd) and
                                                       40 and include equity capital, reinvested earnings, other
Direct Investments in Reporting Economy, n.i.e (line 78bed)
capital and financial derivatives associated with various intercompany transactions between affiliated enterprises.
Portfolio Equity Investments corresponds to Equity Security Assets (line 78bkd) and Equity Securities Liabilities
(line 78bmd) and include shares, stock participations, and similar documents that usually denote ownership of equity.
Data taken from IMF, IFS.
              Table 14: Appendix Table: Sample Countries – Debt Data



         Sample Debt                                     Sample Debt by Decades


          All Countries             1970-1980              1981-1990            1991-2000

Albania               starts 1992                                               Albania
Algeria               1977-1991     Algeria                Algeria
Angola                              Angola                 Angola               Angola
Argentina                           Argentina              Argentina            Argentina
Australia                           Australia              Australia            Australia
Austria                             Austria                Austria              Austria
Bahrain                             Bahrain                Bahrain              Bahrain
Bangladesh                          Bangladesh             Bangladesh           Bangladesh
Belarus               starts 1993                                               Belarus
Bene-Lux                            Bene-Lux               Bene-Lux             Bene-Lux
Benin                               Benin                  Benin                Benin
Bolivia                             Bolivia                Bolivia              Bolivia
Botswana                            Botswana               Botswana             Botswana
Brazil                              Brazil                 Brazil               Brazil
Bulgaria              starts 1980                          Bulgaria             Bulgaria
Burkina Faso                                               Burkina Faso         Burkina Faso
Cambodia                            Cambodia               Cambodia             Cambodia
Cameroon                            Cameroon               Cameroon             Cameroon
Canada                              Canada                 Canada               Canada
Cent. Afri. Rep.                    Cent. Afri. Rep.       Cent. Afri. Rep.
Chad                                Chad                   Chad                 Chad
Chile                               Chile                  Chile
China                 starts 1982                          China                China
Colombia                            Colombia               Colombia             Colombia
Comoros               starts 1983                          Comoros              Comoros
Congo, Rep.                         Congo, Rep.            Congo, Rep.          Congo, Rep.
Costa Rica                          Costa Rica             Costa Rica           Costa Rica
Cote d’Ivoire                       Cote d’Ivoire          Cote d’Ivoire        Cote d’Ivoire
Croatia               starts 1993                                               Croatia
Cyprus                              Cyprus                 Cyprus               Cyprus
Czech Republic        starts 1993                                               Czech Republic
Denmark                             Denmark                Denmark              Denmark
Dominican Republic                  Dominican Republic     Dominican Republic   Dominican Republic
Ecuador                             Ecuador                Ecuador              Ecuador
Egypt, Arab Rep.                    Egypt, Arab Rep.       Egypt, Arab Rep.     Egypt, Arab Rep.
El Salvador                         El Salvador            El Salvador          El Salvador
Eritrea               starts 1992                                               Eritrea 1992
Estonia 1992          starts 1992                                               Estonia 1992
Ethiopia                            Ethiopia               Ethiopia             Ethiopia
Fiji                                Fiji                   Fiji                 Fiji
Finland                             Finland                Finland              Finland
France                              France                 France               France
Gabon                               Gabon                  Gabon                Gabon




                                                 41
           Appendix Table: Sample Countries – Debt Data (Cont.)


         Sample Debt                                Sample Debt by Decades


         All Countries             1970-1980            1981-1990            1991-2000

Gambia                             Gambia               Gambia               Gambia
Germany                            Germany              Germany              Germany
Ghana                              Ghana                Ghana                Ghana
Guatemala                          Guatemala            Guatemala            Guatemala
Guinea               starts 1987                        Guinea               Guinea
Guyana               starts 1992                                             Guyana
Haiti                              Haiti                Haiti                Haiti
Honduras                           Honduras             Honduras             Honduras
Hungary              starts 1982                        Hungary              Hungary
India                              India                India                India
Iran, Islamic Rep.                 Iran, Islamic Rep.   Iran, Islamic Rep.   Iran, Islamic Rep.
Ireland                            Ireland              Ireland              Ireland
Israel                             Israel               Israel               Israel
Italy                              Italy                Italy                Italy
Jamaica                            Jamaica              Jamaica              Jamaica
Japan                              Japan                Japan                Japan
Jordan                             Jordan               Jordan               Jordan
Kenya                              Kenya                Kenya                Kenya
Korea, Rep.                        Korea, Rep.          Korea, Rep.          Korea, Rep.
Kuwait                             Kuwait               Kuwait               Kuwait
Lao PDR              starts 1989                                             Lao PDR
Latvia                             Latvia               Latvia               Latvia
Lesotho                            Lesotho              Lesotho              Lesotho
Libya                              Libya                Libya                Libya
Lithuania            starts 1993                                             Lithuania
Madagascar                         Madagascar           Madagascar           Madagascar
Malawi                             Malawi               Malawi               Malawi
Malaysia                           Malaysia             Malaysia             Malaysia
Mali                               Mali                 Mali                 Mali
Mauritania                         Mauritania           Mauritania           Mauritania
Mauritius                          Mauritius            Mauritius            Mauritius
Mexico                             Mexico               Mexico               Mexico
Mongolia             starts 1990                                             Mongolia
Morocco                            Morocco              Morocco              Morocco
Namibia              starts 1990   Namibia              Namibia              Namibia
Nepal                              Nepal                Nepal                Nepal
Netherlands                        Netherlands          Netherlands          Netherlands
New Zealand                        New Zealand          New Zealand          New Zealand
Nicaragua            starts 1991                                             Nicaragua
Niger                              Niger                Niger                Niger
Nigeria                            Nigeria              Nigeria              Nigeria
Norway                             Norway               Norway               Norway
Oman                               Oman                 Oman                 Oman




                                               42
                   Appendix Table: Sample Countries – Debt Data (Cont.)


                  Sample Debt                                    Sample Debt by Decades


                  All Countries                1970-1980              1981-1990               1991-2000

       Pakistan                                Pakistan               Pakistan                Pakistan
       Panama                                  Panama                 Panama                  Panama
       P. N. Guinea                            P. N. Guinea           P. N. Guinea            P. N. Guinea
       Paraguay                                Paraguay               Paraguay                Paraguay
       Peru                    starts 1985                            Peru                    Peru
       Philippines                             Philippines            Philippines             Philippines
       Poland                                  Poland                 Poland                  Poland
       Portugal                                Portugal               Portugal                Portugal
       Romania                                 Romania                Romania                 Romania
       Rwanda                                  Rwanda                 Rwanda                  Rwanda
       Saudi Arabia                            Saudi Arabia           Saudi Arabia            Saudi Arabia
       Senegal                                 Senegal                Senegal                 Senegal
       Sierra Leone                            Sierra Leone           Sierra Leone            Sierra Leone
       Singapore                               Singapore              Singapore               Singapore
       Slovak Republic         starts 1993                                                    Slovak Republic
       Slovenia                starts 1992                                                    Slovenia
       South Africa                            South Africa           South Africa            South Africa
       Spain                                   Spain                  Spain                   Spain
       Sri Lanka                               Sri Lanka              Sri Lanka               Sri Lanka
       Sudan                                   Sudan                  Sudan                   Sudan
       Swaziland                               Swaziland              Swaziland               Swaziland
       Sweden                                  Sweden                 Sweden                  Sweden
       Switzerland                             Switzerland            Switzerland             Switzerland
       Syria                                   Syria                  Syria                   Syria
       Tanzania                starts 1993                                                    Tanzania
       Thailand                                Thailand               Thailand                Thailand
       Togo                                    Togo                   Togo                    Togo
       Trin. and Tobago                        Trin. and Tobago       Trin. and Tobago        Trin. and Tobago
       Tunisia                                 Tunisia                Tunisia                 Tunisia
       Turkey                                  Turkey                 Turkey                  Turkey
       Uganda                                  Uganda                 Uganda                  Uganda
       U.K.                                    U.K.                   U.K.                    U.K.
       U.S.                                    U.S.                   U.S.                    U.S.
       Uruguay                                 Uruguay                Uruguay                 Uruguay
       Zambia                                  Zambia                 Zambia                  Zambia
       Zimbabwe                                Zimbabwe               Zimbabwe                Zimbabwe

Notes: Countries in italics have data only for certain periods as indicated in the table. Countries in bold have data
for both equity (foreign direct investment and portfolio equity investments) and debt flows throughout the whole
sample period. Debt data correspond to Debt Securities Assets (line 78bld) and Debt Securities Liabilities (line
78bnd) which cover bonds, notes, and money market or negotiable debt instruments; and other investment assets
(line 78bhd) and other investments liabilities (line 78bid) which include all financial transactions not covered in direct
investment, portfolio investment, financial derivatives or other assets. Data taken from IMF, IFS.




                                                           43
Table 15: Appendix Table: Descriptive Statistics - Inflows of Capital and Volatility
(per Capita US$)


                                       Sample: 47 countries (1970–2000)


                                                   Capital Inflows

                                                                Mean    Std. Dev.         Min.       Max.

            FDI Inflows                                      166.92        307.64      -122.51    1723.78
            Portfolio Equity Inflows                         129.44        310.90        -2.17    1769.21
            Debt Inflows                                     501.33        821.60       -84.65    4827.94
            Total Equity Inflows                             287.47        562.50      -122.51    3492.99
            Capital Inflows                                  795.40       1363.66       -84.65    8320.92



                                                Volatility of Inflows

                                                                Mean    Std. Dev.         Min.       Max.

            Volatility   of   FDI Inflows                        0.78          0.32       0.12         1.63
            Volatility   of   Portfolio Equity Inflows           0.80          0.47       0.16         2.29
            Volatility   of   Debt Inflows                       0.70          0.24       0.32         1.40
            Volatility   of   Total Equity Inflows               0.93          0.38       0.34         2.01
            Volatility   of   Capital Inflows                    0.62          0.24       0.13         1.38


Notes: Inflows represent flows of foreign claims on domestic capital (liability), divided by population based on IMF
data in 1995 U.S. dollars. Volatility of Inflows is the standard deviation of the corresponding inflows per capita
divided by the average of the absolute value of the inflows and outflows of capital per capita. Data for 47 countries
out of the 122 countries sample for which both equity and debt flows data are available throughout the whole sample
period. FDI inflows correspond to Direct Investments in Reporting Economy (line 78bed) which includes equity
capital, reinvested earnings, other capital and financial derivatives associated with various intercompany transactions
between affiliated enterprises. Portfolio equity inflows correspond to Equity Liabilities (line 78bmd) which include
shares, stock participations, and similar documents that usually denote ownership of equity. Data on inflows of debt
include Debt Securities Liabilities (line 78bnd) which cover bonds and money market or negotiable debt instruments;
and Other Investments Liabilities (line 78bid) which include all financial transactions not covered in direct investment,
portfolio investment, financial derivatives or other assets. Inflows of total equity are the sum of FDI and portfolio
equity investments. Inflows of capital are the sum of total equity and debt.




                                                           44
                                           Figure 1: Capital Inflows per Capita by Type of Flow, 1970-2000

                                           100%



                                           80%
              Composition: Capital Flows




                                           60%



                                           40%



                                           20%



                                            0%
                                                      1974    1978   1982    1986     1990    1994     1998

                                           -20%

                                                    Debt Inflows        FDI Inflows          Port. Inflows



Notes : Inflows represent inflows of FDI, portfolio equity investment, and debt divided by population based on IMF data in
1995 US$. FDI data are available for 72 countries, portfolio data for 68 countries and debt data for 122 countries. Inflows
represent flows of foreign claims on domestic capital (liability). FDI inflows correspond to Direct Investment in Reporting
Economy (line 78bed) which includes equity capital, reinvested earnings, other capital and financial derivatives associated
with various intercompany transactions between affiliated enterprises. Portfolio equity inflows correspond to Equity Liabilities
(line 78bmd), which includes shares, stock participations, and similar documents that usually denote ownership of equity.
Data on inflows of debt include Debt Securities Liabilities (line 78bnd) which include bonds, notes, and money market, or
negotiable debt instruments; and Other Investment Liabilities (line 78bid) which include all financial transactions not covered
by direct investment, portfolio investment, financial derivatives, or other assets.
                                          Figure 2: Gross Flows per Capita by Type of Flow, 1970-2000

                                   100%



                                         80%
            Composition: Capital Flows




                                         60%



                                         40%



                                         20%



                                         0%
                                                    1974    1978   1982    1986      1990      1994     1998

                                               Gross Debt Flows    Gross FDI Flows          Gross Port. Flows



Notes: Gross flows represent gross flows of FDI, portfolio equity investment, and debt divided by population based on
IMF data in 1995 US$ and correspond to the sum of the absolute value of the flows of assets (outflows) and liabilities
(inflows). FDI data are available for 72 countries, portfolio data for 68 countries and debt data for 122 countries. FDI
assets and liabilities correspond respectively to Direct Investment Abroad (line 78bdd) and Direct Investment in
Reporting Economy (line 78bed) and include equity capital, reinvested earnings, other capital, and financial derivatives
associated with various intercompany transactions between affiliated enterprises. Portfolio Equity Investment assets and
liabilities correspond to Equity Securities Assets (line 78bkd) and Equity Securities Liabilities (line 78bmd) and include
shares, stock participations, and similar documents that usually denote ownership of equity. Debt assets and liabilities
include Debt Security Assets (line 78bld) and Debt Security Liabilities (line 78bnd) which include bonds and money
market or negotiable debt instruments; and other investment assets (line 78bhd) and other investment liabilities (line
78bid) which include all financial transactions not covered by direct investment, portfolio investment, financial derivatives,
or other assets.
                          Figure 3: FDI Flows per Capita, 1970-2000

                  2500


                  2000


                  1500
       1995 US$




                  1000


                  500


                    0
                            1974       1978       1982      1986       1990       1994       1998

                  -500

                          FDI Inflows              Net FDI Flows               Gross FDI Flows




Notes : Flows represent flows of FDI divided by population based on IMF data in 1995 US$. Data are for 72
countries. Inflows represent flows of foreign claims on domestic capital (liability). Net flows are calculated as
the difference between corresponding inflows (liabilities) and outflows (assets). Gross flows correspond to
the sum of the absolute value of the flows of assets and liabilities. FDI assets and liabilities correspond,
respectively, to Direct Investment Abroad (line 78bdd) and Direct Investment in Reporting Economy (line
78bed) and include equity capital, reinvested earnings, other capital, and financial derivatives associated with
various intercompany transactions between affiliated enterprises.
                          Figure 4: Portfolio Flows per Capita, 1970-2000


                   1400

                   1200

                   1000

                   800
       1995 US $




                   600

                   400

                   200

                     0
                              1974        1978    1982       1986       1990       1994      1998
                   -200

                   -400

                          Port. Inflows          Net Port. Flows               Gross Port. Flows



Notes : Flows represent flows of portfolio equity investment divided by population based on IMF data in 1995
US$. Data are for 68 countries. Inflows represent flows of foreign claims on domestic capital (liability). Net
flows are calculated as the difference between corresponding inflows (liabilities) and outflows (assets). Gross
flows correspond to the sum of the absolute value of the flows of assets and liabilities. Portfolio Equity
Investment assets and liabilities correspond, respectively, to Equity Securities Assets (line 78bkd) and Equity
Securities Liabilities (line 78bmd) and include shares, stock participations, and similar documents that usually
denote ownership of equity.
                             Figure 5: Debt Flows per Capita, 1970-2000

                    2000



                    1500



                    1000
         1995 US$




                    500



                      0
                               1974       1978      1982       1986       1990       1994       1998


                    -500

                           Debt Inflows            Net Debt Flows                Gross Debt Flows




Notes : Flows represent flows of debt divided by population based on IMF data in 1995 US$. Data are for 122
countries. Inflows represent flows of foreign claims on domestic capital (liability). Net flows are calculated as
the difference between corresponding inflows (liability) and outflows (asset). Gross flows correspond to the
sum of the absolute value of the flows of assets and liabilities. Debt assets and liabilities include respectively
Debt Securities Assets (line 78bld) and Debt Securities Liabilities (line 78bnd) which cover bonds, notes, and
money market or negotiable debt instruments; and Other Investment Assets (line 78bhd); and Other
Investment Liabilities (line 78bid) which include all financial transactions not covered by direct investment,
portfolio investment, financial derivatives, or other assets.
                  Figure 6a: Equity Inflows to Rich and Poor Countries, 1970-2000

                  1800

                  1600

                  1400

                  1200
       1995 US$




                  1000

                   800

                   600

                   400

                   200

                     0
                         1970-1974   1975-1979   1980-1984    1985-1989     1990-1994     1995-2000

                                         Rich Countries             Poor Countries




Notes : Inflows represent inflows of equity (FDI and portfolio equity investment) divided by population based on
IMF data in 1995 US$. Data are for 72 countries and averaged over 5 year periods. FDI inflows correspond to
Direct Investment in Reporting Economy (line 78bed) which includes equity capital, reinvested earnings, other
capital, and financial derivatives associated with various intercompany transactions between affiliated
enterprises. Portfolio equity inflows correspond to Equity Liabilities (line 78bmd) which includes shares, stock
participations, and similar documents that usually denote ownership of equity. Rich countries denote high-
income OECD countries; poor countries denote the remaining ones.
                                            Figure 6b: Ratio of Equity Inflows to Total Capital Inflows
                                                         to Rich and Poor Countries, 1970-2000

                                            80%
         Equity Inflows / Capital Inflows




                                            70%

                                            60%

                                            50%

                                            40%

                                            30%

                                            20%

                                            10%

                                            0%
                                                  1970-1974   1975-1979   1980-1984   1985-1989   1990-1994   1995-2000



                                                               Rich Countries         Poor Countries




Notes: Inflows represent inflows of equity (FDI and portfolio equity investment) to total inflows (equity plus
debt), divided by population based on IMF data in 1995 US$. Data are for 72 countries for which equity data
are available averaged over 5 year periods. FDI inflows correspond to Direct Inv. in Reporting Econ. (line
78bed) which includes equity capital, reinvested earnings, other capital, and financial derivatives associated
with various intercompany transactions between affiliated enterprises. Portfolio equity inflows correspond to
Equity Liabilities (line 78bmd) which cover shares, stock participations, and similar documents that usually
denote ownership of equity. Data on inflows of debt include Debt Securities Liabilities (line 78bnd) which cover
bonds or negotiable debt instruments; and Other Investment Liabilities (line 78bid) which include all financial
transactions not covered in direct investment., portfolio investment, financial derivatives, or other assets. Rich
countries denote high-income OECD countries; poor countries denote the remaining ones.
                                             Figure 7: Regression of Inflows of Capital per
                                        Capita on Institutional Quality after Controlling for Other
                                                               Regressors
                                   4

                                                                                              SWE   NLD

                                   3
                                                                                                     FIN
                                                                                  GBR DNK
                                                                                                       AUS
                                   2                                                                     NZL
   Inflows of Capital per Capita




                                                                                                            PNG
                                   1                              PAK
                                                                                                          TUN
                                                                                    NOR
                                                                             FRA KEN                        PRT
                                                                CMR       CHLESP
                                                                               CAN
                                   0                               INDCZE        ARG BRA
                                                                        EGY JORMAR
                                                                       SENZAF KOR
                                                                COL      THA
                                                         BOL CYP    PRY     HUN
                                                                            USA    CRI
                                   -1          LKA         PHL         EST
                                             ISR               TUR                AUT
                                                                                       JPN
                                                                                   DEU
                                   -2                                                   ITA

                                                               ROM POL
                                   -3



                                   -4
                                     -0.4      -0.3     -0.2       -0.1       0           0.1        0.2        0.3
                                                                Institutional Quality


Notes: We first regressed the inflows of capital per capita on the regressors other than institutional
quality and took the residuals, which we then regressed on the residuals from a regression of
institutional quality on the other regressors (including a constant in both regressions). The coefficient
on institutional quality is then exactly the same as the coefficient in the multiple regression. We plot the
first set of residuals against the second set in the figure.
                                            Figure 8: Regression of Inflows of Capital per
                                          Capita on French Legal Origin Controlling for Other
                                                            Regressors
                                    4


                                    3                                SWE

                                                                     GBR
                                                                      DNK
                                    2
    Inflows of Capital per Capita




                                              PAK                  FIN



                                    1
                                                                    AUS
                                                             LKA
                                                     IND            ISR
                                                                    NZL            TUN
                                                                    NOR                         ESPFRA
                                    0               KEN                                  EGY    BOL
                                                                                                 CHL
                                                                      CAN                JOR COL
                                                                                               PHL
                                                                                            TUR
                                                             THA                           PRT ARG
                                                             KOR                             BRA
                                    -1                                   USA

                                                                    AUT                          CRI
                                                                     DEU
                                    -2                             JPN                             ITA


                                    -3
                                         -1               -0.5                 0           0.5           1
                                                                   French Legal Origin


Notes: We first regressed the inflows of capital per capita on the regressors other than French legal
origin and took the residuals, which we then regressed on the residuals from a regression of French
legal origin on the other regressors (including a constant in both regressions). The coefficient on the
French legal origin is then exactly the same as the coefficient in the multiple regression. We plot the
first set of residuals against the second set in the figure.
                                              Figure 9: Regression of Inflows of Capital per
                                            Capita on British Legal Origin Controlling for Other
                                                                Regressors
                                  4


                                  3                                  SWE

                                                                                                        GBR
                                                                     DNK
                                  2
  Inflows of Capital per Capita




                                                                          FIN                     PAK



                                  1
                                                                                                 AUS
                                                                                        LKA
                                                                                          ISR    IND
                                                                     FRA    TUN                  NZL
                                                                     ESP
                                  0                  BOL CHL       EGY NOR                             KEN
                                                                    JOR                                CAN
                                                      PHLCOL
                                                                TUR
                                                              ARG          PRT                   THA
                                                                 BRA
                                                                  KOR
                                  -1                                                                   USA

                                                                  CRI AUT
                                                                   DEU
                                  -2                              JPN
                                                                    ITA


                                  -3
                                       -1              -0.5                 0              0.5                1
                                                                 British Legal Origin


Notes: We first regressed the inflows of capital per capita on the regressors other than British legal
origin and took the residuals, which we then regressed on the residuals from a regression of British
legal origin on the other regressors (including a constant in both regressions). The coefficient on the
British legal origin is then exactly the same as the coefficient in the multiple regression. We plot the
first set of residuals against the second set in the figure.
                                    Figure 10: Evolution of Institutional Quality
                                             (Average of 47 Countries)
                        80



                        60
Institutional Quality




                        40
                                                                          Developing
                                                                          Countries
                                                                          All
                        20
                                                                          OECD Countries


                         0
                             1984   1986   1988   1990    1992     1994    1996     1998    2000


Notes: Institutional Quality Index is a composite political safety index, which is the sum of all the
rating components from International Country Risk Guide (ICRG). The components are as
follows: Government stability is defined as the government's ability to carry out its declared
programs and its ability to stay in office. It ranges from 0 to12. Internal conflict is defined as the
political violence in the country and its actual or potential impact on governance. It ranges from 0
to 12. External conflict is the risk to the incumbent government from foreign action, ranging from
non-violent external pressure to violent external pressure. It ranges from 0 to 12. No-corruption
is an index of the degree of the non-corruption within the political system. It ranges from 0 to 6.
Militarized politics is the degree of protection from the military involvement in politics. It ranges
from 0 to 6. A religious tension is the degree of the protection from religious tensions in the
society. It ranges from 0 to 6. The law component of the law and order index is an assessment
of the strength and impartiality of the legal system; the order component is the assessment of
the popular observance of the law. It ranges from 0 to 6. Ethnic tensions are the degree of
protection from the tensions attributable to racial, nationality or language divisions in the society.
It ranges from 0 to 12. Democratic Accountability ranges from 0 to 6, where a higher score
represents stable democracies and lower scores represents autocracies. Bureaucratic Quality
ranges from 0 to 4 and represents institutional strength and quality of the bureaucracy.
                                                       Figure 11: Regression of Volatility of Inflows of Capital
                                                           per Capita on Institutions Controlling for Other
                                                                             Regressors


                                                  1

                                                0.8                               JOR
  Volatility of Inflows of Capital per Capita




                                                                                   COL
                                                0.6                                  POL
                                                                            LKA
                                                                                                           DNK
                                                0.4
                                                                                           KOR
                                                                                                 BRA
                                                0.2                    CMR
                                                                          ISR        ZAF
                                                                                               ROM  SWE
                                                                       PAK          THA
                                                                                                  FIN
                                                                                           BOL USA
                                                                                              PRTGBR
                                                  0                         SEN TUN PNG         AUT
                                                                                               DEU
                                                                                     MAR      CRICAN
                                                                               KEN      ESP      NLD
                                                                                IND    PRYCZE
                                                                                      EGY    CHL
                                                -0.2                                          JPN NORNZL
                                                                                   TUR                                 HUN
                                                                            PHL CYP         FRA AUS
                                                                                        ARG
                                                                                          ESTITA
                                                -0.4

                                                -0.6
                                                    -0.6        -0.4       -0.2            0         0.2         0.4     0.6
                                                                                Institutional Quality

Notes: We first regressed the volatilitly of inflows of capital per capita on the regressors other than
institutional quality and took the residuals, which we then regressed on the residuals from a
regression of institutional quality on the other regressors (including a constant in both regressions).
The coefficient on the institutional quality is then exactly the same as the coefficient in the multiple
regression. We plot the first set of residuals against the second set.
                                                       Figure 12: Regression of Volatility of Inflows of Capital
                                                       per Capita on Inflation Volatility Controlling for Other
                                                                             Regressors

                                                  1

                                                0.8                                                                POL
                                                                                      JOR
   Volatility of Inflows of Capita per Capita




                                                0.6
                                                                              DNK
                                                                                                     BRA
                                                0.4          COL
                                                                                     KOR
                                                                     LKA                                     BOL
                                                                                                           ISR
                                                0.2                        SWE     FIN     CMR
                                                                            ROMGBR     THA
                                                                             USA
                                                                               PRT              SEN
                                                                             AUT
                                                                              DEU
                                                                              CAN
                                                  0              ZAF             CRI
                                                                                  NLD      CHL
                                                                                               JPN
                                                                             PNG                             ARG
                                                                        PAK ESP
                                                                        MARNZL
                                                                                KEN
                                                -0.2              TUN
                                                                      CZENOR AUS FRA
                                                             HUN     PRY IND                EST
                                                                 EGY          ITA
                                                -0.4                  TUR      CYP PHL



                                                -0.6
                                                       -1          -0.5         0             0.5           1            1.5
                                                                              Inflation Volatility

Notes: We first regressed the volatility of inflows of capital per capita on the regressors other than
inflation volatility and took the residuals, which we then regressed on the residuals from a regression
of inflation volatility on the other regressors (including a constant in both regressions). The coefficient
on inflation volatility is then exactly the same as the coefficient in the multiple regression. We plot the
first set of residuals against the second set in the figure.
                                                        Figure 13: Regression of Volatility of Inflows of Capital
                                                           per Capita on Bank Credit Controlling for Other
                                                                             Regressors


                                                 0.8
                                                                                                           JOR

                                                                                                                      POL
                                                 0.6
                                                                                                    COL
   Volatility of Inflows of Capital per Capita




                                                                                                    DNK

                                                 0.4
                                                                                             LKA          KOR
                                                                                                   BRA
                                                 0.2                                                SWE
                                                                                                     FIN
                                                                                                      ZAF       CMR
                                                                                                                 ISR
                                                                                               ROM USA THA
                                                                                                 GBRPRT
                                                                                                     AUT
                                                                                                     DEU
                                                                                                  CAN
                                                   0                                                  NLD
                                                                                                       PNG    SEN
                                                                                             CRI   PAKTUN
                                                                                              MAR      ESP
                                                                             BOL                     CZE
                                                                                              NZL AUS KEN  JPN
                                                 -0.2                                   CHL     NOR     FRA
                                                                                          PRYIND
                                                                HUN                    EGY              ARG
                                                                                              TUR ITA     CYP
                                                                                                         EST
                                                                                                         PHL
                                                 -0.4


                                                 -0.6
                                                     -0.8        -0.6      -0.4       -0.2          0           0.2     0.4
                                                                                   Bank Credit

Notes: We first regressed the volatility of inflows of capital per capita on the regressors other than
bank credit and took the residuals, which we then regressed on the residuals from a regression of
bank credit on the other regressors (including a constant in both regressions). The coefficient on the
bank credit is then exactly the same as the coefficient in the multiple regression. We plot the first set
of residuals against the second set in the figure.
                                                       Figure 14: Regression of Volatility (deviation from the
                                                       trend) of Inflows of Capital per Capita on Institutions
                                                                  Controlling for Other Regressors


                                                  1

                                                                                   JOR
                                                0.8
  Volatility of Inflows of Capital per Capita




                                                0.6


                                                0.4                   CMR
                                                                                   COL                  DNK
                                                                            LKA
                                                                                     POL
                                                                           SEN
                                                0.2                     ISR
                                                                                    PNGKOR BRA
                                                                                  TUNMAR              SWE
                                                                      PAK                       DEU
                                                                                                  GBR
                                                                                                    FIN
                                                                                KEN      ROMBOLUSA CAN
                                                  0                                ZAF EGY
                                                                                               JPN NLD
                                                                                                 AUT
                                                                                               PRT
                                                                                  THA PRY
                                                                                IND      ESP                        HUN
                                                                                CYP        CZE
                                                -0.2                                          CHL
                                                                                               CRI NOR
                                                                            PHL    TUR            AUSNZL
                                                                                             FRA
                                                                                              ITA
                                                                                        ARG
                                                                                          EST
                                                -0.4


                                                -0.6
                                                    -0.6       -0.4         -0.2         0        0.2         0.4     0.6
                                                                              Institutional Quality

Notes: We first regressed the volatility of net inflows of capital per capita on the regressors other than
institutional quality and took the residuals, which we then regressed on the residuals from a
regression of institutional quality on the other regressors (including a constant in both regressions).
The coefficient on the institutional quality then exactly the same as the coefficient in the multiple
regression. We plot the first set of residuals against the second set in the figure.
                                                      Figure 15: Regression of Volatility (not normalized) of
                                                     Inflows of Capital per Capita on Institutions Controlling
                                                                      for Other Regressors


                                                14

                                                12
                                                                                                       DNK
                                                                                                       SWE
   Volatility of Inflows of Capita per Capita




                                                10

                                                 8                                                  NLD
                                                                                                    GBR
                                                                                                     FIN
                                                 6

                                                 4
                                                                                           BOL                     HUN
                                                 2                                               CAN
                                                                                            CHL    NOR
                                                                                              DEU
                                                                                              USA
                                                                                           FRA
                                                 0                     ISR LKA       EGY
                                                                                                    NZL
                                                                                       ESP BRAAUT
                                                                                                AUS
                                                                              IND    PRY     PRT
                                                                    PAK          TURMAR  CZEJPN
                                                                                       ARG
                                                                                       ROM   CRI
                                                -2                              COL KOREST
                                                                               JOR
                                                                          PHL KENZAF
                                                                               CYP          ITA
                                                                                THA
                                                                                  PNG
                                                                                   POL
                                                                    CMR SEN TUN
                                                -4

                                                -6
                                                  -0.6       -0.4        -0.2        0           0.2         0.4     0.6
                                                                            Institutional Quality

Notes: We first regressed the Volatility of net inflows of capital per capita on the regressors other than
institutional quality and took the residuals, which we then regressed on the residuals from a
regression of institutional quality on the other regressors (including a constant in both regressions).
The coefficient on the institutional quality is then exactly the same as the coefficient in the multiple
regression. We plot the first set of residuals against the second set in the figure.
