NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WORK HOURS, WAGES, AND VACATION LEAVE
Joseph G. Altonji
Emiko Usui
Working Paper 11693
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11693
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2005

This research was supported by the Institute for Policy Research, Northwestern University, the Economic
Growth Center, Yale University, and the National Science Foundation under grants SES- 0112533 and SES0301142. We thank Derek Neal, Christopher Taber and participants in seminars at the Federal Reserve Bank
of Chicago, LSE, the Midwest Economic Association Meetings, NBER, Northwestern, the Universitat
Pompeu Fabra, and the Upjohn Institute for helpful comments. The usual disclaimer applies. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
©2005 by Joseph G. Altonji and Emiko Usui. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Work Hours, Wages, and Vacation Leave
Joseph G. Altonji and Emiko Usui
NBER Working Paper No. 11693
October 2005
JEL No. J2
ABSTRACT
Using the Panel Study of Income Dynamics and the Health and Retirement Study, we provide a set
of facts about vacation leave and its relationship to hours worked, hours constraints, wage rates,
worker characteristics, spouse's vacation leave, labor market experience, job tenure, occupation,
industry, and labor market conditions. We show that on average vacation time taken rises 1 to 1 with
paid vacation but varies around it, that annual hours worked fall by about 1 full time week with every
week of paid vacation, that the gap between time taken and time paid for is higher for women, union
members, and government workers, that hourly wage rates have a strong positive relationship with
paid vacation weeks both in the cross section and across jobs, and that nonwage compensation is
positively related to vacation weeks. We provide evidence that vacation leave is determined by broad
employer policy rather than by negotiation between the worker and firm. In particular, it is strongly
related to job seniority but depends very little on labor market experience, and for job changers it is
only weakly related to the amount of vacation on the previous job.
Joseph G. Altonji
Yale University
Department of Economics
PO Box 208269
New Haven, CT 06520-8269
and NBER
joseph.altonji@yale.edu
Emiko Usui
Department of Economics
Wayne State University
656 W. Kirby Street
2127 FAB
Detroit, MI 48202
usui@wayne.edu

1. Introduction
Empirical research on work hours is dominated by the massive labor supply literature, which
assumes that people can choose hours at a parametric wage.1 However, casual empiricism suggests
that firms have strong preferences about employee hours, and there is a good basis in theory for
believing this to be the case. The models of Ehrenberg (1971), Lewis (1969), Rosen (1968, 1969),
and Deardorff and Stafford (1976) emphasize the effect of startup costs, fatigue, and hiring and
training costs that are fixed per employee in shaping the hours preferences of firms. They also
consider nonlinearities in compensation that are induced by fringe benefits, payroll taxes, and
overtime pay as well as the costs of coordinating workers who work different hours. Rebitzer and
Taylor (1995), Landers et al. (1996) and Sousa-Poza and Ziegler (2003) provide a different class of
models in which firms regulate hours because hours requirements influence the quality of a firm’s
workforce.2
There is also substantial evidence that the hours choices of workers are in fact constrained by
the employer. For example, Altonji and Paxson (1986) and recent studies by Martinez-Granado
(2005) and Senesky (2004) show that the variances of changes in hours per week, weeks per year,
and annual hours worked are much larger across jobs than within the job. This evidence suggests that
work time is to an important extent a job specific phenomenon.3 Studies of the labor market for older
1

See Killingsworth (1983), Pencavel (1986) and Blundell and MaCurdy (1999) for comprehensive surveys. Cogan
(1981), Hanoch (1980) and subsequent studies have modified the basic framework to accommodate fixed costs, so that
worker preferences and budget parameters influence the form in which work hours are packaged. Rosen (1976), Biddle
and Zarkin (1989), and Moffitt (1984) are early examples of labor supply studies in which workers choose hours and
wages according to a market locus.
2
Their basic assumptions are that (1) work preferences are heterogeneous and unobserved by the firm and are either
correlated with skill or directly influence productivity affecting current and future effort levels or turnover decisions and
that (2) pay cannot be tied directly to the productivity of a worker. The difficulty in matching pay to productivity may
arise because productivity is unobservable or because of problems in devising and enforcing multi-period contracts,
particularly when turnover is a key issue. This will lead to reluctance on the part of highly productive workers who
happen to have strong leisure preferences to bargain for more vacation time. As a result, vacations will tend to be set by
firm wide policy rather than tailored to individuals. Too little vacation may be offered out of a fear of attracting less
productive workers.
3
The results of Altonji and Paxson (1986, 1992) as well as a substantial literature using self reported measures of
unemployment, underemployment, and overemployment (eg. Ham (1982, 1986), Kahn and Lang (1992, 1995), and
Altonji and Paxson (1988) suggest that workers face demand constraints that they cannot fully avoid by changing jobs.
Research by Paxson and Sicherman (1996) on dual job holding suggests that second jobs are sometimes used to adjust
hours on the margin despite the fact that they pay less per hour basis than full time jobs. Note that we abstract from
preferences of firms and workers regarding the timing of work over the day and the week. See Hamermesh (1996, 1998,
1999) for evidence.

1

workers have stressed restrictions on going part time with one’s current employer as well as a large
wage penalty associated with giving up a full time job for part time work in another firm (e.g.,
Gustman and Steinmeier (1983, 1984), Berkovec and Stern (1991), Hurd (1996), Elder (2004) and
Aaronson and French (2004)).4 In summary, restrictions on choice of hours in a given job appear to
be a key feature of the labor market.
Firms regulate days of work by establishing fixed holidays, paid and unpaid vacation and
personal days (hereafter, vacation days) and provisions for excused absences due to illness or family
considerations, perhaps with pay. Strictly from a budget point of view, there is no meaningful
economic distinction between “paid” and unpaid vacation. One can always adjust the wage rate paid
for time worked to achieve a given level of annual compensation for a given amount of time worked
over the year. However, adjusting time off without leaving an employment relationship involves
authorized leave.5 Indeed, a number of countries, particularly in Europe, regulate work time by
requiring employers to provide a minimum number of paid vacation days. Consequently, data on
paid vacation days and other forms of regular leave provide a direct measure of the work
requirements imposed on the worker by the firm or by law. Leave policy is of interest in its own
right and as a window on how hours are determined in the labor market. Analyzing it may help
inform the contentious debate over whether Americans work more than the optimal amount given
preferences and productivity, as is implied by some of the adverse selection models of hours
determination mentioned above.6 Since little is known about this important job characteristic, we fill
the gap by providing a set of facts about vacation leave and its relationship to hours worked, hours
constraints, wage rates, worker characteristics, labor market experience and job tenure, occupation,
industry and labor market conditions.
Specifically, we use the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), and other sources,
including the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) to address the following questions about vacation
leave.
1. What are the distributions of weeks of paid vacation received and vacation weeks
actually taken, and how do they relate? In particular, what is the effect of weeks of
paid vacation on weeks actually taken?
4

Blank (1990a, 1990b) considers selection bias issues and concludes that there is a substantial premium to working full
time in many but not all types of jobs. Aaronson and French (2004) provide fairly compelling evidence for a substantial
full time premium.
5
Both firms and individuals also care about the daily work schedule. See Hamermesh (1999) for analysis of the
distribution of work hours by time of day and days of the week.
6
See Altonji and Oldham (2003) for a brief discussion of theoretical arguments for vacation laws. See Schor (1991),
Kniesner (1993) and Stafford (1992) for conflicting view on trends in hours in the U.S.

2

2. How are weeks worked per year, hours per week, hours per year on the main job, and
annual hours on other jobs influenced by weeks of paid vacation and weeks actually
taken? Do workers offset vacation on the main job by working longer hours?
3. How are personal characteristics that influence wages and hours preference related to
vacation time? Is vacation time taken influenced by the amount of paid vacation time
received by a spouse, conditional on one’s own paid vacation time?
4. How do hourly wage rates and weeks of paid vacation relate?
5. How does vacation time vary with labor market experience and seniority?
6. Does vacation time on a previous job influence vacation time on subsequent jobs? We
use this question to provide indirect evidence on the issue of whether workers
negotiate over vacation time when taking new jobs.
7. How do weeks of paid vacation and weeks actually taken vary with job characteristics
such as union membership, government employment, occupation, and industry? Do
they depend on percent female in an occupation? Has the relationship between
percent female and vacation time weakened over time?
8. Is vacation time countercyclical, as predicted by some equilibrium business cycle
models?
The paper continues in Section 2, with a brief discussion of economic content of paid and
unpaid vacation leave policy. In Section 3 we discuss the data. In Section 4 we present the empirical
analysis. In the conclusion we summarize the main empirical findings and provide a research agenda.

2. Vacation Policy and the Worker’s Choice Set
Because there is virtually no discussion of vacation policy in the labor economics literature,
we set the stage by discussing the implications of vacation policy for the tradeoff between earnings
and hours that workers face.7 Assume that days worked is the only dimension over which hours vary,
and that people work five days a week. Suppose the worker has preferences over consumption C and
leisure VT, where VT = 52 – H, H is weeks worked, and VT and H are measured in 5 day work weeks.
Let VP be paid vacation and VU be unpaid vacation, with VT = VP + VU. The worker’s annual
earnings E are determined by the function

7

Beam and McFadden (1998) and Maniaci (2001) discuss employee leave policies from a personnel management
perspective.

3

E(VT; VP, VUmax, wcash, CARRY-OVER, p)
where p is the worker’s weekly productivity, VUmax is the maximum amount of unpaid vacation that
the firm will permit, wcash is the price at which a worker may cash in vacation time, and CARRYOVER indicates whether a worker may carry over vacation to the next year or subsequent year.
If VT may not exceed paid leave (VUmax = 0) and unused vacation may not be carried over or
cashed in, then the worker’s budget constraint is
(2.1) E(VT; VP, VUmax = 0, wcash = 0, CARRY-OVER = no, p)
=

0

if VT > VP

=

p·(52–VP)

if 0 ≤ VT ≤ VP.

Assuming a competitive labor market, the worker will be paid a weekly wage of p·(52–VP)/52
throughout the year.
There is no difference from the worker’s point of view between the above policy with VP
equal to some value VP0 and VUmax = 0 and an alternative policy with VP = 0, VUmax = VP0, the
requirement that the worker take unpaid leave, and a payrate of p while working.
Below we display Table 18 from the Bureau of Labor Statistics 1997 Employee Benefits
Survey (EBS), which reports the fraction of full-time workers in medium and large private
establishments who can cash in vacation days. Fifty-two percent of all workers who receive paid
vacation for whom data are available can neither carry over nor cash in vacation, and so their budget
constraint is described by (2.1). Fourteen percent of all workers can cash in vacation days but not
carry them over, 11 percent can either cash them in or carry them over, and 24 percent can only carry
them over. (The corresponding values for 1988 are 15, 5, and 25 percent, suggesting an increase in
flexibility of vacation time.)8

8

The table also shows substantial variation by occupation category. A much larger percentage of professional and
technical employees can carry over vacation, which is consistent with the idea that the work schedules for such workers
may be tailored to variation over time in the needs of the firm and/or the workers.

4

Source: Employee Benefits in Medium and Large Private Establishments, 1997, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Bulletin
2517, 1999.

When workers can cash in vacation weeks at the rate p·(52–VP0)/52, the budget constraint is
(2.2) E(VT; VP, VUmax = 0, wcash = p, CARRY-OVER = no, p)
=

0

if VT > VP

=

p·(52–VP) + p·(VP–VT) = p·(52–VT)

if 0 ≤ VT ≤ VP.

There is no difference from the worker’s point of view between the above policy with VP equal to
some value VP0 and an alternative policy with no paid vacation, VUmax = VP0, and no requirement
that the worker actually take VT = VUmax. Annual earnings, VT, and H would be the same. The
hourly wage would be 52/(52–VT) higher for the worker without paid vacation when she is working
and 0 when she is not. (If the cash in rate is the normal weekly wage p·(52–VP0)/52 rather than
productivity p, then the worker without paid vacation is slightly better off.)
Finally, consider the case in which workers may carry over VP but are not permitted to cash it
in or to take unpaid vacation. In this case, the earnings function is the same as (2.1), but the stock of
vacation days available to the worker in the following year increases by VP – VT. Many company

5

plans that allow carryover cap the amount at a certain number of days.9
Casual empiricism suggests that the situation is more complicated than the above three special
cases might imply. First, the timing of vacation schedules is often subject to the employer’s
approval. Second, workers face a multiperiod budget constraint in which future wage rates are based
upon past performance levels. In some cases, workers may face an implicit trade-off between VT and
advancement prospects even when VT is less than VP. Third, although we do not have data on this,
some employers require workers to take vacation time. Finally, several human resources textbooks
that we consulted mention that some firms offer employees the option of “buying” additional
vacation time as part of a flexible benefits package. (These are similar to plans in which employees
are permitted to take some unpaid leave.) We could not find evidence on the prevalence of such
plans. A major goal of the paper is to assess the degree to which rigidities in vacation policy
determine vacation time taken and annual hours worked.

3. Data
We have identified two U.S. household datasets with panel data on vacation time.10 The first
is the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). The PSID contains panel data on wage rates, weeks
worked per year and hours worked per week on the main job, hours worked on secondary jobs,
whether the individual could have worked more or could have worked less on the job, whether she
would have liked to have worked more, and whether she would have liked to have worked less even
if “you earned less money.” It also contains information about union membership, government
employment, industry, occupation, location, education, race, labor market experience, job seniority,
quits, and layoffs.
VT is based on responses to the question, “Did you take any vacation or time off during
19XX? How much vacation or time off did you take?” Heads of household were asked the question
in all years and wives were asked in 1976 and from 1979 on. We use data for the calendar years
1975-1991. VP is based on responses to the question, “How many weeks of paid vacation do you get
each year?” The question was asked of employed heads of household in 1975-1977 and 1984 and of
employed wives in 1976 and 1984.
9

For example, Yale University’s policy states, “The University encourages employees to use their vacations for rest and
relaxation. Consonant with that policy, employees with less than 10 years service may carry a maximum of 44 unused
vacation days into the new fiscal year” (http://www.yale.edu/hronline/busmgr/0305/hr_e.html).
10
In the Current Population Survey (CPS) persons who report that they were temporarily absent or on layoff “last week”
are asked why they were absent. “On vacation” is one of the responses. The CPS could support an analysis of trends in
vacation time but lacks the panel structure and rich set of covariates that are in the PSID and the HRS.

6

The measures of quits, layoffs, job seniority, and labor market experience are taken from
Altonji and Williams (2005). The coding of most of the other variables used in the study is
reasonably straightforward and is summarized in Appendix A.
Our analysis of the effects of occupation uses information on occupational characteristics
from the Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT) aggregated to the three-digit Census occupation
category. The measure of gender composition of the occupation is the proportion of female workers
in the worker’s three-digit Census occupational category. The estimates below use the proportion
female based on the 1980 Census.11
We make limited use of the Health and Retirement Study (HRS). The sample is composed of
persons between the ages of 51 and 61 at the start of the survey and their spouses. The 1992, 1994,
1996, 1998, 2000, and 2002 waves contain questions about weeks of paid vacation, the number of
days of paid sick leave allowed each year, and the number of days of work missed during the
previous 12 months because of health problems. The HRS provides data on whether the person could
reduce hours, whether the person would like to reduce hours even if earnings were reduced
proportionately, whether the person could increase hours, whether the person would like to increase
hours if earnings were increased proportionately, and how many additional hours the person would
like to work. It also provides data on job seniority, job mobility, and fringe benefits. The
information is available for both the sample member and the spouse of the sample member. The
major disadvantages of the HRS for our purposes are the facts that it does not ask about weeks of
vacation taken and that it covers a relatively narrow age range. Means for the PSID and HRS of the
main variables used in the study are in Table A1.

4. Empirical Results
4.1 The Distributions of Weeks of Paid Vacation Received and Weeks of Vacation Taken
What are the distributions of paid vacation time and unpaid vacation time? Do people use all
of their paid vacation time? Is there substantial unpaid vacation time? How do the two measures
interrelate? To answer these questions, we start by displaying the distributions of weeks of paid
vacation (VP) and weeks of vacation taken (VT). In Section 4.2 we discuss trends in vacation leave
and in Section 4.3 we use regression methods to examine the relationship between the two vacation
measures and work hours.
11

We obtain similar results when we linearly interpolate using information from the 1980 and 1990 Censuses.

7

We focus on persons who work 35 or more hours per week on their main job, were between
the ages of 19 and 59, had left school and not returned, had not retired, and were not self employed.
We do not condition on weeks worked per year. To insure that reports of vacation time over the year
refer to persons in the same job for the entire year, we also restrict the analysis to individuals with at
least .5 years of seniority at the time of the survey and exclude observations in a given year if the
current job ended prior to the next interview. Unless stated otherwise, we use these sample
restrictions throughout the paper.
Figure 1 presents the distributions of paid vacation weeks (VP) and vacation weeks taken (VT)
for men based on the years when both are available. (The distribution of VT using 1975-1991 is
similar, as shown in Appendix Figure A4.) We find that 10.7 percent of the men report no paid
weeks, 11.9 percent report 1 week, 34.3 percent report 2 weeks, 19.4 percent report 3 weeks, 14.1
percent report 4 weeks, 6.4 percent report 5 weeks, and 3.2 percent report 6 or more weeks. The
distribution of VT is similar. The distributions of VP and VT for women are similar to those for men
(Figure 2). However, 10.0 percent of women report 8 or more weeks of vacation taken while only
2.1 percent report 8 or more paid weeks.
Figure 3 presents the distribution of VT – VP. The difference is zero for 51.7 percent of the
men and 46.2 percent of the women.12 For men the distribution between the values of -4 and 4 is
skewed to the left, indicating that men are more likely to take fewer vacation weeks than they are
paid for. This is also true for women, although the skew is less pronounced. Taken at face value, the
figures suggest that in a given year many workers take less vacation or more vacation than they are
paid for. Part of this is probably measurement error. Part may reflect decisions to carry over paid
vacation across years and part may reflect occupations with a seasonal component to the work year.
For men and women combined teachers account for only 3.4 percent of the sample but for 38.7
percent of the cases where VT exceeds VP by more than 2 weeks.
4.2 Time Trends in Weeks of Paid Vacation and Weeks of Vacation Taken
We have estimated a full set of year dummies in regressions for VT that also contain the
detailed set of control variables used in Table 3, column 4. These consist of demographic
characteristics, experience, seniority, union membership, government employment and industry and
12

In Appendix Figures A1, A2, and A3 we present the distributions of VP, VT, and VT – VP for people who work
between 15 and 34 hours per week on their main job. Thirty-four percent of the men and 41.2 percent of the women in
this group report 0 for VP. 32.5 percent of the men and 21.7 percent of the women in this group report 0 for VT. It is
unclear how part time workers interpret the question, “did you take any vacation or time off?”

8

occupation dummies. The year dummies (not reported) show an inverted U-shaped pattern in which
VT rises by about 1 day between 1975 and 1983 and then slowly returns to mid-1970s levels by the
early 1990s. In the PSID we do not have enough years of data to study trends in VP. The Bureau of
Labor Statistics’ the Employee Benefits Surveys (EBS) for 1982 (Table 8) and 1988 (Table 5, Table
108) show little change in paid vacation days for full-time workers in medium and large firms when
coverage changes in the survey are taken into account. Between 1988 and 1993 paid vacation days
increased by about .5 days, with the largest increase for professional and administrative employees
(EBS 1988-Table 5; EBS 1993-Table 11). Between 1993 and 1997 VP rose by about .2 days for
seniority of 10 or less with a small decrease for higher seniority levels (EBS 1997-Table 13). It is
difficult to make comparisons after 1997, because the published tables for full-time workers are no
longer broken down by firm size. However, the available information suggests that any changes are
small.
4.3 The Effect of Weeks of Paid Vacation on Weeks of Vacation Taken, Weeks Worked, and Annual
Hours Worked
The Effect of Weeks of Paid Vacation on Weeks of Vacation Taken
In Appendix Table A2 we report the means of VT and various measures of hours worked for a
given value of weeks of VP. Men who report 0 paid weeks take an average of 2.39 weeks of vacation
taken. Surprisingly, weeks taken fall to 1.38 for persons reporting 1 paid week. Weeks taken then
rise with paid weeks. Women show the same pattern. Weeks worked on the main job more or less
mirror the pattern of vacation weeks taken (column 2). The table suggests that there are some 35+
hours per week jobs that allow for substantial amounts of “unpaid” time off but do not provide paid
leave. Many of these jobs are in education---38.9 percent of K12 and college and university teachers
report positive VT and 0 VP. 28.2 percent of the individuals in the education services industry report
positive VT and 0 VP. As noted in Section 4.1, some jobs with 0 paid vacation weeks may have a
strong seasonal component to demand, such as construction work. For seasonal jobs, the implicit
employment contract may be structured so that vacation is taken during the off season, perhaps with a
subsidy from the unemployment insurance system.13
13

Effort by the PSID interviewer to insure that reports of vacation weeks, weeks worked on the main job, weeks lost due
to illness, etc. sum to 52 may build in negative correlation between measurement error in VT and weeks worked.
Consequently, one cannot directly examine the link between vacation weeks and unemployment weeks because they are
mutually exclusive categories in the survey. Instead, we examine the link between VT and employment status at the
survey date. The mean of VT is 1.28 for individuals who are unemployed at the survey date in given year, 3.12 for
persons on temporary layoff, and 2.93 those who are employed. A regression containing the controls in Table 1, column

9

Regression provides a clearer picture of the relationship between VP and VT. The first row of
Table 1 reports OLS estimates of the coefficient of the regression of VT on VP and alternative sets of
control variables for the pooled sample of men and women. (To reduce the influence of outlier
observations and reporting error we recoded the approximately 1 percent of observations reporting
more than 7 paid weeks to 7.) The regression coefficient on VP is only .467 (.019) when we exclude
all controls. However, when we add a dummy 1(VP>0) for whether the worker receives paid
vacation, the coefficient on VP rises to .799 (.023) (row 1, column 2). The coefficient on the dummy
1(VP > 0) is -2.80 (.110). Part of this effect is related to the substantial difference in the nature of
jobs that do and jobs that do not offer paid vacation.14 When we include 1(VP > 0) and add controls
for education, a quartic in experience, the interaction between education and experience, marital
status, disability status, sex, race, city size, region, and calendar year, the coefficient on VP falls to
.671 (.024). Thus, VP has a strong influence on VT, but the effect is not 1 to 1. The coefficient falls
to .430 (.027) when we add controls for seniority (a cubic), union membership, and government
employment. Intertemporal substitution in the use of VP cannot easily explain the shortfall, because
such substitution is likely to introduce a mean zero error into the model. However, reporting error in
VP could explain the shortfall.
We address reporting error in two ways. First, we have re-estimated the models in row 2,
columns 1-6 using a 2 step estimator in which we first predict weeks of paid vacation using weeks of
paid vacation in the previous year and the other variables in the model. When we control for 1(VP >
0), the coefficient on paid weeks rises to between .979 (.052) and 1.10 (.034) depending on the
control set used (row 2, columns 2 and 6). Second, we exploit the fact that VP depends strongly on
job tenure by re-estimating the models in columns 1-4 using the first 3 powers of tenure as the
instrumental variables. This requires the assumption that seniority does not have a direct influence
on VT given VP. When we control for 1(VP > 0), the coefficient on VP is .985 (.045) when all other
controls are excluded and 1.28 (.059) when they are included (row 3, columns 2 and 4).
Overall, the regressions of VT on VP indicate that, on average, VT rises about one for one with
2 plus industry dummies indicates that mining and extraction, agriculture, forestry and fishing, durable goods, and
educational services all have unusually large amounts of VT relative to VP (not reported).
14
For men, 33.6, 12.4, and 13.6 percent of jobs with no paid vacation are in construction or agriculture, forestry and
fisheries, or educational services (respectively), while only 3.9, 1.2 and 4.4 percent of jobs with paid vacation are in these
industries. Men in jobs with no paid vacation have lower tenure, are less educated, are less likely to be married, are more
likely to be black, and are less likely to be unionized than men who receive at least a week of paid vacation. Few women
are in agriculture and construction, which are the source of many of the VP = 0 observations for men. In contrast, for
women educational services account for 42.4 percent of the jobs with no paid vacation but only 10.5 percent of the jobs
with paid vacation. Personal services accounts for 8.6 percent and 3.8 percent, respectively.

10

weeks of paid leave even though VT fluctuates around paid weeks for a given year. We cannot rule
out the possibility that the difference in the 2 step estimates using lagged VP with controls for tenure
and the IV estimates using tenure as an instrument arises because variation across firms in VP has a
weaker relationship to VT than the component of variation associated with tenure. This might be the
case if implicit norms about vacation time influence VT given VP and vary less than one to one with
VP across firms.

Vacation Time and Hours and Weeks Worked
In the top panel of Table 2, we report OLS estimates of the relationship between VT and
various work time measures. Each coefficient (standard error) in the table refers to a separate
regression. The column headings identify the dependent variable and the row headings indicate the
controls used. When all controls are excluded, the coefficient of VT on annual hours worked on all
jobs is -44.3 (1.1), which indicates that an extra week of vacation is associated with about 1 less week
of work (column 6, row 1). The coefficient is -51.6 (1.1) when the demographic controls are added
and -45.3 (1.2) when tenure, union membership, and government employment are added. Almost all
of the effect is through weeks worked on the main job. The relationships between VT and
hours/week and VT and annual hours on extra jobs are weak.15
The second panel of Table 2 presents regressions results using VP as the vacation measure.
(The means of the hours measures by VP level are in Table 1.) When the demographic controls are
included, the effect of VP on weeks worked is only .015 (.038), in sharp contrast to the coefficient of
-1.09 (.012) using VT. There is a similar discrepancy between the effects of VP and VT on annual
hours worked on all jobs (column 6).
The discrepancy between the results for VP and VT is accounted for by the substantial positive
difference in weeks worked between persons who receive 1 paid week and persons who receive no
paid vacation. When we add the dummy variable 1(VP > 0) to the model with the basic control set,
the coefficient on VP is -.626 (.046) for weeks worked and -24.5 (4.03) for annual hours on all jobs
(Table 2a, columns 1 and 6). 2SLS estimates of the effect of VP on weeks worked using the first 3
powers of tenure as the excluded instruments (Table 2a, bottom) are more negative than but
reasonably consistent with the OLS estimates of the effect of VT in Table 2 and the OLS estimates of
15

When we include the basic set of controls, we find that hours/week on the main job drop by .195 (.017) hours per week
with each extra week of vacation (column 2, row 2). This amounts to an annual reduction of about 10 hours for someone
working 50 weeks. However, the coefficient on VT is only -.067 (.019) when seniority, union membership, and
government employment are controlled for. The corresponding coefficient for annual hours on extra jobs is 3.64 (.682)
when the basic set of controls is included and 3.17 (.735) when the full set is included.

11

the effect of VP in Table 2a, especially when sampling error is kept in mind. Basically, an extra
week of paid vacation is associated with a reduction in weeks worked on the main job with no offset
or even a small reduction in the other dimensions of work hours.
It is interesting to compare our results for vacation time at the individual level to the country
level analysis of Altonji and Oldham (2003). Altonji and Oldham regress annual work hours on the
minimum number of weeks of paid vacation and holiday required by law for a panel of several
European countries and the U.S. When they control for year and country, they find that an additional
week of legislated paid vacation reduces annual hours worked by 51.9 (11.7) hours. This estimate in
conjunction with other estimates for alternative specifications in their paper implies that mandating
an extra week of paid vacation translates approximately one for one into a reduction in weeks
worked. It suggests that the laws are binding for vacation time and that there is little or no offset
through other dimensions of hours.
4.4 Personal Characteristics and Vacation Time
In Table 3 we display the coefficients on personal characteristics in regressions for VT, VP,
and VT – VP. Columns 1-3 exclude controls for a cubic in tenure, union membership, and
government employment. Controls for labor market experience (a cubic), education times
experience, city size, region, and calendar year are also included in the regression models (not
reported).
Women take .973 (.072) more weeks of vacation than men but receive only .070 (.043) more
paid vacation. VP and VT are both a bit higher for married people. Blacks receive and take about .26
fewer weeks vacation than whites.
Perhaps surprisingly, those with a health problem that hinders work take about .344 (.117)
fewer weeks of vacation but receive about the same amount of paid vacation. One might speculate
that health problems boost sick time but reduce reported vacation time taken for a given number of
weeks of paid vacation. Paid sick leave might lead to a reduction in vacation time taken to recover
from illness.16

16

The HRS lacks data on vacation time taken but does report days of work missed due to health and the number of days
of paid sick leave at full pay the individual earns each year, which we have converted to 5 day weeks. The data are only
obtained for persons who are with new employers or who have changed positions with an employer. In a regression of
weeks lost due to illness on VP, paid sick weeks, dummies for 1(VP > 0) and 1(paid sick weeks > 0), controls for
demographic variables, seniority, union membership, and government employment, the coefficient on VP is -.050 (.031)
and the coefficient on paid sick weeks is .214 (.032). Thus, there is little evidence that employees use paid vacation as
sick leave. In a similar regression for paid sick weeks the coefficient on paid vacation weeks is .245 (.036). This positive

12

These basic results change only slightly when controls for seniority, union membership, and
government employment are added in columns 4-6 of the table.

Interactions between Vacation Time of Husbands and Wives
Is the amount of vacation married men and women take constrained by the paid vacation time
of their spouse? To investigate this, we regress VT on VP, VP of the spouse, indicators for (VP > 0)
and (VP of spouse > 0) and control set 2 defined in Table 2. The sample is restricted to couples in
which both spouses work 35 or more hours per week. For husbands the coefficient on VP of the wife
is .134 (.062). For wives the coefficient on VP of the husband is -.141 (.105), which is opposite from
what one would expect if vacation time of husbands and wives are complements but is not
statistically significant.17
We also tried replacing VP of the spouse with the function min(VP, VP of the spouse). If
leisure time of the husband and wife are complements, then the spouse with the least amount of paid
vacation may constrain vacation taken by the other. This would imply a positive coefficient on
min(VP, VP of spouse) when VP is also controlled for. A substitution effect could go the other way.
The coefficient on min(VP, VP of spouse) is .297 (.091) in the husband’s equation, but -.290 (.169) in
the wife’s equation.
In summary, VT is increasing in spouse’s VP for husbands and decreasing for wives.
However, the coefficient on spouse’s VP is statistically insignificant in the case of wives, and so we
should not make too much of the asymmetry.
4.5 The Relationship between Wage Rates and Weeks of Paid Vacation
Assume that a worker is on her labor supply curve and works 50 weeks a year. Then by the
envelope theorem she should be willing to reduce weeks worked by one week in exchange for a
reduction in pay of about 1/50th, or two percent. Alternatively, suppose the worker must choose
between a job that offers two paid weeks of vacation with no unpaid leave permitted and a job
offering one paid week and one unpaid week of vacation. The worker will be indifferent between the
two jobs if they provide the same annual compensation. This will occur if the hourly wage rate for
the job with two paid weeks is approximately two percent lower than the hourly wage for the job

value is consistent with the view that the generosity levels of the various benefits that firms offer are positively correlated.
We return to this issue in Section 4.5.
17
The sample sizes are only 1,340 for husbands and 1,144 observations for wives in part because data on paid vacation
for wives is only available in 1976 and 1984. We obtain similar results when we drop the 35+ hours restriction.

13

offering only one paid week of vacation. This prediction follows from the budget constraint. It is
sharper than the predictions one normally obtains from the theory of compensating differentials
because in most applications one does know how the job attribute is valued while in the second
example the person works fifty weeks in both jobs.18
On the other hand, the search theoretic models of Hwang, Mortensen and Reed (1998), Lang
and Majumdar (2004), and Dey and Flinn (2005) are consistent with a positive relationship between
vacation weeks and wages. One possibility is that heterogeneity across firms in the value of a match
leads some firms to adopt high wages and fringe benefits to increase offer acceptances and reduce
turnover. The most likely story is that the amount of vacation leave that best balances preferences of
firms and workers is increasing in the skill level of the jobs and is positively associated with wages.
Wages and vacation time tend to move together as job changers move up and down the job quality
ladder as a result of random search outcomes and employer learning about worker quality.
In Table 4 we report estimates of the effect of paid weeks of vacation on the log hourly wage
rate. The sample consists of men and women. Columns 1-3 report results for the combined sample
of hourly and salary workers. Columns 4-6 are for hourly workers and columns 7-9 are for salary
workers. The model in columns 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, and 8 contains the linear term VP and the dummy 1(VP
> 0). In contrast to the simple compensating differentials story, for the hourly worker sample the
coefficient on VP is .095 (.004), which is positive rather than negative (column 4). The coefficient on
VP declines to .077 (.005) when demographic controls, seniority, union membership, and government
employment are all controlled for. Results for the combined sample and for the salaried sample are
similar.
Note, however, that the coefficient on 1(VP > 0) is large and negative for the combined
sample and for hourly workers, although it is positive for salary workers. Columns 3, 6, and 9 report
estimates of a model containing dummy variables for each vacation category, with VP = 2 as the
reference category. As one can see, the move from 0 to 1 week is associated with a decrease in
wages in all three samples, as predicted by the theory of compensating differentials, but the decrease
18

If workers are over employed at the standard level of vacation weeks, as some proponents of minimum vacation laws
argue, the compensating differential for giving up a week of paid leave and working should be even larger than 1/50. To
see this, assume that workers are not hours constrained at a job offering the wage rate w(VP*) and VP* paid weeks of
vacation. Let w(VP**) for some VP** < VP* be the wage rate at which the individual is indifferent between working 52 –
VP* weeks and receiving 52·w(VP*) and working 52 – VP** weeks for 52·w(VP**). Following along the lines of Abowd
and Ashenfelter’s (1981) analysis of hours constraints, one may show that

w(VP** ) − w(VP* )
1 (VP* − VP** )2 VP* − VP**
≈ .5 ⋅
+
e 52 ⋅ (52 − VP* )
52
W (VP* )
where e is the compensated labor elasticity. If e is .2 and VP* is 5, then w(2) should exceed w(5) by about 6.7 percent of
the w(5) wage. If VP* = 5, w(2) should exceed w(3) by about 2.3 percent of the w(2) wage.

14

is unreasonably large for hourly and salary workers combined and for hourly workers. After that,
wages rise substantially with additional weeks through the 5th week. We have already documented
that the occupation and industry distribution of jobs with VP = 0 differs substantially from that of
jobs which offer paid vacation. We have also shown that VT is higher and annual weeks worked is
lower in jobs with VP = 0.
Appendix Table A3 reports similar results for the HRS. For example, for hourly workers the
coefficients on VP and 1(VP > 0) are .062 (.004) and -.061 (.015) in the specification corresponding
to column 5 of Table 4.
Presumably, the positive wage coefficient in the HRS and the PSID reflects bias from
unobserved skills of the worker and/or characteristics of the job that influence wages and paid
vacation in the same direction. Such bias in wage level regressions is widely discussed in the
compensating differentials literature. Adding two-digit occupation controls and two-digit industry
controls reduces the coefficient on 1(VP > 0) by about half but has little effect on the VP coefficient.
A number of papers have used job changes to examine the link between wages and job
characteristics, including early papers Brown (1980) and Duncan and Holmlund (1983) and recent
papers by Usui (2004) and Villanueva (2004). The HRS sample is sufficient to permit estimation of
wage change regressions of the form
(4.1) ∆Wit = a0 + a1Lit + a2Qit ∆VPit + a3Qit ∆[1(VPit > 0)] + a4 Lit ∆VPit
+ a5 Lit ∆[1(VPit > 0)] + a6∆OCCit + a7∆Zit + uit
where ∆ is the first difference operator across time, Wit is the log wage, Qit is 1 if the person changed
jobs between surveys due to a quit and Lit is 1 if the person changed jobs due to a layoff, OCCit is a
vector of occupation dummies, and Zit consists of a cubic in tenure, a quartic in experience, education
times experience, health limitation dummies, and dummies for marital status, union membership,
government employment, region, and year. We restrict the sample to job changers who were less
than 60, had not retired, and worked more than 35 hours per week in both the current and previous
survey years.
The estimates are reported in Table 5. Column 4 refers to the combined sample of hourly and
salary workers. The estimate of a2 is .038 (.010) and the estimate of a4 is .046 (.014). The positive
coefficients cannot be easily be attributed to bias from unobserved variation in worker skill and are
also hard to square with a simple story about bias due heterogeneity in wage offers across job
matches for a given value of VP.
The positive association between wages and VP is mirrored in the relationship between VP
15

and fringe benefits. Using fringe benefits data from the 1984 wave of the PSID, we obtain substantial
positive coefficients when we regress dummies for whether the employer provides health insurance,
paid sick days, dental benefits, life insurance, and a pension plan on VP and the full set of controls
(not shown). In the HRS we also find a strong positive association between VP and presence of a
pension plan. We have also used the HRS to study the relationship between changes in benefits and
changes in VP following a quit or a layoff using a regression specification analogous to column 3 of
Table 5. For both quits and layoffs the change in the probability of having a pension plan is
positively related to the change in the number of weeks of VP. The change in the probability that the
worker gets sick leave is also a positive function of VP in the case of quits.
In summary, we find that the wage and other job benefits vary positively with VP.
4.6 Hours Constraints and Vacation Time
We use a series of questions in the PSID about whether the individual would like to reduce
hours “even if it meant less money” and whether the individual could have worked less if she wanted
to to construct an overemployment indicator. We also used a parallel set of questions to construct a
measure of underemployment. Precise estimates from separate probit models with controls for
demographic characteristics, job seniority, union membership, government employment and 1(VP >
0) show that the effect of VT and VP on the probability of reporting overemployment is essentially
zero. Using similar questions in the HRS we find that one week of paid vacation raises the
probability of overemployment by .006 (.003). In both the PSID and the HRS the probability of
reporting underemployment falls with VT and with VP. In the PSID an extra week of VP is
associated with a reduction of .022 (.005) in the probability of reporting underemployment, which
compares to the mean probability of .268. Consequently, we have no evidence suggesting that
vacation time alleviates overemployment or exacerbates underemployment, in contrast to what
popular discussion of the “overworked American” might lead one to expect.19
4.7 The Effects of Experience, Seniority and Job Mobility on Vacation Time
In this section we measure the effects of experience and seniority on VP and VT, establish that
vacation time is largely a function of tenure rather than labor market experience, and provide
suggestive evidence that vacation time reflects broad firm policy rather than the preferences and
19

In the PSID we obtain similar results for women with children under 12.

16

bargaining power of individual workers.

OLS and Instrumental Variables Estimates of the Experience and Tenure Profiles
In Table 6 we present estimates of the effects of labor market experience and tenure on VT,
VP, and VT – VP. The estimates are based on regression models that a cubic in tenure, a quartic in
experience, the interaction between experience and education, and a set of control variables. We
estimate separate models for men and women.
Column 1 presents OLS estimates of the effects of 2, 5, 10, and 20 years of tenure and 5, 10,
20, and 30 years of experience prior to the start of the job. The results show that VT rises by .258
(.019) over the first two years on the job, 1.14 (.048) over the first 10 years, and 2.00 (.044) over the
first 20 years. The relationship between VT and experience is flat.20 Column 2 uses Altonji and
Shakotko’s (1987) instrumental variables strategy to deal with the possibility that tenure is correlated
with unobserved person specific and job specific heterogeneity that also influences VT. The
estimated effects of seniority on VT are about one third less than the OLS estimates, and the estimates
of the effects of experience are close to zero.
The second panel of the table reports estimates for VT for the sample used to study VP. The
estimates of the effect of seniority are very similar to estimates for the full set of years, although the
standard errors are much larger in the IV case.
The third panel reports estimates of the effects of tenure and experience on VP. The OLS
estimates and the IV estimates are very similar for both men and women through ten years of
seniority. The IV estimates actually lie above the OLS estimates at 20 years, although the IV
estimates are very noisy and the difference is not statistically significant. In general, the choice
between the OLS and the IV estimator makes much less difference for vacation time than for wages.
Paid vacation time varies very little with experience. Both the OLS and the IV estimates imply that
for men paid vacation rises more rapidly with tenure and than weeks of vacation taken. The point
estimates suggest the opposite for women, although standard errors are large for both groups,
especially in the IV case for women.
Table 7 reproduces a table from the 1997 EBS that reports average paid holidays and paid
vacation and average paid sick leave for full-time employees in medium and large private
establishments by tenure. The table implies that vacation days increase by an average of about one
20

Simple crosstabs of VP by experience and seniority in the previous year for full-time men also indicate that VP and VT
rise by about 2 weeks over the first 15 years on the job and that VP has little to do with experience conditional on tenure
(not shown).

17

half days per year over the first 20 years and very little after that.21 One cannot tell from the Table 7
how uniform the policies are within the many firms, but the EBS is very consistent with the PSID
based estimates of the tenure profile of VP.

The Link between Vacation Weeks Across Jobs
If vacation time can be bargained over, then workers who had long vacations on their
previous job will use this as a bargaining chip for more vacation time on the new job in much the
same way that wage rates on a previous job influence reservation wages for any new job.
Furthermore, if the amount of paid and unpaid leave is to some extent at the discretion of employees,
then those who chose relatively long vacations on a previous job are likely to choose long vacations
on the new job. On the other hand, if vacation time is set by rigid firm wide policy, then prior
vacation time will have little influence on the vacation in the new job, other than through job
selection.
In Table 8 we report the coefficient of the regression of VT on current job on the average of
VT during the last two years of the previous job and a full set of controls, including current seniority
and experience at the start of the job.22 We average VT to reduce the effects of reporting error and
random variation in when vacation on the previous job is taken. The coefficient on past VT is .216
(.056). Measurement error in the two-year averages probably biases these estimates downward,
while fixed heterogeneity across workers in leisure preferences or in the prevailing vacation packages
in particular occupations and industries biases them upward. When we add dummies for the current
two-digit occupation, the coefficient falls to .094 (.057). When we restrict the sample to cases in
which the previous job ended due to a quit, we obtain the estimates of .282 (.072) or .150 (.078)
depending on whether or not we control for occupation (columns 4 and 5). The results for layoffs are
.291 (.088) with occupation controls excluded and .176 (.090) with occupation controls included.
Table 9 reports similar regressions using VP. Because VP is only available for the years
1975-1977 and 1984, the sample size of job changers is small. When we use VP in the last year of
the previous job rather than the average of the values for the last two years, we obtain a coefficient of
.121 (.058) when occupation controls are excluded and only .010 (.058) when occupation controls are
included. These coefficients rise to .338 (.093) and .251 (.106), respectively, when we use two year
averages, although the sample size is only 158.
21

Buckley (1989) presents summary tables on paid vacation time using the Employee Benefits Survey for 1983-1986.
The CPS does not appear to have ever collected information about vacation weeks.
22
We continue to drop an observation if tenure at the survey date is less than .5 or if it is the last observation on the job.

18

Taken at face value, the results suggest that prior vacation has only a small effect on vacation
on the new job once occupation is controlled for. Some relationship would be expected to arise
through the effect of vacation time in the old job on the reservation locus of job characteristics to
induce a job change. It is fully consistent with the fact that tenure on the previous job has little to do
with vacation time on the new job.23 Evidently, people who had a lot of vacation on their old job are
unable or unwilling to bargain for a similar vacation on the new job. To a large degree, vacation
policy is set firm wide.
To put the results in perspective, the middle panel of Table 8 reports regressions of hours per
week on the current job on the average of hours per week in the last two years on the previous job.
The coefficient is .312 (.028) when occupation is not controlled for and .263 (.031) when occupation
is controlled for. These coefficients are larger than the corresponding values for vacation time, but
suggest that work hours are heavily influenced by the specific job and not easily amenable to
bargaining. In contrast, the bottom panel presents regressions of the log of the hourly wage rate in
the current job on the average for the last two years on the previous job. The coefficients are .682
(.028) without occupation controls and .668 (.028) with occupation controls. Part of the difference
probably reflects a more important role for fixed individual heterogeneity in the determination of
wage rates than in the preferences for hours. That is, even if people are perfectly free to choose hours
per week and vacation time, there might be less heterogeneity in these variables than in the
productivity factors underlying wage rates. Overall, the results suggest, in common with other
evidence regarding work hours mentioned in the Introduction, that vacation time as well as work
hours are governed by broad policies of the employer. They are not heavily influenced by the
preferences or alternative opportunities of a particular worker.
4.8 The Effects of Union Membership, Government Employment, Industry and Occupation
Characteristic, and Gender on Vacation Time
The above analysis suggests that vacation time reflects employer policy. We now examine
variation in vacation time across job types. Conditional on demographic characteristics and
experience and tenure, union membership boosts VT by .487 (.067) weeks and VP by only .183 (.037)
23

For a sample of job changers, a tabulation of weeks taken (VT) on the new job by experience and tenure on the previous
job shows little systematic variation with either experience or prior tenure (not shown). This is true for both quits and
layoffs considered separately. These results indicate that seniority-based vacation is usually lost when a person changes
employers. They reinforce our finding of a relatively weak link between vacation on the previous job and the current job
controlling for seniority on the current job. They suggest that employees are unable or unwilling to negotiate vacation on
the new job on the basis of vacation on the previous one.

19

weeks. Government workers take 1.20 (.065) more weeks of vacation per year and receive .681
(.038) more paid weeks (Table 3, columns 4 and 5). Perhaps unions and civil service structures
suppress “rat races” and so reduce the incentive of employees to forgo paid vacation. Another
potential explanation for government workers is that “comp” time is more prevalent in the public
sector and that “comp” time is taken as additional vacation but is not reported as paid vacation. We
do not have any evidence on this at this point.
Table 10 presents estimates of the effects of occupation on VT, VP and VT – VP when
demographic characteristics, seniority, union membership, and government membership are
controlled for. The reference occupation is “Operatives, Except Transport.” For VT we report
estimates using the sample for 1975-1991. The largest coefficient in the VP equation is 2.42 (.138),
which is for armed forces. Interestingly, for that group the coefficient on VT is only .426 (.099). In
general, one obtains positive coefficients for VP in professional occupations. The two largest
coefficients on VT are, not surprisingly, 7.44 (.075) for K12 teachers and 2.61 (.113) for college
teachers and librarians.24

Vacation Policy and Hours Preferences of the Median Worker: The Effect of Percent Female in
Occupation on Vacation Time
Rosen (1969) and Deardorff and Stafford’s (1976) analyses suggest that job characteristics
will be determined in part by the preferences of the typical worker in a job. Women work fewer
hours than men even among full-time workers. Usui (2004) shows that for both men and women
average annual hours worked is negatively related to the proportion female in an occupation. In the
PSID vacation time is positively related to the proportion female in an occupation. Did the large
changes over the past 3 decades in the gender composition of the workforce and the sharp increase in
women’s work hours weaken the relationship? The coefficient on percent female in an occupation is
.482 (.134) for men and 1.28 (.290) for women for the years 1975-1983 in regressions that controls
for demographic characteristics, seniority, union membership, government employment, a detailed
list of occupational characteristics based upon the Dictionary of Occupational Titles, and a dummy

24

We also regressed VP on characteristics drawn from the Dictionary of Occupational Titles, entering characteristics one
at a time in regressions with our full set of control variables (not shown). Measures of general education development math, language, reason, and specific vocational preparation (SVP) all enter positively and are highly significant.
Measures of strength, climbing, stooping, balancing, kneeling, crouching, crawling, reaching, handling, fingering, feeling,
talking, hearing, tasting/smelling, near acuity, far acuity, depth perception, accommodation, color vision and field of
vision are negative in most cases. Proxies for bad environmental conditions typically enter negatively and are statistically
significant in some cases.

20

for whether the person is a teacher. For the period 1983-1991, the coefficient is .247 (.124) for men
and .589 (.198) for women. One hypothesis is that the decline in coefficients is the result of a
decrease in the desired number of weeks of vacation among women between the two periods, as the
labor force attachment of women has increased. Unfortunately, we cannot examine changes in the
link between VP and percent female over the same period.
4.9 Implicit Contracts, Intertemporal Substitution over the Business Cycle and Vacation Time
To the extent that leisure is substitutable over time at annual frequencies, one might expect VT
– VP to be countercyclical. It is efficient for workers to shift VT from booms to periods when
business is slow. Research on intertemporal substitution over the business cycle has generally failed
to explain movements in hours as a response on the labor supply curve to procyclical movements in
wage rates. However, Barro (1977) and others have argued that hours per week and annual weeks
worked are governed by implicit contracts in which hours decisions respond to an unobservable
shadow price of labor that equates marginal revenue production with the marginal utility of leisure
rather than to the contractual wage, which reflects marginal revenue product over a longer horizon.
Such models are difficult to assess, however, because the shadow price is not observed. An
examination of VT relative to VP provides a window on this possibility. Under such an implicit
contract the timing of vacations would respond to the needs of the firm as well as the needs of the
worker. Under the reasonable assumption that firms do not change paid vacation policy in response
to short-term business conditions, cyclical variation in VT – VP would be similar to variation in VT,
ignoring compositional changes in the job mix and work force over the business cycle.
We examine this issue by regressing VT on state level business cycle indicators for 19751991. The indicators consist of the state unemployment rate and the change in the state
unemployment rate. We control for individual fixed effects to guard against spurious correlation
between the labor market indicators and unobserved compositional changes in the workforce that
influence vacation time, as well as for education, experience, job seniority, union membership,
government employment, marital status, disability status, city size, region, and a quadratic time trend.
Standard errors account for clustering at the state year level. In separate regressions we obtain a
coefficient of .013 (.007) when we use the state unemployment rate as our business cycle indicator
and a coefficient of .025 (.008) when we use the change in the state unemployment rate. The results
suggest that vacation time is in fact weakly countercyclical, as predicted by models of intertemporal
substitution. In summary, we have a little evidence that firms and workers adjust weeks worked
21

through the timing of vacations in response to changes in demand, but the magnitudes are small.25

5. Discussion and Conclusions
Once one steps beyond the standard labor supply model of hours determination in which
workers are free to choose how much to work at a parametric wage, the study of work hours becomes
very complicated. Vacation policy is a key component of the regulation of work hours and is an
important job attribute, but has been the subject of very little research. Using the PSID and the HRS,
we have provided the first detailed analysis of paid vacation time and vacation time actually taken.
Our main findings are as follows.
1. There is substantial variation in both VP and VT. An increase in VP leads to an
increase of one week in VT, but there is a significant amount of variation in VT around
VP. There is little evidence that an extra week of VP is offset by increases in other
dimensions of work hours, such as hours per week or annual hours on other jobs. An
extra week of VP reduces annual hours worked by approximately one week.
2. Women take about one more week of vacation than men, but receive only slightly
more paid vacation. Part of the gender difference in VT – VP is related to the high
concentration of women in education and related field. VP and VT are both a bit
higher for married people and about .26 weeks lower for blacks. There is weak
evidence that married men take more vacation if their spouses have more paid
vacation, holding their own VP constant, while married women take less vacation if
their spouses have more paid vacation.
3. Hourly wage rates as well as our broad array of fringe benefits are positively related to
VP both in the cross-section and across jobs.
4. Both VP and VT increase with seniority but are largely unrelated to labor market
experience (conditional on seniority). For job changers vacation time on previous job
has little relationship with vacation time on the new job. Our results suggest that
vacation time is determined by firm wide policy and tends not to reflect the
preferences and bargaining power of individual employees. Coordination costs do not
provide a full explanation for the lack of heterogeneity, because within a firm vacation
time varies with seniority. As noted in the introduction, a possible explanation is that
correlation between hours preferences and unobserved factors that influence
productivity and turnover may make workers reluctant to bargain.
5. Both VT and VP are higher for union members and government workers. VT and VP
vary substantially across occupations and industries. VT is positively associated with
percent female in an occupation controlling for the gender of the worker and other
characteristics. The relationship between percent female and VT has declined
25

If consumers are credit constrained, then complimentarity between market goods (travel fares, lodging, etc.) and time in
the production of vacations is an offsetting force that could lead to procyclical variation in vacation time taken.

22

substantially over time, which is consistent with models in which the hours policy of
the firm reflects the typical worker, and the work preferences of women and men have
converged to some extent.
6. Vacation time taken is countercyclical, as predicted by some equilibrium business
cycle models, but the relationship is weak.
A natural program for future research is the development and empirical testing of alternative models
of the role of firms in determining work hours mentioned in the Introduction, with particular attention
to leave policy.

23

References
Aaronson, Daniel, and Eric French. 2004. “The Effect of Part-Time Work on Wages: Evidence from
the Social Security Rules.” Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 22, No. 2 (April), pp. 329-52.
Altonji, Joseph G., and Jennifer Oldham. 2003. “Vacation Laws and Annual Work Hours.” Federal
Reserve Bank of Chicago Economic Perspectives, Vol. 27, Third Quarter, pp. 19-29.
Altonji, Joseph G., and Christina H. Paxson. 1986. “Job Characteristics and Hours of Work.” In
Ronald G. Ehrenberg, ed., Research in Labor Economics, Vol. 8, Part A, Greenwich: Westview
Press, pp. 1-55.
Altonji, Joseph G., and Christina H. Paxson. 1988. “Labor Supply Preferences, Hours Constraints,
and Hours-Wage Tradeoffs.” Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 6, No. 2 (April), pp. 254-76.
Altonji, Joseph G., and Christina H. Paxson. 1992. “Labor Supply, Hours Constraints, and Job
Mobility.” Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 27, No. 2 (Spring), pp. 256-78.
Altonji, Joseph G., and Robert A. Shakotko. 1987. “Do Wages Rise with Job Seniority?” Review of
Economic Studies, Vol. 54, No. 3 (July), pp. 437-59.
Altonji, Joseph G., and Nicolas Williams. 2005. “Do Wages Rise with Job Seniority? A
Reassessment.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 58, No. 3 (April), pp. 370-97.
Abowd, John M., and Orley C. Ashenfelter. 1981. “Anticipated Unemployment, Temporary Layoffs
and Compensating Wage Differentials.” In Sherwin Rosen, ed., Studies in Labor Markets, Chicago,
IL: University of Chicago Press, pp. 141-70.
Barro, Robert J. 1977. “Long-Term Contracting, Sticky Prices, and Monetary Policy.” Journal of
Monetary Economics, Vol. 3, No. 3 (July), pp. 305-16.
Beam, Burton T. Jr., and John J. McFadden. 1998. Employee Benefits, Fifth edition, Chicago, IL:
Dearborn Financial Publication.
Berkovec, James, and Steven Stern. 1991. “Job Exit Behavior of Older Men.” Econometrica, Vol. 59,
No. 1 (January), pp. 189-210.
Blank, Rebecca M. 1990a. “Are Part-time Jobs Bad Jobs?” In Gary Burtless, ed., A Future of Lousy
Jobs? The Changing Structure of U.S. Wages, Washington. D.C.: Brookings Institution, pp. 123-64.
Blank, Rebecca M. 1990b. “Understanding Part-time Work.” In Laurie J. Bassi and David L.
Crawford eds. Research in Labor Economics, Vol. 11, Greenwich, CN: JAI Press. pp. 137-58.
Biddle, Jeff E., and Gary Zarkin. 1989. “Choice Among Wage-Hours Packages: An Empirical
Investigation of Male Labor Supply.” Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 7, No. 4 (October), pp. 41537.

24

Blundell, Richard and Thomas MaCurdy. 1999. “Labor Supply: A Review of Alternative
Approaches.” In Orley C. Ashenfelter and David Card eds., Handbook of Labor Economics. Chapter
27, Vol. 3A, Amesterdam: Elsevier Science, pp. 1559-695.
Brown, Charles. 1980. “Equalizing Differences in the Labor Market.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, Vol. 94, No. 1 (February), pp. 113-34.
Buckley, John E. 1989. “Variations in Holidays, Vacations, and Area Pay Levels.” Monthly Labor
Review, Vol. 112, No 2. (February), pp. 24-31.
Cogan, John F. 1981. “Fixed Costs and Labor Supply.” Econometrica, Vol. 49, No. 4 (July), pp. 94563.
Deardorff, Alan V., and Frank P. Stafford. 1976. “Compensation and Cooperating Factors.”
Econometrica, Vol. 44, No. 4 (July), pp. 671-84.
Dey, Matthew S., and Christopher J. Flinn. 2005. “An Equilibrium Model of Health Insurance
Provision and Wage Determination.” Econometrica, Vol. 73, No. 2 (March), pp. 571-627.
Duncan, Greg J., and Bertil Holmlund. 1983. “Was Adam Smith Right After All? Another Test of the
Theory of Compensating Wage Differentials.” Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 1, No. 4. (October),
pp. 366-79.
Ehrenberg, Ronald G. 1971. Fringe Benefits and Overtime Behavior: Theoretical and Econometric
Analysis. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.
Elder, Todd E. 2004. “Reemployment Patterns of Displaced Older Workers.” unpublished paper,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
Gustman, Alan L., and Thomas L. Steinmeier. 1983. “Minimum Hours Constraints and Retirement
Behavior.” Contemporary Policy Issues, a supplement to Economic Inquiry, No. 3 (April), pp. 77-91.
Gustman, Alan L., and Thomas L. Steinmeier. 1984. “Partial Retirement and the Analysis of
Retirement Behavior.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 37, No. 3 (April), pp. 403-15.
Ham, John C. 1982. “Estimation of a Labour Supply Model with Censoring Due to Unemployment
and Underemployment.” Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 49, No. 3 (July), pp. 335-54.
Ham, John C. 1986. “Testing Whether Unemployment Represents Intertemporal Labour Supply.”
Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 53, No. 4 (August), pp. 559-78.
Hamermesh, Daniel S. 1996. Workdays, Workhours and Work Schedules: Evidence for the United
States and Germany, W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, Kalamazoo, Michigan.
Hamermesh, Daniel S. 1998. “When We Work.” American Economics Review, Vol. 88, No. 2 (May),
pp. 321-25.
Hamermesh, Daniel S. 1999. “The Timing of Work over Time.” Economic Journal, Vol. 109, No.
452 (January), pp. 37-66.
25

Hanoch, Giora. 1980. “Hours and Weeks in the Theory of Labor Supply.” In James Smith ed.,
Female Labor Supply: Theory and Estimation. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, pp. 119165.
Hurd, Michael D. 1996. “The Effect of Labor Market Rigidities on the Labor Force Behavior of
Older Workers.” In David A. Wise ed., Advances in the Economics of Aging. Chicago, IL: University
of Chicago Press, pp. 11-58.
Hwang, Hae-shin, Dale T. Mortensen, and W. Robert Reed. 1998. “Hedonic Wages and Labor
Market Search.” Journal of Labor Economics. Vol. 16, No. 4 (October), pp. 815-47.
Kahn, Shulamit B., and Kevin Lang. 1992. “Constraints on the Choice of Work Hours: Agency
versus Specific-Capital.” Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 27, No. 4 (Fall), pp. 661-78.
_______. 1995. “The Causes of Hours Constraints: Evidence from Canada.” Canadian Journal of
Economics, Vol. 28 No. 4a (November), pp. 914-28.
Killingsworth, Mark R. 1983. Labor Supply. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kniesner, Thomas J. 1993. “Review Essay: The Overworked American?” Journal of Human
Resources, Vol. 28, No. 3 (Summer), pp. 681-88.
Lang, Kevin, and Sumon Majumdar. 2004. “The Pricing of Job Characteristics When Markets Do
Not Clear: Theory and Policy Implications.” International Economic Review, Vol. 45, No. 4
(November), pp. 1111-28.
Landers, Renee M., James B. Rebitzer, and Lowell J. Taylor. 1996. “Rat Race Redux: Adverse
Selection in the Determination of Work Hours in Law Firms.” American Economic Review, Vol. 86,
No. 3 (June), pp. 329-48.
Lewis, H. Gregg. 1969. “Employer Interests in Employee Hours of Work.” unpublished English
version of “Interes del Empleador en las Horas de Trabajo del Empleado.” Cuadernos de Economia,
No. 18, pp. 38-54.
Maniaci, Serafina. 2001. “Time-Off Benefits and Family and Medical Leave Program.” chapter 18,
In Jerry S. Rosenbloom, ed., The Handbook of Employee Benefits: Design, Funding and
Administration. Fifth edition. New York: McGraw-Hill, pp. 423-36.
Martinez-Granado, Maite. 2005. “Testing Labour Supply and Hours Constraints.” Labour
Economics, Vol. 12 No. 3 (June). pp 321-43.
Moffitt, Robert. 1984. “The Estimation of a Joint Wage-Hours Labor Supply Model.” Journal of
Labor Economics, Vol. 2, No. 4 (October), pp. 550-66.
Paxson, Christina H., and Nachum Sicherman. 1996. “The Dynamics of Dual Job Holding and Job
Mobility.” Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 14, No. 3 (July), pp. 357-93.
Pencavel, John. 1986. “Labor Supply of Men.” In Orley C. Ashenfelter and Richard Layard eds.,
Handbook of Labor Economics, chapter 1, Vol. 1. Amesterdam: Elsevier Science, pp. 3-102.
26

Rebitzer, James B., and Lowell J. Taylor. 1995. “Do Labor Markets Provide Enough Short-Hour
Jobs? An Analysis of Work Hours and Work Incentives.” Economic Inquiry, Vol. 33, No. 2 (April),
pp. 257-73.
Rosen, Harvey S. 1976. “Taxes in a Labor Supply Model with Joint Wage-Hours Determination.”
Econometrica, Vol. 44, No. 3 (May), pp. 485-507.
Rosen, Sherwin. 1968. “Short-Run Employment Variation on Class-I Railroads in the U.S., 19471963.” Econometrica, Vol. 36, No. 3/4 (July-October), pp. 511-29.
Rosen, Sherwin. 1969. “On the Interindustry Wage and Hours Structure.” Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 77, No. 2 (March-April), pp. 249-73.
Schor, Juliet B. 1991. The Overworked American: The Unexpected Decline of Leisure, New York,
NY: Basic Books.
Senesky, Sarah. 2004. “Testing the Intertemporal Labor Supply Model: Are Jobs Important?”
forthcoming in Labour Economics.
Sousa-Poza, Alfonso, and Alexandre Ziegler. 2003. “Asymmetric Information about Workers’
Productivity as a Cause for Inefficient Long Working Hours.” Labour Economics, Vol. 10, No. 6
(December), pp. 727-47.
Stafford, Frank P. 1992. Review of The Overworked American: The Unexpected Decline of Leisure
by Juliet B. Schor, Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 30, No. 3 (September), pp. 1528-29.
U.S. Department of Labor. 1983. Employee Benefits in Medium and Large Private Firms, 1982.
Bulletin 2176. Washington D.C.: Bureau of Labor Statistics, August.
U.S. Department of Labor. 1989. Employee Benefits in Medium and Large Private Firms, 1988.
Bulletin 2336. Washington D.C.: Bureau of Labor Statistics, August.
U.S. Department of Labor. 1994. Employee Benefits in Medium and Large Private Establishments,
1993. Bulletin 2456. Washington D.C.: Bureau of Labor Statistics, November.
U.S. Department of Labor. 1999. Employee Benefits in Medium and Large Private Establishments,
1997. Bulletin 2517. Washington D.C.: Bureau of Labor Statistics, September.
Usui, Emiko. 2004. “Wages, Non-Wage Characteristics, and Predominantly Female Jobs.”
unpublished paper, Wayne State University.
Villanueva, Ernesto. 2004. “Compensating Wage Differentials and Voluntary Job Changes: Evidence
from Germany.” unpublished paper, Universitat Pompeu Fabra.

27

Appendix A: Description of Variables Used
Panel Study of Income Dynamics
Employment Variables:
1. Paid vacation (VP) is asked in 1975-1977, and 1984 for the heads and 1976 and 1984 for the
wives. In 1975-1977, respondent is asked “How many weeks of paid vacation do you get each
year?” In 1984, respondents who answered to “yes” to “Not counting holidays like Christmas
and Labor Day, do you get paid vacation or personal days?” were asked “How much paid
vacation or personal time do you get each year?” In 1984, respondents reported VP either in days
per year, weeks per year, hours per year, or other (combination). We converted days per year and
hours per year to 5 day weeks assuming 8 hours per day and rounded to the nearest integer.
2. Vacation taken (VT): Respondents who answered “yes” to “Did you take any vacation or time off
during 19XX?” were asked “How much vacation or time off did you take?”
3. Indicators for quits and layoffs, job seniority and labor market experience are taken from Altonji
and Williams (2005).
4. Hourly rate of pay: To reduce the influence of measurement error and outliers, wage rates are set
to missing when they are less than $1.5.
5. Industry and Occupation: Coded based on three digit 1970 Census codes.
6. 0-1 indicators for union membership and government employment.
7. Hours Constraints: We construct the variables for overemployment and underemployment
following Altonji and Paxson (1988, page 263, fn 7).
Demographic Variables:
1. Marital status: 0-1 indicator for married with spouse present and never married, divorced,
separated, or deceased.
2. Race: Separate 0-1 indicators for black and nonwhite/nonblack. The excluded category in the
regressions is white.
3. Education: 1-16 (fourth year college), 17 (at least some graduate work).
4. Health limitation: 0-1 indicator for whether the respondent has physical or nervous condition that
limits the type of work or the amount of work.
5. Region and urbanicity of current residence: We include separate 0-1 indicators for northeast,
north central, and west. The excluded category is south. Our urbanicity measures are a 0-1
indicator for whether the residence is in SMSA and a 0-1 indicator for whether the residence is in
a large city more than 500,000 people.

The Health and Retirement Study
Information on age, gender, race, census region, education, current marital status, whether health
limits work, labor force status, hours of work per week at current job, the wage rate, job seniority and
labor market experience are taken from files produced by RAND Corporation.
Employment Variables:
1. Paid vacation (VP): Response to “How many weeks of paid vacation do you get each year?”
2. 0-1 indicators for quits and layoffs: The respondent was asked “Why did you leave that
employer?” If the respondent reported either business closed or laid off/let go, then the
separation is coded as layoff. If the respondent reported poor health/disabled, family care, better
job, quit, family moved, divorce/separation, transportation, too much travel, and/or transferred,
then the separation is coded as a quit. The respondent was allowed to report more than one
28

3.

4.
5.
6.

reason for leaving the employer. If the reasons given fall into both the quit and layoff categories
we treated the separation as a quit.
Hourly rate of pay: Wage information is available for respondent who were working at the time
of the interview. Wages are deflated to 1982-84 dollars using the CPI-U. To reduce the influence
of measurement error and outliers, wage rates are set to missing when they are less than $1.5. For
wage change specifications wages that are more than 800% or less than 1/8th of the previous
year’s value are dropped as well.
0-1 indicators for union membership and government employment.
Industry and Occupation: Industry is classified into 13 categories. Occupation is classified into
17 fields.
Hours Constraints: We construct the variable for overemployment and underemployment
following Altonji and Paxson (1988, page 263, fn 7).

Demographic Variables:
1. Marital status: 0-1 indicator for married/married spouse absent/partnered and
separated/divorced/widowed/never married.
2. Race: Separate 0-1 indicators for black and nonwhite/nonblack. The excluded category is white.
3. Education: 0-16 (fourth year college), 17 (at least some graduate work).
4. Health limitation: 0-1 indicator for whether an impairment or health problem that limits the kind
or amount of paid work for the respondent.
5. Region of current residence: Separate 0-1 indicators for northeast, midwest, and west. The
excluded category is south.
Proportion Female in an Occupation
Proportion female in an occupation is computed from the three digit occupation code in the Public
Use Microdata 5-Percent Samples of the 1980 and 1990 US Censuses of Population. We match the
proportion female to individuals on the basis of their recorded occupation in two ways. The first is to
assign proportion female of an occupation to the worker’s reported occupation using the 1980
Census. The second is to use a linear interpolation using the proportion female based on the 1980
and 1990 Censuses and the year of the survey.
Occupational Characteristics
The Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT) has the following information on occupational
characteristics. General education development, which is measured by reasoning, math, language,
and specific vocational preparation (SVP). Aptitudes are in 11 fields: general learning, verbal,
numerical, spatial, form perception, clerical perception, motor coordination, finger dexterity, manual
dexterity, eye-hand coordination, and color discrimination. Physical demands are in 20 fields:
strength, climbing, balancing, stooping, kneeling, crouching, crawling, reaching, handling, fingering,
feeling, talking, hearing, tasting/smelling, near acuity, far acuity, depth perception, accommodation,
color vision, and field of vision. Environmental conditions are in 14 fields: weather, cold, hot,
wet/humid, noise, vibration, atmospheric condition, move mechanic parts, electric shock, high exp.
places, radiation, explosives, toxic caustic chemicals, and other environmental conditions.

29

Figure 1: Distribution of Vacation Weeks for Men
40
35

Percent

30

Weeks of Paid Vacation (VP)

25

Weeks of Vacation Taken (VT)

20
15
10
5
0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8-14

15+

Vacation Weeks

Figure 2: Distribution of Vacation Weeks for Women

40
35

Percent

30

Weeks of Paid Vacation (VP)

25

Weeks of Vacation Taken (VT)
20
15
10
5
0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8-14

15+

Vacation Weeks

Figure 3: Distribution of Vacation Weeks Taken Vacation Weeks Paid
55
50
45

Percent

40
35

Men
Women

30
25
20
15
10
5
0
-15 -14
-8

-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8-14 15+

Vacation Weeks Taken - Vacation Weeks Paid (VT-VP)

Notes: The sample contains individuals who work 35 or more hours per week in their main job,
were between age 19 to 59, had left school and not returned, had not retired, and were not selfemployed. It also restricts to persons who have at least .5 years of seniority at the time of the
survey and exclude observations if the job ended prior to the next interview.

Table 1
The Effect of Vacation Weeks Paid on Vacation Weeks Taken

None
Estimation Method
OLS

VP

VP

VP
1(VP > 0)

0.100
(0.034)

(2)
0.799
(0.023)
-2.800
(0.110)

0.521
(0.024)

1.098
(0.034)
-3.153
(0.156)

0.358
(0.028)

1.037
(0.040)
-3.138
(0.157)

0.846
(0.041)

0.985
(0.045)
-3.310
(0.152)

1.067
(0.054)

1.278
(0.059)
-4.170
(0.175)

1(VP > 0)

IV, tenure used as
Instruments

Add Tenure, Union
and Government
(5)
(6)
0.105
0.430
(0.022)
(0.027)
-2.153
(0.109)

(1)
0.467
(0.019)

1(VP > 0)

2 Step. Use lagged VP
to predict VP

Control Variables
Add Demographic
Variables
(3)
(4)
0.329
0.671
(0.020)
(0.024)
-2.623
(0.108)

0.979
(0.052)
-3.023
(0.173)

Notes: The top panel reports OLS estimates. The second panel uses a two step estimator in which weeks of paid vacation
are predicted using weeks of paid vacation in the previous year and the other controls in the model. The third panel uses
an IV estimator with a cubic in tenure as the excluded instrumental variables. The column headings identify the controls.
Column 1 includes only an intercept. Column 2 includes an intercept and an indicator equal to 1 if a worker receives paid
vacation. Column 3 includes a set of demographic characteristics: education, experience (a quartic and an interaction
between education and experience), dummies for sex, marital status, residence in SMSA, residence in city more than
500,000 people, and disability status, 2 race dummies, 3 regional dummies, and calendar year dummies. Column 4 adds
the indicator for VP > 0. Column 5 includes a set of demographic characteritics, tenure (a cubic), and dummies for union
membership and government employment. Column 6 adds the indicator for VP > 0.
When 1(VPt > 0) is included as a control in the two step estimation (columns 2, 4, and 6), the regression in the first step
controls for 1(VPt > 0) and 1(VPt-1 > 0). The sample size for the OLS and IV estimates is 10,752. The sample sizes for the
two step estimates are 3,795 in the first step and 8,821 (3,788) in the second step when 1(VPt > 0) is (not) controlled for.
The sample contains individuals who work 35 or more hours per week in their main job, were between age 19 to 59, had
left school and not returned, had not retired, and were not self-employed. It also restricts to persons who have at least .5
years of seniority at the time of the survey and exclude observations if the job ended prior to the next interview. Standard
errors are in parentheses.

Table 2
The Effect of Vacation Weeks Taken and Weeks of Paid Vacation on Hours Measures

(1)
-1.029
(0.012)
-1.088
(0.012)
-1.047
(0.013)
55506

Annual
Annual
Annual
Overtime
Hours /
Hours
Hours
Week, Main hours, Main Hours
Worked, All
Worked,
Worked,
Job
Job
Extra Jobs Jobs
Main Job
Effect of Vacation Weeks Taken (VT) on Hours Measures
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
-0.084
-0.588
-54.451
3.992
-44.259
(0.017)
(0.327)
(1.200)
(0.633)
(1.098)
-0.195
0.697
-60.037
3.644
-51.617
(0.017)
(0.353)
(1.231)
(0.682)
(1.131)
-0.067
-0.055
-52.670
3.166
-45.309
(0.019)
(0.380)
(1.316)
(0.735)
(1.214)
55611
30157
33727
33727
55611

(1)
-0.054
(0.035)
0.015
(0.038)
0.273
(0.042)
10761

Effect of Weeks of Paid Vacation (VP) on Hours Measures
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
-0.004
2.397
9.866
-1.277
(0.048)
(1.218)
(4.682)
(2.386)
-0.116
3.045
9.397
-4.458
(0.051)
(1.298)
(4.747)
(2.532)
-0.048
3.013
29.168
-6.549
(0.055)
(1.416)
(5.072)
(2.759)
10769
3500
3500
3500

Weeks
Worked,
Main Job

Controls
1. None
2. Add Demographic
Variables
3. Add Tenure, Union and
Government
N

1. None
2. Add Demographic
Variables
3. Add Tenure, Union and
Government
N

(6)
0.396
(3.162)
-7.031
(3.299)
8.789
(3.632)
10769

Table 2a
The Effect of Weeks of Paid Vacation on Hours Measures
Controls: Demographic Variables

Vacation Variable
Paid Vacation (VP)
1(VP > 0)
N

Paid Vacation (VP)
1(VP > 0)
N

(1)
-0.626
(0.046)
4.918
(0.202)
10761

OLS: Regression Coefficient (Standard Error)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
-0.011
1.881
-4.309
2.471
(0.061)
(1.588)
(5.796)
(3.093)
-1.472
9.766
115.147
-58.120
(0.270)
(7.683)
(28.038)
(14.961)
10769
3500
3500
3500

(6)
-24.542
(4.026)
134.793
(17.795)
10769

IV using Tenure, Tenure2, and Tenure3 as Excluded Instruments: Regression
Coefficient (Standard Error)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
-1.095
-0.298
-0.351
-79.573
-2.375
-60.769
(0.108)
(0.143)
(3.962)
(14.800)
(7.716)
(9.479)
6.115
-0.741
15.988
324.983
-44.610
227.065
(0.321)
(0.426)
(12.707)
(47.467)
(24.746)
(28.214)
10761
10769
10769
3500
3500
3500

Notes: Each Panel of Table 2 reports three specifications. The first specification includes only an intercept. The second
specification contains a set of demographic characteristics. These consist of education, experience (a cubic and an interaction
between education and experience), dummies for sex, marital status, residence in SMSA, residence in city more than 500,000
people, and disability status, 2 race dummies, 3 regional dummies, and calendar year dummies. The third specification adds
seniority (a cubic) and dummies for union membership and government employment. The top panel of Table 2a reports OLS
estimates of the effects of paid vacation and an indicator equal to 1 if paid vacation is greater than zero. The equations include
the demographic controls used in specification 2 of Table 2. The bottom panel of Table 2a reports IV estimates, with weeks of
paid vacation treated as endogenous and the 1(VP > 0) treated as exogenous and the tenure variables as the excluded
instruments. We have fewer observations for columns 3-5 because only observations from year 1984 are available.

Table 3
Personal Characteristics and Vacation Time

Variable
Female
Education
Marital Status
Disability Status
Black
Non white, Non black
Residence in SMSA

Vacation
Taken (VT)
(1)

Vacation
Paid (VP)
(2)

Dependent variables
Taken-Paid
Vacation
(VT-VP)
Taken (VT)
(3)
(4)

0.973
(0.072)
0.494
(0.023)
0.276
(0.077)
-0.344
(0.117)
-0.154
(0.071)
-0.188
(0.195)
-0.009
(0.069)

0.070
(0.043)
0.193
(0.014)
0.066
(0.046)
-0.019
(0.070)
-0.185
(0.043)
-0.415
(0.116)
0.257
(0.041)

0.902
(0.076)
0.301
(0.024)
0.209
(0.081)
-0.325
(0.123)
0.031
(0.075)
0.226
(0.205)
-0.266
(0.073)

No
0.108
10752

No
0.126
10752

No
0.042
10752

Union Membership
Government Employment
Control for Tenure
Adjusted R2
N

1.043
(0.071)
0.454
(0.023)
0.223
(0.074)
-0.366
(0.112)
-0.300
(0.069)
-0.084
(0.188)
-0.067
(0.067)
0.487
(0.064)
1.202
(0.065)
Yes
0.175
10752

Vacation
Paid (VP)
(5)
0.123
(0.041)
0.175
(0.013)
0.019
(0.043)
-0.030
(0.065)
-0.255
(0.040)
-0.320
(0.109)
0.199
(0.039)
0.183
(0.037)
0.681
(0.038)
Yes
0.238
10752

Taken-Paid
(VT-VP)
(6)
0.920
(0.077)
0.279
(0.025)
0.204
(0.081)
-0.336
(0.123)
-0.045
(0.076)
0.236
(0.205)
-0.266
(0.073)
0.304
(0.070)
0.521
(0.072)
Yes
0.049
10752

Notes: All models control for experience (a cubic and an interaction between education and experience), dummy variables for
residence in SMSA, residence in a city with more than 500,000 people, 3 regions, and 3 calendar year. Columns 4-6 also include
tenure (a cubic), dummies for union membership and government employment. The sample selection criteria are described in the
note to table 1. Standard errors are in parentheses.

Table 4
The Effect of Weeks of Paid Vacation on the Log of the Hourly Wage

Sample
Hourly and Salary
(1)
(2)
(3)
VP

1(VP > 0)

Hourly Only
(5)

(6)

(7)

Salary Only
(8)

0.068

0.054

0.095

0.077

0.038

0.027

(0.003)

(0.003)

(0.004)

(0.005)

(0.004)

(0.005)

-0.061

-0.049

-0.138

-0.134

0.088

0.111

(0.013)

(0.013)

(0.016)

(0.015)

(0.023)

(0.024)

VP=0

VP=1

VP=3

VP=4

VP=5

VP=6

VP=7+

Controls for tenure,
union and
government
Adjusted R2
N

(4)

(9)

-0.067

-0.031

-0.156

(0.011)

(0.013)

(0.020)

-0.125

-0.110

-0.158

(0.011)

(0.012)

(0.023)

0.084

0.080

0.086

(0.009)

(0.011)

(0.015)

0.152

0.158

0.130

(0.012)

(0.016)

(0.017)

0.209

0.217

0.172

(0.017)

(0.022)

(0.025)

0.048

0.195

-0.039

(0.023)

(0.037)

(0.031)

0.090

0.215

0.014

(0.029)

(0.073)

(0.033)

No

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

0.492
9500

0.517
9500

0.526
9500

0.456
5732

0.510
5732

0.512
5732

0.501
3768

0.523
3768

0.540
3768

Notes: The table reports OLS regression coefficients relating log hourly wage rate to measures of weeks of paid vacation. The
wage measure is based on direct questions about rate of pay and refers to the main job at the time of the survey. In columns
1,2,4,5,7, and 8 the vacation variables are the number of weeks (VP and and indicator for VP > 0. Columns 3, 6, and 9 contain
dummy variables for each number of weeks of paid vacation with VP=2 as the reference category. All models include education,
a cubic in experience, education * experience, dummies for sex, marital status, residence in SMSA, residence in city more than
500,000 people, and disability status, 2 race dummies, 3 regional dummies, and calendar year dummies. Column 2,3,5,6,8, and
9 also include a cubic in tenure , dummies for union membership and government employment. The sample selection criteria are
described in the note to table 1. Standard errors are in parentheses.

Table 5
The Effect of Weeks of Paid Vacation on the Log of the Hourly Wage, First Difference Specification, Job
Changers, HRS Sample

Sample
Hourly and Salary
∆VP

∆1(VP > 0)

(1)

(2)

0.046

0.043

(0.008)

(0.008)

-0.015

-0.025

(0.029)

(0.029)

Quit × ∆VP

Quit × ∆1(VP > 0)

Layoff × ∆VP

Layoff × ∆1(VP > 0)

Layoff

Control for occupation dummies
Adjusted R2
N

(3)

(4)

0.039

0.038

(0.010)

(0.010)

-0.045

-0.059

(0.037)

(0.038)

0.051

0.046

(0.014)

(0.014)

0.0002

-0.002

(0.045)

(0.045)

-0.107

-0.097

(0.022)

(0.022)

No

Yes

No

Yes

0.123
747

0.154
747

0.155
747

0.180
747

Notes: The vacation variables are the change in the number of paid vacation weeks ( ∆VP) and the change in the indicator
1(VP > 0). All models include education, a cubic in experience, education * experience, dummies for sex, marital status, and
health limitation, 2 race dummies, 3 regional dummies, tenure (a cubic), dummies for union membership, government
employment, and calendar years. The samples contain job changers who work 35 or more hours per week on the job in both
current and previous interview years, were less than 60, had not retired, and were not self-employed. Standard errors are in
parentheses.

Table 6: The Effects of Tenure and Experience on VT and VP, OLS and IV estimates

2 Years of Tenure
5 Years of Tenure
10 Years of Tenure
20 Years of Tenure
5 Years of Experience
10 Years of Experience
20 Years of Experience
30 Years of Experience
Adjusted R2
N

2 Years of Tenure
5 Years of Tenure
10 Years of Tenure
20 Years of Tenure
5 Years of Experience
10 Years of Experience
20 Years of Experience
30 Years of Experience
2

Adjusted R
N

Panel I
Weeks of Vacation Taken (VT)
1975-1991
Men
Women
OLS
IV
OLS
IV
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.258
0.191
0.329
0.383
(0.019)
(0.032)
(0.042)
(0.073)
0.615
0.446
0.755
0.797
(0.037)
(0.069)
(0.080)
(0.151)
1.136
0.797
1.314
1.157
(0.048)
(0.110)
(0.097)
(0.236)
1.996
1.306
2.062
1.313
(0.044)
(0.180)
(0.093)
(0.411)
-0.088
-0.167
0.230
0.143
(0.040)
(0.045)
(0.084)
(0.102)
-0.056
-0.178
0.250
0.117
(0.042)
(0.053)
(0.087)
(0.119)
0.023
-0.163
0.226
0.065
(0.042)
(0.063)
(0.096)
(0.131)
-0.076
-0.372
-0.024
-0.239
(0.076)
(0.106)
(0.192)
(0.229)
0.175
0.163
0.204
0.200
35522
35522
20089
20089

Panel II
Weeks of Vacation Taken (VT)
1975-1977, 1984
Men
Women
OLS
IV
OLS
IV
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
0.261
0.181
0.373
0.295
(0.041)
(0.102)
(0.108)
(0.285)
0.615
0.438
0.834
0.692
(0.080)
(0.221)
(0.205)
(0.595)
1.124
0.824
1.383
1.251
(0.103)
(0.359)
(0.250)
(0.932)
1.971
1.407
1.932
2.104
(0.093)
(0.584)
(0.251)
(1.579)
-0.006
-0.074
0.486
0.493
(0.086)
(0.101)
(0.209)
(0.263)
-0.006
-0.094
0.504
0.518
(0.091)
(0.108)
(0.219)
(0.286)
-0.050
-0.180
0.030
0.051
(0.089)
(0.123)
(0.228)
(0.273)
-0.198
-0.441
-0.875
-0.860
(0.157)
(0.254)
(0.440)
(0.538)
0.178
0.167
0.184
0.183
7697
7697
3055
3055

Panel III
Weeks of Paid Vacation (VP)
1975-1977, 1984

Panel IV
Weeks of Vacation Taken Minus Weeks
of Paid Vacation (VT-VP)
1975-1977, 1984
Men
Women
OLS
IV
OLS
IV
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
-0.045
-0.050
0.031
0.055
(0.045)
(0.112)
(0.118)
(0.312)
-0.097
-0.123
0.081
0.149
(0.088)
(0.242)
(0.223)
(0.651)
-0.149
-0.246
0.161
0.346
(0.113)
(0.393)
(0.273)
(1.021)
-0.158
-0.575
0.235
0.954
(0.102)
(0.640)
(0.274)
(1.728)
0.049
0.005
0.461
0.533
(0.095)
(0.111)
(0.228)
(0.288)
0.050
-0.015
0.488
0.587
(0.099)
(0.118)
(0.239)
(0.314)
-0.083
-0.202
0.043
0.135
(0.098)
(0.135)
(0.249)
(0.299)
-0.241
-0.444
-0.879
-0.760
(0.172)
(0.278)
(0.480)
(0.589)
0.022
0.011
0.082
0.077
7697
7697
3055
3055

Men
OLS
IV
(1)
(2)
0.306
0.231
(0.025)
(0.063)
0.712
0.561
(0.050)
(0.136)
1.273
1.071
(0.064)
(0.221)
2.129
1.982
(0.058)
(0.361)
-0.055
-0.080
(0.054)
(0.063)
-0.056
-0.079
(0.056)
(0.067)
0.033
0.022
(0.055)
(0.076)
0.043
0.003
(0.098)
(0.157)
0.306
0.305
7697
7697

Women
OLS
IV
(3)
(4)
0.342
0.240
(0.059)
(0.156)
0.754
0.543
(0.111)
(0.325)
1.221
0.905
(0.136)
(0.510)
1.697
1.149
(0.136)
(0.863)
0.025
-0.041
(0.114)
(0.144)
0.016
-0.069
(0.119)
(0.157)
-0.012
-0.083
(0.124)
(0.149)
0.004
-0.101
(0.239)
(0.294)
0.127
0.118
3055
3055

Notes: All models control for education, a quartic in experience, education * experience, a cubic in seniority, dummies for sex,
marital status, union membership, government employment, residence in SMSA, residence in city more than 500,000 people,
and disability status, 2 race dummies, 3 regional dummies, and calendar year dummies. The IV results in columns 2 and 4
treat both the time trend and the tenure variables as endogenous and are based on Altonji and Shakotko's (1987)
methodology. The deviation of the tenure variables from their job means are used as instruments, along with the deviation of
time from its mean for each individual. The sample selection criteria are described in the note to table 1. Standard errors are in
parentheses.

Table 7:

Source: Employee Benefits in Medium and Large Private Establishments, 1997
Bureau of Labor Statistics, USDL 99-02. Data are from BLS Employee Benefits Survey

Source: Employee Benefits in Medium and Large Private Establishments, 1997
Bureau of Labor Statistics, USDL 99-02. http://www.bls.gov/news.release/ebs3.nws.htm, Table 4.

Table 8
The Link Across Jobs in Vacation Weeks Taken, Hours Worked Per Week and Hourly Rate of Pay

Avg. of Vacation Taken in
last two years
Occupation Index
Occupation Dummies
Adjusted R2
N

Effects of Vacation on Previous Job on Vacation in New Job
All Job Changers
Quits
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
0.216
0.094
0.076
0.282
0.150
0.086
0.291
(0.056)
(0.057)
(0.056)
(0.072)
(0.078)
(0.075)
(0.088)
0.647
0.627
No
No
No
No
No
(0.079)
(0.086)
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No
0.113
0.158
0.158
0.131
0.195
0.189
0.114
1235
1235
1235
770
770
770
347

Layoffs
(8)
0.176
(0.090)
No
Yes
0.175
347

(9)
0.224
(0.086)
1.427
(0.278)
No
0.181
347

Effects of Hours Worked Per Week on Previous Job on Hours Worked Per Week in New Job
All Job Changers
Quits
Layoffs
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
0.312
0.263
0.264
0.329
0.297
0.296
0.383
0.305
Avg. of Hours/Week in last
(0.028)
(0.031)
(0.031)
(0.043)
(0.047)
(0.046)
(0.051)
(0.059)
two years
0.447
0.281
Occupation Index
No
No
No
No
No
No
(0.107)
(0.158)
Occupation Dummies
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
0.174
0.200
0.185
0.146
0.157
0.149
0.209
0.232
Adjusted R2
N
1287
1287
1287
776
776
776
350
350

(9)
0.316
(0.055)
0.599
(0.204)
No
0.228
350

Effects of Hourly Rate of Pay on Previous Job on Hourly Rate of Pay in New Job
All Job Changers
Quits
Layoffs
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
0.682
0.668
0.629
0.700
0.689
0.649
0.653
0.654
Avg. of Log Wage in last
(0.028)
(0.028)
(0.029)
(0.035)
(0.036)
(0.036)
(0.054)
(0.057)
two years
0.453
0.413
Occupation Index
No
No
No
No
No
No
(0.075)
(0.095)
Occupation Dummies
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
0.667
0.695
0.677
0.685
0.717
0.694
0.648
0.692
Adjusted R2
N
1078
1078
1078
636
636
636
303
303

(9)
0.595
(0.056)
0.478
(0.146)
No
0.661
303

Notes: Two specifications are used to control for the occupation of the previous job. The first specification includes 27 occupation dummies,
including a dummy for missing data on occupation. Occupation index is based on the coefficients on the occupation dummies in a cross
section regression for vacation weeks taken (VT) on which are obtained from a cross sectional regression, as a variable to control for
occupation. Sample sizes for the cross section regression are 51,835, 51,942 and 47,733 for vacation time, hours worked per week, and
hourly rate of pay, respectively. All models control for education, experience (a cubic and an interaction between education and experience),
seniority (cubic), and dummies for sex, marital status, union membership, government employment, residence in SMSA, residence in city
more than 500,000 people, disability status, 2 race dummies, 3 regional dummies, and calendar year dummies. The sample selection criteria
are described in the note to table 1. Standard errors are in parentheses.

Table 9
The Link between Vacation Weeks Paid Across Jobs
The Effect of Paid Vacation on Previous Job on Paid Vacation in New Job
Sample: All Job Changers
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Paid Vacation in last year
0.121
0.010
0.072
(0.058)
(0.058)
(0.058)
Avg. of Paid Vacation in
0.338
0.251
last two years
(0.093)
(0.106)
Occupation Index
1.008
No
No
No
No
(0.265)
Occupation Dummies
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
0.221
0.330
0.257
0.316
0.373
Adjusted R2
N
302
302
302
158
158

(6)

0.263
(0.098)
0.817
(0.377)
No
0.334
158

Notes: Two specifications are used to control for the occupation of the previous job. The first specification includes 27
occupation dummies, with missing occupation treated as a seperate category. The second specification (occupation
index) uses coefficients on occupation dummies, which are obtained from a cross sectional regression (N=9,657), as
a more parsimonious control for aspects of occupation of the previous job that are related to vacation. All models
control for education, a cubic in experience, education * experience), a cubic in seniority, dummies for sex, marital
status, union membership, government employment, residence in SMSA, residence in city more than 500,000
people, and disability status, 2 race dummies, 3 regional dummies, and calendar year dummies. The sample
selection criteria are described in the note to table 1. Standard errors are in parentheses.

Table 10
The Effects of Occupation on Vacation Weeks Taken, Vacation Weeks Paid, and Vacation Weeks Taken Vacation Weeks Paid
Vacation
Vacation Taken
Paid Vacation
Taken - Paid Vacation
(VT)
(VP)
(VT-VP)
Variable
Coefficient Std. Err. Coefficient Std. Err. Coefficient Std. Err.
Physician, Dentist
0.213
0.268
0.784
0.386
-0.148
0.669
Other Medical & Paramedical
0.423
0.101
0.994
0.160
-0.590
0.276
Accountant & Auditor
-0.055
0.110
0.261
0.162
-0.047
0.281
Teacher K12
7.436
0.075
0.548
0.110
7.727
0.191
Teacher College, Librarian
2.613
0.113
0.255
0.182
2.574
0.315
Architects, Physical & Biological
0.014
0.079
0.245
0.111
-0.060
0.192
Technician
0.134
0.064
0.466
0.098
-0.325
0.170
Public Advisor
-0.223
0.091
0.370
0.137
-0.461
0.237
Judge, Lawyer
-0.485
0.171
0.565
0.290
-0.786
0.501
Other Professional
1.544
0.143
0.182
0.213
1.597
0.369
Manager, Official & Proprietor (not self)
-0.059
0.050
0.273
0.073
-0.216
0.126
Manager, Official & Proprietor (self-emp)
0.639
0.631
-0.955
1.136
-0.211
1.967
Secretary, Typists
-0.053
0.069
0.203
0.105
-0.348
0.182
Other Clerical Workers
0.146
0.047
0.314
0.066
-0.064
0.114
Retail Store Salesman & Sales Clerk
-0.148
0.071
-0.150
0.101
0.133
0.175
Craftsmen, Foreman
0.093
0.082
0.356
0.109
-0.116
0.188
Other Craftsmen
-0.145
0.045
-0.225
0.060
0.119
0.105
Government Protective Service Worker
0.087
0.097
0.319
0.139
-0.011
0.240
Armed Force
0.426
0.099
2.418
0.138
-1.865
0.239
Transport Equipment Operative
-0.042
0.059
0.042
0.080
-0.005
0.138
Unskilled Laborer
-0.374
0.064
-0.302
0.084
0.084
0.146
Farm Laborer & Foreman
-0.417
0.130
-1.065
0.161
1.119
0.280
Private Household Worker
-0.773
0.217
-1.131
0.293
-0.014
0.508
Other Service Worker
-0.011
0.051
-0.078
0.071
0.243
0.123
Farmers & Manager
0.147
0.352
-0.882
0.509
1.401
0.882
2
0.352
0.273
0.236
Adjusted R
55182
10386
10386
N
Notes: The reference category for the occupational dummies is operatives, except transport. All models control for education, a
cubic in experience, education * experience), a cubic in seniority, dummies for sex, marital status, union membership,
government employment, residence in SMSA, residence in a city of more than 500,000 people, and disability status, 2 race
dummies, 3 regional dummies, and calendar year dummies. The sample selection criteria of the data are described in the note to
table 1.

Appendix:

Figure A1: Distribution of Vacation Weeks for Part Time
Men
40
35

Percent

30

Weeks of Paid Vacation (VP)

25

Weeks of Vacation Taken (VT)

20
15
10
5
0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8-14

15+

Vacation Weeks

Figure A2: Distribution of Vacation Weeks for Part Time
Women
40
35

Percent

30

Weeks of Paid Vacation (VP)

25

Weeks of Vacation Taken (VT)

20
15
10
5
0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8-14

15+

Vacation Weeks

Percent

Figure A3: Distribution of Vacation Weeks Taken Vacation Weeks Paid, Part Time

55
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

Men
Women

-15 -14 - -7
8

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8-14 15+

Vacation Weeks Taken - Vacation Weeks Paid (VT-VP)

Note: The sample contains individuals who work between 15 and 34 hours per week in their main
job. The other restrictions are same as in the note to Figures 1, 2 and 3. That is, individuals were
between age 19 to 59, had left school and not returned, had not retired, and were not selfemployed. It also restricts to persons who have at least .5 years of seniority at the time of the
survey and exclude observations if the job ended prior to the next interview.

Figure A4: Distribution of Vacation Weeks Taken
1975-1991
40
35

Percent

30
25

Men
Women

20
15
10
5
0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8-14

15+

Vacation Weeks Taken (VT)

Notes: We use all the years available from the PSID. The sample design is the same as in the note to
Figures 1, 2 and 3.

Figure A5: Distribution of Vacation Weeks Taken
1975-1991, Part Time Workers

40
35

Percent

30
25
Men
Women

20
15
10
5
0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8-14

15+

Vacation Weeks Taken (VT)

Note: The sample contains individuals who work between 15 and 34 hours per week in their main job. We
use all the years available from the PSID. The sample selection criteria are the same as Figures 4, 5 and 6,
except that we use years 1975-1991.

Appendix Table A1
Means of Selected Variables in the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID)
Values of VP
Variable
Weeks of Vacation Taken (VT)
Weeks of Paid Vacation (VP)
Marital Status
Age
Education
Experience
Tenure
Wage
Government Employment
Union
Proportion Female
Teacher
Black
Nonblack/Nonwhite
Disability
SMSA
Large City
Northeast
North Central
West
South
Overemployment
Underemployment
Reasoning
Math
Language
SVP
Strength
Climbing
Balancing
Stooping
Kneeling
Crouching
Crawling
Reaching
Handling
Fingering
Feeling
Talking
Hearing
Weather
Wet/humid
Noise
Atmospheric condition
Vibration

VP = 0
2.386
0.000
0.846
35.47
11.14
16.48
6.439
9.352
0.178
0.248
0.196
0.071
0.389
0.046
0.062
0.526
0.237
0.104
0.201
0.149
0.545
0.027
0.374
3.202
2.255
2.588
4.788
1.843
0.547
0.361
0.905
0.643
0.727
0.118
1.929
1.946
1.315
0.145
0.818
0.956
1.055
0.128
3.485
0.435
0.026

Men
VP > 0
2.581
2.818
0.888
36.51
12.22
17.59
9.311
11.18
0.230
0.344
0.211
0.014
0.281
0.023
0.063
0.673
0.306
0.169
0.266
0.153
0.410
0.047
0.263
3.478
2.628
2.898
5.273
1.363
0.265
0.161
0.532
0.286
0.361
0.058
1.910
1.926
1.425
0.141
0.970
1.045
0.496
0.101
3.304
0.182
0.010

All
2.560
2.516
0.884
36.40
12.10
17.48
9.003
10.99
0.224
0.334
0.209
0.020
0.293
0.025
0.063
0.657
0.298
0.162
0.259
0.153
0.425
0.045
0.275
3.448
2.588
2.865
5.222
1.415
0.295
0.183
0.571
0.324
0.400
0.065
1.912
1.929
1.414
0.141
0.954
1.035
0.556
0.104
3.323
0.209
0.012

VP = 0
5.547
0.000
0.542
37.13
12.52
14.24
6.063
6.772
0.421
0.092
0.680
0.258
0.467
0.017
0.069
0.602
0.218
0.103
0.183
0.095
0.616
0.032
0.209
3.555
2.554
3.149
5.032
1.144
0.081
0.073
0.522
0.186
0.193
0.011
1.780
1.812
1.442
0.200
1.528
1.579
0.128
0.101
3.040
0.038
0.002

Women
VP > 0
3.021
2.765
0.494
36.60
12.29
14.58
6.832
8.023
0.284
0.160
0.661
0.045
0.415
0.016
0.064
0.713
0.342
0.161
0.221
0.157
0.459
0.044
0.162
3.467
2.509
3.029
4.904
0.934
0.074
0.055
0.383
0.137
0.195
0.012
1.911
1.933
1.606
0.181
1.289
1.338
0.114
0.109
2.962
0.045
0.002

All
3.310
2.450
0.499
36.66
12.32
14.54
6.745
7.891
0.299
0.152
0.663
0.069
0.421
0.016
0.064
0.700
0.328
0.154
0.217
0.150
0.477
0.043
0.167
3.477
2.514
3.043
4.918
0.957
0.074
0.057
0.398
0.143
0.195
0.012
1.896
1.919
1.587
0.183
1.316
1.365
0.116
0.108
2.971
0.044
0.002

Note: The numbers in the table are means of the row variables conditional on column segments on VP. These are
calculated across individuals between 1975-1991. The sample selection criteria are described in the note to table 1.

Appendix Table A1 contd.
Means of Selected Variables in the Health and Retirement Study (HRS)
Values of VP
Variable
Weeks of Paid Vacation (VP)
Marital Status
Age
Education
Experience
Tenure
Wage
Hours/Week
Weeks Worked (counting VP)
Paid Sick Days
Days Missed due to Illness
Government Employment
Union
Black
Nonblack/Nonwhite
Health Limitation
Northeast
Midwest
West
South
Overemployment
Underemployment

VP = 0
0.000
0.828
55.05
11.87
34.42
9.828
10.54
46.02
45.99
1.931
0.636
0.011
0.285
0.125
0.053
0.092
0.144
0.230
0.170
0.455
0.091
0.162

Men
VP > 0
3.669
0.884
55.31
12.88
35.66
16.13
12.03
45.71
51.53
9.610
0.971
0.073
0.319
0.124
0.043
0.073
0.167
0.257
0.160
0.415
0.134
0.138

All
3.259
0.878
55.28
12.77
35.52
15.43
11.86
45.75
50.92
8.475
0.934
0.066
0.315
0.124
0.044
0.075
0.165
0.254
0.161
0.420
0.129
0.141

VP = 0
0.000
0.768
53.51
12.98
26.60
10.16
8.465
43.32
43.93
4.475
0.657
0.027
0.259
0.149
0.044
0.087
0.114
0.238
0.162
0.485
0.081
0.157

Women
VP > 0
3.560
0.734
53.31
13.00
28.77
12.46
9.858
41.98
51.10
9.848
1.074
0.072
0.218
0.190
0.039
0.065
0.180
0.240
0.141
0.440
0.190
0.129

All
3.114
0.738
53.34
13.00
28.50
12.17
9.688
42.15
50.22
9.031
1.021
0.066
0.223
0.185
0.040
0.068
0.172
0.240
0.143
0.445
0.176
0.132

Note: The numbers in the table are means of the row variables conditional on column segments on VP. These are
calculated across individuals between 1992, 1994, 1996, 1998, 2000, and 2002. The sample selection criteria are described

Appendix Table A2
Means of Vacation Weeks Taken, Weeks Worked on Main Job, Hours/week on Main Job, Annual
Hours Worked on Extra Jobs, and Annual Hours Worked on All Jobs by Weeks of Paid Vacation
Men
Weeks
Paid
Vacation
(VP)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7+
Total

(1)
(2)
Vacation
Weeks
Weeks
Worked,
Taken (VT) Main Job
2.39
1.38
1.94
2.77
3.44
4.48
3.89
8.20
2.56

44.88
48.39
48.26
47.55
47.08
46.09
46.90
41.05
47.37

(3)
(4)
Hours /
Overtime
Week, Main Hours,
Job
Main Job
46.30
44.47
44.43
43.92
44.27
44.05
47.17
46.99
44.58

23.98
48.43
42.58
54.63
47.17
55.05
39.36
49.14
45.36

(5)
Annual
Hours
Worked,
Main Job
2128.24
2135.32
2173.64
2135.70
2065.48
2075.55
2324.01
1852.62
2135.06

(6)
Annual
Hours
Worked,
Extra Jobs
143.37
54.50
63.40
58.90
87.33
39.36
83.37
158.05
74.25

(7)
Annual
Hours
Worked, All
Jobs
2190.50
2262.96
2259.88
2205.63
2199.50
2144.56
2354.32
2104.56
2226.99

(5)
Annual
Hours
Worked,
Main Job
1703.62
1898.92
1937.41
1890.47
1904.24
1881.83
1990.32
1794.37
1888.57

(6)
Annual
Hours
Worked,
Extra Jobs
47.76
39.65
22.88
29.96
41.39
28.83
70.00
61.37
33.50

(7)
Annual
Hours
Worked, All
Jobs
1781.08
1953.05
1961.63
1915.13
1941.70
1959.43
1998.92
1740.30
1923.53

Women
Weeks
Paid
Vacation
(VP)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7+
Total

(1)
(2)
Vacation
Weeks
Weeks
Worked,
Taken (VT) Main Job
5.55
2.08
2.41
3.35
3.66
3.78
4.31
10.64
3.31

42.48
47.08
47.22
46.33
46.04
46.16
45.69
40.16
46.14

(3)
(4)
Hours /
Overtime
Week, Main Hours,
Job
Main Job
40.42
40.61
40.54
40.31
40.89
40.77
42.13
42.29
40.59

25.56
24.45
30.72
25.41
31.93
26.25
26.52
31.68
28.06

Notes: The numbers in the table are means of the column variable conditional on the row value of weeks of paid
vacation. The number of observations for men (women) are 7,697 (3,055) for vacation weeks taken, 7,702 (3,059) for
weeks worked on main job, 7,708 (3,061) for hours per week on main job and hours worked on all jobs, 2,093 (1,407)
for overtime hours, annual hours worked on main job, and annual hours worked on extra jobs. We have fewer
observations for columns 4-6 because only observations from year 1984 are available.

Appendix Table A3
The Effect of Weeks of Paid Vacation on the log of the Hourly Wage: HRS

Sample

Men and Women
Hourly and Salary
(1)
(2)
(3)
VP

1(VP > 0)

(6)

(7)

Salary Only
(8)

0.064

0.110

0.062

0.075

0.048

(0.002)

(0.003)

(0.003)

(0.004)

(0.004)

(0.004)

-0.189

-0.094

-0.154

-0.061

-0.171

-0.070

(0.013)

(0.014)

(0.015)

(0.015)

(0.023)

(0.024)

VP=1

VP=3

VP=4

VP=5

VP=6

VP=7+

Adjusted R2
N

Hourly Only
(5)

0.101

VP=0

Controls for tenure,
union and
government

(4)

(9)

-0.023

-0.078

0.026

(0.012)

(0.013)

(0.021)

-0.145

-0.122

-0.188

(0.014)

(0.014)

(0.030)

0.118

0.069

0.156

(0.010)

(0.012)

(0.016)

0.191

0.132

0.216

(0.011)

(0.014)

(0.017)

0.264

0.184

0.320

(0.013)

(0.017)

(0.020)

0.320

0.266

0.313

(0.019)

(0.026)

(0.026)

0.132

0.151

0.064

(0.019)

(0.031)

(0.025)

No

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

0.445
15454

0.467
15454

0.477
15454

0.384
8393

0.428
8393

0.431
8393

0.382
7061

0.401
7061

0.425
7061

Notes: The table reports OLS regression coefficients relating log hourly wage rate to measures of weeks of paid vacation. In
columns 1,2,4,5,7, and 8 the vacation variables are the number of weeks (VP and and indicator for VP > 0. Columns 3, 6, and
9 contain dummy variables for each number of weeks of paid vacation with VP=2 as the reference category. All models include
education, experience (a cubic and an interaction between education and experience), dummies for sex, marital status, and
health limitation, 2 race dummies, 3 regional dummies, and calendar year dummies. Column 2,3,5,6,8, and 9 also tenure (a
cubic), dummies for union membership and government employment. The sample contains individuals who work 35 or more
hours per week on the job, were less than age 60, had not retired, and were not self-employed.

