                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              HISTORICAL FINANCING OF SMALL-
                               AND MEDIUM-SIZED ENTERPRISES

                                              Robert Cull
                                             Lance E. Davis
                                          Naomi R. Lamoreaux
                                         Jean-Laurent Rosenthal

                                          Working Paper 11695
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11695


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2005




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Robert Cull, Lance E. Davis, Naomi R. Lamoreaux, and Jean-Laurent Rosenthal. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Historical Financing of Small- and Medium-Sized Enterprises
Robert Cull, Lance E. Davis, Naomi R. Lamoreaux, and Jean-Laurent Rosenthal
NBER Working Paper No. 11695
October 2005
JEL No. G2, N2

                                             ABSTRACT

We focus on the economies of the North Atlantic Core during the nineteenth and early twentieth

centuries and find that an impressive variety of local financial institutions emerged to supply the

needs of SMEs wherever there was sufficient demand for their services. Although these

intermediaries had significant weaknesses, they were able to tap into local information networks and

so extend credit to firms that were too young or small to secure funds from large regional or national

institutions. In addition, by raising the return to savings for local households, they helped to mobilize

significant new resources for economic development.

Robert Cull
The World Bank
rcull@worldbank.org

Lance E. Davis
Humanities and Social Sciences
California Institute of Technology
1200 East California Boulevard MC 228-77
Pasadena, CA 91125
and NBER
led@hss.caltech.edu

Naomi R. Lamoreaux
Department of Economics
UCLA
405 Hilgard Avenue
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
lamoreaux@econ.ucla.edu

Jean-Laurent Rosenthal
UCLA
rosenthal@econ.ucla.edu
                                                                                                           2



                Historical Financing of Small- and Medium-Size Enterprises♣



1. Introduction

         The size distribution of firms in developing nations today is very different from

that in most advanced economies. In the poorest countries on average almost two thirds

of workers are employed in very small (micro) enterprises—that is, enterprises with less

than five employees—and most of the rest work for large firms with more than one

hundred employees. Small- and medium-size firms have little presence in these

economies and together employ on average less than 10 percent of the total workforce.

By contrast, in the richest countries more than two thirds of all employees work for large

enterprises, the bulk of the remainder work for small- and medium-size enterprises

(SMEs), and only a very small fraction for micro enterprises (Snodgrass and Biggs,

1996). Although large firms account for the lion’s share of aggregate economic activity

in most developed countries, SMEs play a more significant role than their proportion of

total employment might suggest. Not only do they make up the vast majority of firms,

but they dominate many sectors of economic activity and have been an ongoing source of

new products and of technological innovation more generally.



         ♣
             We would like to thank Thorsten Beck, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, Kenneth Sokoloff, two anonymous

referees, and participants in the World Bank Conference on Small and Medium Enterprises for their helpful

comments. We are also grateful to our research assistant, Andrea Maestrejuan. The findings,

interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the authors. They do not

necessarily represent the views of the World Bank, its Executive Directors, or the countries they represent.
                                                                                                              3



         A common explanation for the comparative absence of SMEs in poor countries

today is that they cannot obtain access to capital. As a survey recently conducted by the

World Bank confirms, large firms everywhere generally have more access to bank credit,

both local and foreign, than small firms, whereas the latter rely heavily on internal funds

and retained earnings.1 Nonetheless, the survey also indicates that there is considerable

heterogeneity across countries in the sources of finance for SMEs, with the share of small

firms that have no external finance ranging from 19.2 percent in Croatia to 72.9 percent

in Armenia (see Table 1). In about a quarter of the countries small firms obtain more

than ten percent of their funds from trade credit, and in about 40 percent they obtain an

equivalent share from local commercial banks. In general, moreover, the countries in

which SMEs have access to these kinds of external sources are those with more advanced

financial systems, suggesting there may have been a causal relationship between financial

development and the viability of SMEs.2

         Such a possibility is also consistent with the recent literature on financial

development and economic growth. Based on cross-country regressions, this literature

suggests that there is a strong positive association between the extent of a country’s



         1
             The surveys of funding sources for businesses were conducted under the World Bank

investment climate program in 2002-2003 in 38 developing countries in Europe, Asia, Africa, and Latin

America. See http://research.worldbank.org/ics/jsp/index.jsp for details. Hereafter we refer to them as

Investment Climate Surveys (ICS).
         2
             Further evidence on this point comes from Beck, Demirgüç-Kunt, and Maksimovic (2004), who

use a different cross-country database to control for additional firm characteristics and find that small firms

and those in countries with poor institutions use less external finance than other enterprises.
                                                                                                                 4



financial development and its growth rate, and that the direction of causation runs from

finance to growth rather than the reverse (Beck, Levine, and Loayza, 2000; Levine,

Loayza, and Beck, 2000). There are strong theoretical reasons to believe these results,

but they have not gone uncontested. The case-study evidence, in particular, has yielded

more ambiguous conclusions. For example, commenting on a series of historical studies

that aimed to pin down the relationship between financial and economic development,

Rondo Cameron observed that the banking system seems merely to be “one of many

institutions that impinge on the economy and affect its performance for better or worse”

(Cameron, 1972, 6).3

         We have no ambition in this article to challenge the idea that modern financial

institutions are necessary for sustained economic growth. To the contrary, we sidestep

this higher-order question entirely and instead use historical evidence to get a clearer

sense of how SME’s special financing problems have been resolved in different times

and places. We focus our examination on what we call the North Atlantic Core—the

countries of northern and western Europe and North America. Most of the economies in

these regions developed the full panoply of modern financial institutions quite early in

their history and then industrialized successfully over a period that stretched from the late

eighteenth to the early twentieth centuries.4 There is no doubt that modern financial




         3
             For excellent surveys of this literature that argue that the balance of the case-study evidence

supports the finance-leads-development view, see Levine (1997 and 2005).
         4
             They have also been extensively studied, but here it is important to interject a note of caution.

Even in these cases, relatively little work has been done on the finance of SMEs, particularly little
                                                                                                      5



institutions were crucially important for the overall growth record of these economies,

but it does not necessarily follow that they played a significant role in the finance of

SMEs. Indeed, as we demonstrate in the following sections, the evidence points to

precisely the opposite conclusion. SMEs in the North Atlantic Core rarely raised capital

on the equity markets. Nor did they typically obtain credit from large financial-center

banks. Although SMEs did tap external sources of funds to secure working capital,

withstand adverse business conditions, and take advantage of new technologies and

opportunities, they obtained this assistance from an impressive variety of local financial

intermediaries. Moreover, these institutions seem to have emerged endogenously to meet

their needs wherever there was sufficient demand.

         To say that these institutions emerged in response to local demand is not to say

that they followed rather than led economic growth. Rather, we mean to suggest that the

entrepreneurs who hoped to make use of (and often helped to create) these institutions

expected that access to finance would enable their firms to exploit potential markets that

were otherwise beyond their reach. It is in this sense that the demand for these

institutions preceded and in some sense “caused” economic growth. The bulk of our

article is devoted to documenting the idiosyncratic, path-dependent processes that

generated this diverse set of local financial intermediaries. As we show, governments did

little to inhibit their formation, but they also played little role in their creation—beyond

providing a secure property-rights environment and establishing national financial

institutions, such as central banks, that helped to mitigate local shocks. Nor were

quantitative work. Hence much of what follows draws of necessity on qualitative evidence and on the

histories of individual industries and firms.
                                                                                             6



governments generally able to jumpstart economic growth by promoting local financial

institutions in regions where there was insufficient demand for their services.

Admittedly, the specialized intermediaries that emerged to meet SMEs’ needs had

significant weaknesses, but they were able to tap into local information networks and

hence extend credit to firms that were too young or small to secure funds from large

regional or national institutions. Moreover, by raising the return to savings for

households in their vicinity, they helped to mobilize significant new resources for

economic development.



2. Equity Finance

       Formal securities markets emerged throughout the North Atlantic Core well in

advance of industrialization. Despite their early appearance, however, they played

relatively little role in the finance of SMEs. Although initially organized to facilitate

trading in long-term government debt, the types of securities they handled expanded

steadily over time—first to include privileged trading corporations, then other companies

promoted by the state (mainly in finance, transportation, and utilities), and then private

companies more generally. Nonetheless, as late as the end of the nineteenth century, it

was still comparatively rare for manufacturing or other non-infrastructural firms to be

listed on the exchanges. Even in the first third of the twentieth century only the securities

of the very largest companies traded (Gelderblom and Jonkers, 2004; Mitchie, 1999;

Plache, 1999; Hautcoeur, 1994; Navin and Sears, 1955; Baskin and Miranti, 1997;

Franks, Mayer, and Rossi, 2005).
                                                                                                7



       To some extent, of course, trading in manufacturing and other similar securities

was inhibited by information problems. Investors were more willing to put their funds in

sectors like railroads where the capital stock was highly visible or in finance where

government regulators at least to some extent served as monitors. But information

problems cannot be the whole story. Certainly, there were markets where intermediaries

were in a position to signal the quality of new issues to investors. For example, Paris had

an active curb market (the Coulisse), supported by a large and competitive group of

private banks that specialized in collecting information about, and underwriting the

equity issues of, firms who wanted to raise capital (Plache, 1999; Hautcoeur, 1994;

Thomas, 1973, ch. 6-7). Throughout the North Atlantic Core, moreover, there were

regional exchanges that handled the securities of firms whose entrepreneurs and business

activities were well known to local investors. Even in these settings, however, the number

of different manufacturing securities actually traded was still quite small relative to the

potential amount. For example, in the 1890s the Boston market quoted stock prices for

only about a hundred manufacturing firms, though thousands of industrial corporations

had been chartered in the New England region. According to a broker who maintained a

record of trading, manufacturing stocks generally were held by people who did not intend

to sell them. As a result, “it was exceedingly difficult to obtain reliable quotations,” even

for the region’s largest enterprises, because the securities rarely appeared on the market

“except in stray shares or in the case of executors’ sales” (Martin, 1898, 126-32).

       Not only did manufacturing securities tend to be closely held, but the vast

majority of companies took organizational forms that did not yield tradable shares. At

first, of course, there was little choice in the matter because the only available form for a
                                                                                              8



multi-owner enterprise was the partnership. But even after the third quarter of the

nineteenth century, when the corporate form became widely available by registration,

most businesses did not avail themselves of the possibility to issue shares. In order to

understand why, it is helpful to get some sense of the tradeoffs involved in the choice of

organizational form. The partnership, of course, had serious drawbacks. All members

had unlimited liability, but they also possessed full ownership rights. Hence, they could

enter into contracts that were binding on the firm without consulting the other partners, so

long as the contracts were in the scope of the firm’s normal business activities. Not only

did this right to act unilaterally mean that partners faced obligations that they might not

even know about, it was a potential source of conflict within the firm. As a result,

partnerships suffered from the nontrivial probability that otherwise profitable ventures

would suffer costly dissolution. Not surprisingly, they tended to be formed among

individuals who knew each other well—that is, who had some kind of deeper personal

relationship that could form a basis for trust (Lamoreaux and Rosenthal, 2006).

       Although corporations solved the most pressing problems of partnerships, they

did so by making controlling shareholders effectively dictators. Hence corporations also

had important drawbacks because majority shareholders could use their power to benefit

themselves at the expense of other members of the firm. Although the latter were only

limitedly liable for the enterprise’s debts and thus, in the event of insolvency, stood to

lose no more than their investments, they had to worry about the possibility that

controlling shareholders would expropriate a significant share of their returns. As a result,

corporations also required a high degree of trust among members of the firm (Lamoreaux

and Rosenthal, 2006).
                                                                                            9



       In France and elsewhere on the European continent, the provisions of the

commercial code allowed business people to contract around some of the problems of

partnerships. For example, one or more members of the firm could exchange their control

rights for limited liability. It was also possible for members to restrict the extent to which

their partners could act unilaterally or even prevent them from encumbering the firm.

Not surprisingly, in both absolute and relative terms, many fewer SMEs chose to

organize as corporations on the continent than in Britain or the U.S., where such options

either were not permitted or not as well enforced (Lamoreaux and Rosenthal, 2005). An

even more attractive alternative became available over time, moreover. The new form

appeared first in Germany, where the government had designed the corporate form with

large enterprises in mind and had set particularly high minimum share values and capital

requirements. The government had envisioned that SMEs would continue to be

organized as partnerships of one type or another, but the obvious contracting problems

associated with these forms led it to provide entrepreneurs (in 1892) with an alternative

form of organization—the private limited liability company (Gesellschaft mit

beschränkter Haftung, or GmbH). A hybrid between partnerships and corporations in

which share capital was not tradable but all owners had limited liability, the GmbH

helped business people overcome the contracting problems associated with both of these

forms and quickly became the device of choice for medium-sized enterprises in Germany

(Lamoreaux and Rosenthal, 2005; Pohl, 1991).

       Other European countries followed suit in the early twentieth century. The

British Parliament passed a statute enabling businesses to organize as private limited

liability companies in 1907, and France created the société à responsabilité limitée
                                                                                           10



(SARL) in 1925. In both countries large numbers of medium-sized companies

immediately adopted the new form. Indeed, as Figure 1 shows, in France the

overwhelming majority of new multi-owner firms chose to organize as SARLs

(Lamoreaux and Rosenthal, 2005). Portugal passed similar legislation as early as 1911,

Austria in 1916, and most other western European countries by the mid-1930s (Lehnardt,

1955, 16-19). The form was enormously popular wherever it was available, and as a

result SMEs in these countries rarely organized in ways that permitted them to issue

tradable shares.

       The one big exception to this story was the U.S., where effective legislation for

private limited liability companies (LLPs and LLCs) was not passed until the end of the

twentieth century, and where even then the take-up rate for the form was slow

(presumably because there had been adjustments in the interim that made the corporate

form more useful to SMEs). Even in the U.S., however, the ongoing need for members

of a corporation to have a high degree of trust meant that entrepreneurs raised investment

capital mainly by means of personal connections. To this very day, shares in the vast

majority of corporations never trade on the market (Lamoreaux and Rosenthal, 2005).



3. Debt Finance

       Historical studies of the role of banks in industrial finance have long focused

attention on what are called “universal banks”—that is, institutions that provided both

commercial and investment banking services to their customers. Many scholars have

argued that this combination of activities gave universal banks advantages in obtaining

information about customers that enabled them to play an important role in financing
                                                                                                              11



economic development (Tilly, 1986 and 1989; Benston, 1994; Calomiris, 1995;

Guinnane, 2002). This claim has occasioned much debate, but whether one agrees with it

or not, it is doubtful that universal banks—or for that matter any other financial center

banks—extended much in the way of credit to SMEs.

         Although private banks had long provided a mix of commercial and investment

services to their customers, the term universal bank is usually reserved for the large

incorporated financial intermediaries that emerged in Europe during the second half of

the nineteenth century, especially in Germany (Riesser, 1911; Gerschenkron, 1962; Tilly,

1966; Calomiris, 1995; Da Rin, 1996; Guinnane, 2002).5 While there is no denying that

the great German banks lent money to and underwrote the securities issues of important

industrial ventures, studies of specific German industries have found considerable

heterogeneity in the extent to which firms made use of universal banks’ services.6 More


         5
             Many scholars have argued that such institutions did not develop in Anglo-American countries,

where banks were much more conservatively focused on the commercial side of their business and were

much less involved in industrial finance (Best and Humphries, 1998; Kennedy, 1987; Calomiris, 1995). In

recent years, however, these generalizations about the differences between German and Anglo-American

banking have been vigorously challenged. See especially Collins (1991 and 1998); Capie and Collins

(1992); and Fohlin (1997a, 1997b, 1998, 1999a and 1999b).
         6
             For example, iron and steel firms were heavily dependent on banks during the difficult 1870s and

1880s. By the 1890s, however, they were in a position to finance investment largely out of retained

earnings, and had begun systematically to reduce the extent of their ties to particular financial institutions.

The role that banks played in the organization of electrical utilities is generally acknowledged, but it is

thought that banks’ presence was comparatively negligible in the country’s flagship chemical industry

(Pohl, 1984; Feldenkirchen, 1981 and 1991; Wengenroth, 1994; Wellhöner and Wixforth, 2003).
                                                                                           12



importantly, the number of companies that were in a position to take advantage of the

banks’ combination of investment and commercial banking services was in fact quite

small (Tilly, 1986, 1989, and 1992). In 1905, nearly 2000 companies were listed on the

various German exchanges. These companies constituted 36 percent of all joint-stock

corporations (Fohlin, 1999b, 328), but joint-stock companies themselves accounted for a

relatively small portion of industrial investment in Germany—less than 20 percent of the

total in the first decade of the twentieth century (Edwards and Ogilvie, 1996, 436-37). As

we have seen, most multi-owner enterprises in Germany (and elsewhere in Europe) were

organized as partnerships or private limited liability companies—that is, as enterprises

that could not issue tradable securities. Hence, to the extent that universal banks

provided any assistance to these firms, it was mainly in the form of credit, especially

short-term commercial lending on current account.

       There are good theoretical reasons to believe, moreover, that large financial center

banks, whether they were in Berlin or London or Paris or New York, were unlikely to be

important sources of credit for SMEs. These kinds of institutions were costly to set up

and hence were geared to serving the needs of customers for whom the volume of activity

justified the costs of acquiring information about the firm’s prospects and ability to repay.

Even if one assumes that the cost of ascertaining creditworthiness was not a decreasing

function of the borrower’s size and number of years in operation, the cost to the bank per

dollar loaned would be greater for SMEs than for large-scale enterprises. Of course, if

the cost of checking the credit of an SME was higher, the situation was even worse.

Moreover, the difficulties were likely to be still greater for SMEs located outside the

main financial centers. To avoid problems of adverse selection, financial center banks
                                                                                           13



would have to invest in developing the capacity to screen borrowers locally, but in small

markets the benefits would not be worth the costs. There would also likely be

competition from local intermediaries that had better access to information from informal

personal connections. Indeed, in location after location throughout the North Atlantic

Core, wherever there was a significant demand for these kinds of loans, intermediaries

emerged in some form or another that were able to tap into local information networks

and provide credit to SMEs.

       Both the types of local intermediaries and the circumstances under which they

developed varied enormously from one location to the next. On the European continent,

for example, notaries came to play a pivotal role in the provision of credit. The primary

responsibility of these officials was to draw up contracts for private individuals, and,

because anyone who contested the contracts they drafted bore a heavy burden of proof,

important agreements were almost invariably notarized. Notaries were thus in a position

to acquire detailed information about the business activities and financial standing of

their clients—to know who had idle wealth, who needed capital, and how individuals had

performed in past transactions. In other words, they had the knowledge they needed to

judge both a borrower’s creditworthiness and a lender’s ability and willingness to bear

risk (Hoffman, Postel-Vinay, and Rosenthal, 2000).

       Already, by the late seventeenth century, Parisian notaries had expanded beyond

their simple duties as scriveners to take on the role of asset brokers, using the information

they accumulated about clients to match borrowers and lenders. By the 1820s, they were

helping to raise capital for industrial enterprises, and some were moving into full-fledged

underwriting. Outside Paris, notaries assisted industrial enterprises mainly by facilitating
                                                                                                           14



loans, but in Paris, the names of notaries appeared, alongside those of bankers and

brokers, on tombstone advertisements soliciting investors in industrial share commandites

in the 1830s (Hoffman, Postel-Vinay, and Rosenthal, 2003 and 2004).7

         Although notaries’ activities as financial intermediaries took them far beyond

their original function and, at times, threatened the legitimacy of their position of public

trust, the state was loath to intervene. Notaries who strayed into banking failed with some

regularity during the early nineteenth century, but the government tolerated these

transgressions until a formal banking system was well developed. Only then did it begin

to clamp down. In Paris, not surprisingly, the end came sooner than elsewhere. The city

already had more than 200 banks, as well as an established securities market, by the late

1830s when the bankruptcy of Jacques François Lehon spurred government action.

Lehon’s failed attempts to underwrite securities issues for a number of share

commandites, and his subsequent fraudulent efforts to cover his losses, wiped out the

assets of a large number of wealthy and well-connected depositors.8 Threatened with

regulation, including periodic audits of their books, the Parisian notaries agreed to exit all

banking activities and to police themselves to make the agreement stick (Hoffman,

Postel-Vinay, and Rosenthal, 2003). In the countryside, however, notaries ignored the


         7
             A commandite was a partnership with one or more managing partners who bore full liability for

the enterprise’s debts and one or more silent partners who had limited liability. During the 1830s, some of

the largest commandites began to make the silent partners’ shares tradable. In this way, they created an

early substitute for the still difficult-to obtain corporate form. See Lamoreaux and Rosenthal (2005).
         8
             The judicial proceedings against Lehon can be followed in the pages of the Gazette des

Tribunaux from January of 1841 to June of 1842. See also Hoffman, Postel-Vinay, and Rosenthal (2003).
                                                                                            15



government’s threats, and it was not until the 1890s that the state required them to halt

their financial activities. By then, however, the number of banking offices outside Paris

had grown to 2,500 or so (from about 800 in the 1830s), and there were also more than

1,000 savings bank branches.9

       In Anglo-American countries, notaries did not play such an important role in

drafting contracts and so did not have the same privileged access to information as their

counterparts on the European continent. But there were other ways to harness local

information to facilitate the provision of credit to SMEs. By the middle of the nineteenth

century, for example, credit reporting agencies had emerged in the United States to

collect local information and sell it to businesses that needed to decide whether or not to

extend trade credit (and how much) to firms in other parts of the country. The most

successful such enterprise was the Mercantile Agency, predecessor of Dun and

Bradstreet. The Mercantile Agency developed a network of correspondents in

communities across the country who were paid to send the company regular reports on

the standing of local businesses. Lawyers were especially well-placed to perform this

function because a mainstay of their business during this period was the collection of

unpaid debts. For firms that had not defaulted on any payments, correspondents reported

what they could learn from interviews, newspapers, local records, and gossip about the

wealth and character of proprietors and the volume and profitability of their businesses.

As in the case of notaries, the response of government to this innovation was generally

permissive. State legislatures resisted pressure to make agencies liable for losses when



       9
           Annuaire Didot-Bottin, various years.
                                                                                            16



their subscribers acted on misinformation, and the courts were similarly unwilling to

make this business unprofitable. Although for a time there was some uncertainty about

whether the courts would consider the dissemination of unfavorable information to be

grounds for a libel suit, the trend was to require only that credit report agencies be

reasonably diligent (Madison, 1974; Norris, 1978; Olegario, 2001; Balleisen, 2001).

       More generally, the marginal role played by notaries in the Anglo-American

world increased the relative importance of local banks in the provision of credit to SMEs.

In England, for example, there was a dramatic expansion in the founding of “country”

banks during the early industrial period, with the number increasing from 12 in 1750 to

over 300 by 1800. These banks were partnerships, limited by law to no more than six

members. Many were formed by industrialists with the express purpose of providing

financial support for their manufacturing enterprises. Most of this support came in the

form of short-term credit, but banks in some areas also provided medium- and long-term

loans. In 1825, new legislation permitted banks to organize as joint-stock companies, but

those that adopted the new form seemed to have changed their structure more than their

function. The prominent position that local manufacturers continued to occupy on their

boards suggests that the banks still served the interests of their directors (Cottrell, 1979,

14-16; Collins, 1991, 23-29; Newton, 1997).

       Nowhere was the connection between local banks and local industry more

apparent than in New England, the region of the United States that industrialized most

rapidly during the first half of the nineteenth century. Particularly in Massachusetts and

Rhode Island, charters for banking corporations were easy to obtain, and many

entrepreneurs organized banks in their communities with the aim of providing themselves
                                                                                          17



with a source of credit. It was well known that the banks thus created lent the bulk of

their funds to their own officers and directors, or to others associated with these

personages in business, but these institutions nonetheless found it easy to attract

investment funds from members of their surrounding communities. Although people

with savings seem to have been reluctant to invest them directly in manufacturing

enterprises, they eagerly bought (in the form of bank stock) what was in effect a share of

the diversified investments of their community’s most active entrepreneurs. To protect

and encourage this flow of funds, banks developed governance systems that enabled the

entrepreneurs that dominated them to cross monitor each other. Although each

entrepreneur might, if unchecked, have succumbed to the temptation to lend too much of

the bank’s funds to himself, each entrepreneur also had an interest in protecting this

valuable source of credit and so could be counted on to intervene to prevent one of his

colleagues from undermining the solvency of the institution. This system seems to have

worked remarkably well, for bank failures were infrequent and capital flowed into the

banking sector, giving the region one of the most favorable ratios of bank capital to

population in the world (Lamoreaux, 1994; Meissner, 2005).

       Of course, banks that lent their funds disproportionately to insiders discriminated

against other would-be borrowers in their localities. In the New England case, however,

political pressures forced state governments to lower barriers to entry into banking to

such an extent that virtually any group of entrepreneurs who wanted to could organize a

bank. This policy undoubtedly limited the extent of the distortion even if it could not

completely eliminate it (Lamoreaux, 1994). In other states, legislatures were less liberal

in their chartering policies, but banks there seem to have made an effort to prevent such
                                                                                          18



political pressures from mounting by extending credit to significant numbers of outsiders,

many of them small, local manufacturers. In order to do this safely, they exploited local

sources of information, assiduously investigating the reputations of those who applied to

them for credit and maintaining detailed records of the financial tidbits they gleaned.

When bank officers themselves did not know a borrower, they relied on the judgment of

someone they trusted who did. For example, the records of the Bank of Newburgh, New

York, contain letters from a prominent local businessman recommending that the bank

extend credit to particular farmers and tradesmen (Wright, 1999; Bodenhorn, 2000 and

2003).

         Another type of local institution emerged in Germany to provide loans to small

businesses and farmers: the credit cooperative (Guinnane, 2002; Herrigel, 1996;

Wengenroth, 1999). There were several distinct movements to organize cooperatives

during the nineteenth century, and the reformers who led these movements had somewhat

different ideas about how these institutions should be organized. Nonetheless, all

mobilized local information flows in essentially the same way—by inducing members

who knew each other well to monitor each other’s borrowing and enforce repayment

terms. Cooperatives associated with the ideas of Freidrich Raiffeisen and Wilhelm Haas

were primarily rural and saw their purpose to be the provision of long-term credit to

farmers. Those associated with Hermann Schulze-Delitzsch tended to be located in urban

areas and to lend short-term to small craftsmen and shopkeepers. Although rural

cooperatives were by far more numerous, urban cooperatives tended to be much larger.

In 1910, for example, there were 15,517 cooperatives located in rural areas, compared to

only 2,103 in urban, but despite their much greater numbers, rural cooperatives only had
                                                                                             19



about twice as many total members as urban (Guinnane, 1997, 2001 and 2002; Ghatak

and Guinnane, 1999).

       There was also a tremendous expansion in savings banks (Sparkassen) in

Germany during the late nineteenth century. In Prussia alone, the number of Sparkassen

increased from 234 in 1850 to 1191 in 1880 to 1711 in 1910, and by 1910 there were

3072 savings banks in the country as a whole (Guinnane, 2002, 84-85). For much of the

period, government regulations inhibited the ability of Sparkassen to lend to local SMEs

by limiting the kinds of assets in which savings banks could invest. Though Sparkassen

were able to make loans to industrial firms by taking mortgages on real estate or, in

Prussia, on the security of a second endorser, over time their investments gravitated

toward urban mortgages and government securities. Indeed, many governments

chartered Sparkassen for the express purpose of creating a market for their own bonds.

As Timothy Guinnane has pointed out, however, much of the government debt that

Sparkassen purchased was issued to finance infrastructural improvements that potentially

benefited local businesses, for example, by lowering transportation costs (Guinnane,

2002, 85-89). Moreover, the spread of Sparkassen had a profound effect on the savings

rate. As the numbers of these local institutions grew, the number of savings books held

by individuals increased as well—in Prussia, from 3 to 32 per hundred people between

1850 and 1910, and in Saxony, from 5 to 66 per hundred. Between 1860 and 1913, the

share of savings institutions in the total assets of financial intermediaries in Germany

grew from 12 to 24.8 percent, and it is likely that this increase mainly resulted from net

additions to the resources of the financial system, which itself grew from about 4 to 90

billion Marks (Guinnane, 2002, 81, 85; Goldsmith, 1969, Table D-9).
                                                                                           20



       Although the Sparkassen had some unique features, similar types of savings

institutions were founded throughout the North Atlantic Core during the industrial era.

Some, like the Sparkassen, invested mainly in government securities, but others played a

more direct role in financing SMEs. In early-nineteenth-century New England, for

example, savings institutions were often founded by the same entrepreneurs who

controlled local banks. Sometimes they engaged in the same types of insider lending as

the banks but more typically they facilitated this type of financing by investing heavily in

the banks’ stock (Lamoreaux, 1994). Regardless of the particular lending behavior of

such institutions, however, there is good reason to believe that they helped to mobilize

capital for economic development by raising the return to savings for households in their

vicinity (Davis and Gallman, 1978). Certainly, their founding was associated with

dramatic jumps in savings rates throughout the North Atlantic Core (Goldsmith, 1969).



4. Path Dependence, Imperfect Substitutes, and Ongoing Problems

       Firms typically need different types of finance for different purposes and at

different points in their life cycle. Hence the three main categories of finance—equity,

long-term credit, and short-term credit—are often thought of as complements. But they

could also substitute for one another, albeit imperfectly, as we will argue below. Firms

took advantage of whatever type of finance was most available in their locality, which in

turn depended on factor endowments, the nature of the legal system, the structure of

government, and the particular solutions that local entrepreneurs happened to devise to

meet their needs. As a consequence, the evolution of local financial institutions had a
                                                                                              21



path dependent character that resulted in persistent differences across countries, and even

across locations within countries, in the ways SMEs raised funds.

       In France, for example, textile manufacturers in different parts of the country

raised funds in strikingly different ways. In Alsace and in the Seine River Valley

between Paris and Rouen, textile manufacturers frequently raised capital by selling

equity, exploiting first the commandite form of organization and later the corporation,

and relying on family and business connections to reduce the information problems

involved in securing outside infusions of funds (Levy-Leboyer, 1964; Chassagne, 1991).

By contrast, in the textile center around Lille, firms rarely had recourse to the equity

markets. Most were either sole proprietorships or family partnerships, and they raised

funds primarily by borrowing. Because families often accumulated large landholdings as

part of their diversification strategies, they possessed the collateral necessary for long-

term loans. In the early part of the century, these loans were typically arranged by

notaries, but over time banks increasingly provided local manufacturers with this type of

credit and also with short-term loans. Indeed, by the middle of the century, this area had

one of the densest networks of banks, most of them private, in the country. The banks

generally were run by individuals with close personal links to the main industries of the

area and, as a result, had good sources of information about the creditworthiness of local

borrowers (Hirsch, 1991; Bonnin, 2004; Lescure, 1999).

       This mix of long-term and short-term debt prevailed throughout most of the rest

of France, but Paris was an important exception. Although bankers sometimes took

equity positions in medium-size firms by becoming silent partners, they rarely made

long-term loans to manufacturers because the latter generally lacked the necessary
                                                                                                            22



collateral. Unlike the countryside, where real estate was widely dispersed, Parisian

landholding was extremely concentrated (Daumard, 1973; Piketty, Postel-Vinay, and

Rosenthal, 2005). Nearly all the inhabitants of the city were renters, and most

commercial and industrial enterprises leased their workspace. Although renting reduced

manufacturers’ access to long-term loans, it also reduced their fixed capital requirements

(Lemercier, 2003).10

        To meet manufacturers’ needs for working capital, Paris had an active short-term

debt market. Because there was no legal requirement for borrowers and lenders to

register commercial debt, this market is less readily visible to historians than the types of

credit mediated by notaries. But there is abundant evidence of its existence, both in the

records of the bankruptcy court and in the concerns about controlling these kinds of

liabilities that pervade the governance agreements of new firms and, more generally, the

whole business literature of the period. Much of this short-term lending took the form of

trade credit, where longstanding business relationships between upstream and

downstream firms kept informational problems to a minimum (Brennan, 1997). In

addition, small investment banks also made short-term commercial loans in sectors where

they had invested in accumulating knowledge about the local population of firms.




        10
             In some industries, moreover, Parisian manufacturers were able to limit their need for fixed

capital in other ways as well. For instance, Paris was a major producer of luxury commodities known as

“articles de Paris.” These goods were most often produced through a putting-out system, with artisans

working alone or in small groups “en chambre.” The artisans owned their own tools with the manufacturer

supplying only inputs and designs.
                                                                                           23



       As the French case demonstrates, even within a common political and legal

system and even within a single industry, firms’ capital structures could vary

considerably in ways that reflected the peculiarities of local history. Across countries

with different types of political or legal systems, of course, the variation could be greater

still. Indeed, our discussion has emphasized the diversity of the solutions that

entrepreneurs throughout the North Atlantic Core devised to meet the financing needs of

SMEs. Although some of these solutions presumably were better—that is, more efficient

in channeling funds to promising projects—than others, the important thing was that they

arose in the first place. Over time, moreover, the efficiency of local financial institutions

typically improved as the first movers evolved and/or as new intermediaries entered the

market to replace or complement their predecessors. Thus in France the role of notaries

in mediating lending declined as banks became important sources of credit. Similarly, by

the late nineteenth century borrowers in the industrial regions of the U.S. were served by

a whole panoply of formal financial intermediaries that ranged from large commercial

banks and trust companies to smaller versions of the same types of institutions to even

smaller savings and loans.

       So long as firms had access to some form of finance, moreover, the particular type

that was available—debt versus equity or short-term versus long-term credit—seems not

to have mattered all that much. Hence industrialization progressed rapidly in New

England during the early nineteenth century, despite firms’ limited access to equity

finance or long-term loans. The swelling ranks of local banks made credit available to

SMEs in the form of 60- or 90-day notes that could be rolled over for extended periods of

time and thus effectively substitute for long-term capital (Lamoreaux, 1994). The more
                                                                                            24



capital-intensive firms that sprang up in the machine tool, electrical, and automobile

industries in the Midwest during the second industrial revolution thrived on similar short-

term sources of funds. Indeed, their entrepreneurs were actively involved in founding

local savings institutions and trust companies that would help them meet their financing

needs in this way (Lamoreaux, Levenstein, and Sokoloff, 2006).

       The extent to which equity and short- and long-term credit can substitute for each

other should not, of course, be overstated. The different types of finance each serve some

needs better than others. Short-term debt can expand and contract flexibly with the

demand for working capital and so helps firms minimize their financing costs. Long-

term debt and equity are more suitable for fixed-capital investments, the returns from

which can only be realized over significant periods of time. Equity finance has

implications for control rights that loans do not have, but missing interest payments can

have much greater consequences for the survival of the firm than passing dividends.

       Because SMEs historically have found it either preferable or easier to secure

outside finance in the form of loans rather than investments of equity, they have tended to

labor under relatively high burdens of (especially short-term) debt. Leverage and

investment have both tended to increase during boom periods, and this pattern has

generally meant large numbers of insolvencies during the downturns that inevitably

ensued (Neal, 1994). The inefficiencies associated with this method of finance were

clearly large, but industrialization nonetheless proceeded apace. Indeed, some scholars

have argued that the creative destruction associated with this cyclical pattern helped to

shift the economy’s production possibility frontier outward, and that high failure rates
                                                                                           25



may themselves have fostered an entrepreneurial spirit by removing the stigma associated

with bankruptcy (Baten, 2001; Balleisen, 2001).

       There is no question, however, that the financial institutions that emerged to serve

SMEs were extremely vulnerable to shocks, such as crop failures, that affected the local

economy. The credit cooperatives formed in Germany are particularly interesting in this

regard because they experimented with formal means to solve this problem. These

cooperatives were typically part of larger movements that also organized umbrella banks

called “centrals” (owned collectively by the cooperatives in the movement and also

sometimes by outside investors) that accepted deposits from member institutions, lent

them money, gave them access to broader capital markets, and served as lenders of last

resort. In 1895, the Prussian government chartered the Prussian Cooperative Central

Bank (Preussenkasse) with capital supplied by the Prussian government to serve a similar

function for all of the centrals located within Prussia (Guinnane, 1997 and 2002).

       Throughout the North Atlantic Core, local banks and other local financial

institutions attempted to improve their ability to withstand shocks by developing

correspondent relationships with large urban banks. By placing funds on deposit with

their urban correspondents, they could diversify their portfolios and secure access to

credit in times of need. These arrangements never amounted to full insurance, however,

because urban banks always exercised discretion about whether or not to provide

additional resources to their client banks. Country banks often failed in England when

money was tight, but nearly all paid their depositors in full when they were liquidated,

suggesting that there would have been many fewer failures if the banks had been able to
                                                                                                          26



get through these periods of stringency. The rise of branch banking in England was in

part an effort to solve this problem (Cottrell and Newton, 1999).

        In Germany, another solution was for the large Berlin banks to acquire minority

stakes in outlying institutions (Guinnane, 2002). These solutions are good examples of

ways in which large banks that did not directly serve SMEs could assist the institutions

that did lend to them and thus show how a well developed financial system could play

important, if indirect, role in SME finance. That such assistance was not vital for the

continued growth of the SME sector, however, is suggested by the case of the United

States. Throughout the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, regulatory restrictions

meant that U.S. banks could only operate in a single state and, in most states, banks were

not allowed to branch (Calomiris, 1995; Davis and Gallman, 2001). Small banks in the

U.S. thus still had to rely of necessity on relations with correspondent banks to sustain

them through periods of emergency.

        Many nations also created central banks that could serve as lenders of last resort

for the largest banks in the system, enabling them in turn better to perform their role of

stabilizing smaller institutions. But these arrangements remained highly imperfect

throughout our period, and financial crises continued to cause large numbers of bank

failures. This imperfection was in turn a reflection of the quite limited role that

governments in the North Atlantic Core played in the economy throughout our period.

Beyond providing a secure property rights environment for transactions, governments for

the most part left the financial system to its own devices.11

        11
             To the extent that state intervention had negative consequences, moreover, it was more likely to

affect large firms than SMEs. For example, the French government’s regulation of access to the Bourse
                                                                                                             27



         In addition to the vulnerability to shocks that resulted from SMEs’ generally high

levels of leverage, the informal nature of local credit markets meant that some degree of

discrimination and hence credit rationing was inevitable. There is no doubt that

individuals with thick ties to other members of their community, and with some capital of

their own, were in a much better position to secure credit than other borrowers, regardless

of the quality of their projects. But there is also no doubt that as commercial banking

became more professionalized and more regulated, lending practices changed in ways

that were not always conducive to the finance of SMEs. To secure long-term credit, for

example, borrowers typically had to pledge collateral whose value was at least twice the

amount of the loan (Snowden, 1995; Hoffman, Postel-Vinay, and Rosenthal, 2000). To

secure short-term credit, they often had to maintain compensating balances in their

deposit accounts, as well as to meet increasingly rigid quantitative standards of

creditworthiness (Collins, 1991; Lamoreaux, 1994).




mainly affected the large industrial enterprises that otherwise might have used the exchange to raise equity.

Similarly, the anti-branching regulations that many state governments imposed in the U.S. kept financial

institutions too small to meet the needs of large-scale businesses (Calomiris, 1995; Davis, 1966). Even

these problems can be exaggerated, however. There is considerable evidence that firms denied access to

the Paris Bourse found an effective substitute in the coulisse (Plache, 1999). Moreover, William Doyle

(1991 and 2000) has argued, based on his detailed research on the U.S. sugar and meat-packing industries,

that large firms had no difficulty financing investment out of retained earnings and short-term sources of

funds. They had to turn to the equity markets when they organized mergers because bargaining problems

made it difficult to fund the necessary acquisitions in any other way. But after the mergers were completed,

they reverted to traditional means of financing working capital and even investment.
                                                                                           28



       Hence, as local banks grew (or merged) into large modern financial institutions,

entrepreneurs devised new types of financial intermediaries to service the SME part of

the market. This process is especially apparent in the United States where the National

Banking Acts of the early 1860s transformed virtually overnight banks that had served

the needs of their community’s businesses into more professional institutions with

lending standards enforced by a national system of bank examiners (Lamoreaux, 1994).

To fill the resulting void, local business people founded new state banks, savings

institutions, building and loan associations, and trust companies. The latter were

especially important because their charters enabled them to combine investment with

commercial banking functions, while the laxer regulatory restrictions to which they were

held enabled them to compete effectively with more established commercial banks for

deposits (Barnett, 1911; Neal, 1971; White, 1982 and 1983, ch.1; Snowden, 1995 and

1997). During the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, for example, when

Cleveland, Ohio, was a center of start-up enterprises in electricity, chemicals, steel,

automobiles, and other second-industrial-revolution technologies, local entrepreneurs

founded a dozen trust companies, as well as scores of savings institutions and buildings

and loans (Lamoreaux, Levenstein, and Sokoloff, 2006).

       We do not wish to minimize the problems that small- and medium-size firms

faced in raising capital. Nonetheless, our reading of the historical record leads us to

emphasize the positive: the alacrity with which, in this generally permissive regulatory

environment, financial intermediaries emerged to serve SMEs wherever there was

sufficient local demand; and the high degree of creativity that the entrepreneurs who

founded these intermediaries exhibited as they innovated around such regulatory barriers
                                                                                           29



as existed, built on preexisting institutional structures, and responded to local factor

endowments and other special conditions.



5.   Financial Deserts

        So far our argument that the development of financial institutions was largely

demand driven has been based on an examination of success stories. Even in Western

Europe and North America, however, there were places that could be characterized as

economic deserts. Instead of accumulating or attracting capital, these regions exported

labor. They also generally suffered from a lack of financial intermediation. In this

section, we consider whether restrictive chartering or regulatory policies might have

inhibited the development of financial services in these regions. Although information

about many of these areas is difficult to find, the available evidence suggests, to the

contrary, that differences in demand explain much of the regional heterogeneity in

financial activity.

        One financial desert for which we have quite a bit of information is the area of

Central France that includes the départements of Aveyron, Cantal, Coreze, Lot, and

Lozere (henceforth, and by exaggeration, the Massif Central). This region lacked natural

endowments, was located far from markets, and had a population that was not

particularly well educated. Low tax payments and the short height of the region’s

conscripts suggest that the area was poor in the 1840s, and the area remained far below

average according to a number of development indicators at the end of the century.

Although there was some manufacturing on the fringes of the region (most famously

Porcelain in Limoges and Michelin tires in Clermont Ferrand), as late as 1898 only
                                                                                                           30



22,000 of its people worked in manufacturing. Relative to population, that figure was a

quarter of the French average. There was also significant out migration. Although the

French population grew by 16 percent from 1840 to 1900, these départements lost more

than 4 percent of their population over the same period (Annuaire Statistique de la

France, 1899).

          It is possible to measure the diffusion of various kinds of financial intermediaries

in this area compared to the rest of France. The oldest such institutions were private

commercial banks, set up as sole proprietorships or partnerships of one form or another.12

During the period 1820 to 1850, there was a massive increase in private banks throughout

the country, but in the Massif Central they were much slower to form. On a per capita

basis there were half as many private banks in this region in 1829 as in the country as a

whole (see Table 2). Over the rest of the century the gap closed, so that by 1898 there

were roughly as many bank offices per capita in the Massif Central as elsewhere. But

because the rate of population growth was much slower in this region, the growth in the

number of bank offices was actually quite modest. More importantly, banks in the

Massif Central were also small relative to the national average. Although there were no

reporting requirements for private banks, we can estimate the extent of their activity by

looking at the magnitude of their discounts at regional offices of the Banque de France at

the end of the century.13 In the Massif Central, the Banque de France’s discounts per

          12
               Bank offices are enumerated in Annuaire Didot-Bottin, various years.
          13
               Because the nation’s large corporate banks did not use the Banque’s branch offices, these

discounts provide an index of the activities of local private banks. Annuaire Statistique de la France

(1899).
                                                                                             31



capita were only 28 percent of the non-Paris national average, suggesting that the

region’s low level of private banking primarily resulted from a low level of demand.

       During the 1870s France’s five big modern banks began to open offices

throughout the country. The Banque de France and the Crédit Foncier were government

controlled but mostly privately owned; the Crédit Lyonnais, Comptoir National

d’Escompte de Paris, and Société Générale were private corporations. As Table 2 shows,

there were only two thirds as many branches of these large banks in the Massif Central as

in the rest of the country. Moreover, the Banque de France and the Crédit Foncier, which

were required by law to have at least one branch per département, accounted for ten of

the sixteen branches in the region. We have already seen that the Banque de France did

little business in the Massif Central, and that was true for the Crédit Foncier as well—just

opening a branch was not sufficient to create a demand for its services. The French

government also mandated that every canton (there were two dozen or so in each

département) have at least one branch of a savings bank (caisse d’épargne). As a result,

there were as many caisses in the Massif Central as elsewhere on a per capita basis. But

the branches held far fewer accounts (Annuaire Statistique de la France, 1899).

       The requirement that state-controlled intermediaries serve all of France

undoubtedly increased access to credit somewhat in the Massif Central. On the whole,

however, it is likely that the main effect of these policies was to encourage local savings.

Government initiatives like the branching requirements imposed on the Banque de

France, the Crédit Foncier, or the caisses d’épargnes did not involve any significant

commitment of public resources; in general the French government left finance to the

private sector. Regulation was sufficiently light, moreover, that it did not inhibit entry
                                                                                              32



into financial services, even in this remote area with weak demand. As we have seen,

private banks did enter the area in the first two thirds of the century, and there was also

some expansion by larger corporate banks later on.

       Because scholars have disproportionately focused their attention on areas that

developed successfully rather than those that were left behind, we have much less

information about other financial deserts in the North Atlantic Core. But the available

anecdotal evidence confirms our sense that such deserts existed because there was little

demand for financial services in these regions, not because governments inhibited the

spread of the banking system or of other financial intermediaries. In the early-

nineteenth-century U.S., for example, the New England states’ generous chartering

policies led many rural towns to create banks, even though there was not enough local

business to keep their funds profitably employed. In order to pay dividends to their

stockholders, the directors of institutions such as the Strafford Bank of Dover, New

Hampshire, and the Mendon Bank of Mendon, Massachusetts, had to travel long

distances to urban financial centers to buy commercial paper. Not surprisingly, given the

serious adverse selection problems they faced when operating in these distant markets,

they were relatively more likely to fail or to decide voluntarily to dissolve. In Maine, the

most undeveloped of the New England states, not only did about a dozen banks fail, but

20 out the 71 banks chartered between 1820 and 1838 never even opened their doors

(Lamoreaux, 1994, 18, 55, 64).

       In the early nineteenth century, the various U.S. states differed in their willingness

to charter banks, but private banks seem to have flourished wherever regulations were

tight but banking services were needed (Sylla, 1976). We do not mean to claim that
                                                                                            33



regulatory restrictions never had any adverse effects on the financial system. But because

the financial intermediaries that catered to SMEs were local institutions that drew on

local sources of information and local sources of capital, they were generally better able

to maneuver around such interventions than the grand institutions of modern finance.



6. Summary and Implications

       As we have argued above, SMEs in the North Atlantic Core primarily secured

finance through local institutions that emerged endogenously to meet their needs. These

local intermediaries had two important weaknesses. First, they discriminated among

potential entrepreneurs on the basis of a variety of criteria that may have been only

weakly related to the expected returns of their projects. Second, they were poorly

diversified from a geographic or sectoral view point, and as a result, faced serious

difficulties withstanding crises. In the North Atlantic Core, however, these weaknesses

were not as serious as they might otherwise have been. The effects of discrimination were

offset at least in part by the basically competitive nature of these capital markets, and the

ties that local intermediaries formed with national financial institutions helped them to

weather area-specific shocks. Moreover, these local financial intermediaries had

significant strengths. Because they could tap into sources of information that large-scale,

“modern,” financial institutions found too costly to exploit, they were able to provide

credit to firms that were either too small or too young otherwise to obtain finance. They

also raised the return to savings for households in their vicinity, and as a consequence,

were able to mobilize substantial new resources for economic development.
                                                                                             34



       The financial institutions that sprang up to serve SMEs throughout the North

Atlantic Core were often local in their form of organization as well as in their geographic

scope. Indeed, the most striking feature of these institutions may well have been their

diversity. Although some types of intermediaries, for example commercial banks, were

ubiquitous, even these might take different forms in different regions—in some places

organizing as corporations, in some places as various kinds of partnerships, in some

places as sole proprietorships. Other institutions had much more limited diffusion. For

instance, credit cooperatives do not seem to have been very important west of the Rhine.

       The governments of the North Atlantic Core did not play a significant role in the

development of these local capital markets. Rather, for the most part they left it to

private individuals and firms to solve the financing needs of manufacturing enterprises in

general and SMEs in particular. This is not to say that government policies had no effect

on these markets. To the contrary, the different legal and political frameworks of the

various countries of the North Atlantic Core shaped the development of local financial

institutions in path dependent ways. Inevitably, each of these frameworks had both

advantages and offsetting disadvantages that often stemmed from a common source. For

example, the same types of political pressures that led to easy entry into banking in the

northeastern U.S. also led to restrictions on branch banking. None of these drawbacks,

however, appear to have been sufficiently serious to prevent local financial institutions

from emerging wherever there was sufficient demand for their services.

       As Table 1 showed, SMEs in developing economies today have recourse to a

variety of different sources of finance, just like those in the North Atlantic Core during

the nineteenth century. If we break the data in the table down by firm size, rather than
                                                                                             35



country of origin, we observe the classic pattern that reliance on banks and similar kinds

of formal intermediaries increases with the size of firms, whereas dependence on

informal sources of funds decreases with size (see Table 3). As was the case in the

nineteenth century, few firms in any size category raise capital for new investment by

issuing equity. Moreover, if we break the data down by organizational form, adoption of

the corporate form does not make it any more likely that firms will raise capital in this

way (see Table 4). Even today SMEs simply do not use the equity markets to raise funds,

but rather, like their nineteenth-century counterparts, secure external finance mainly

through some form of credit.

       The problem remains, however, of the relative lack of SMEs in these

economies—a problem that, as we have seen, is most acute in the poorest countries with

the least developed financial systems. Our historical analysis of the North Atlantic Core

suggests that one possible explanation for the apparent dearth of financial support for

SMEs is that these countries are like the Massif Central—that is, they are financial

deserts because there is little demand for this type of finance. It may simply be that

SMEs in developing economies today, unlike their historical counterparts through much

of the North Atlantic Core, operate by dint of their position in the world economy too far

from the productivity frontier to be competitive. But it is, of course, also possible that

there are regulatory or other institutional barriers that prevent local financial

intermediaries from emerging or that stifle the demand for these kinds of financial

services.

       Turning once again to history, but this time to countries outside the North Atlantic

Core, the case of Mexico would seem to support the view that regulatory barriers can
                                                                                             36



prevent financial institutions from developing to serve SMEs. Under the dictatorship of

Porfirio Díaz during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, entry into banking

was severely limited. The nation’s largest bank, the Banco Nacional de México, whose

directors belonged to Díaz’s inner clique, obtained a variety of special privileges,

including exclusive status as the government’s own bank, a monopoly on note issue, and

the sole right to establish branches, that gave it a big advantage over other banks. As if

those boons were not enough to solidify the Banco Nacional’s position, competing

institutions faced extraordinarily high minimum capital and reserve requirements, and

new banks had to obtain authorization from both the Congress and from the Díaz’s

administration in order to form (Haber, 1991, 1997, and 2006). That these entry barriers

indeed had detrimental consequences for the growth of SMEs is suggested by the

experience of the textile industry. Firms whose proprietors or directors were not on the

boards of the few existing banks were seriously disadvantaged in access to credit, and as

a result, grew more slowly than firms with direct connections to banks. As a result,

despite the absence of significant economies of scale, Mexico’s textile industry was much

more highly concentrated than that of the U.S. or other countries where access to credit

was not so severely rationed (Maurer and Haber, 2004).

       Not all Latin American governments played such an interventionist role in

financial markets, however. Some (for example, Chile, Colombia, and Peru) more

closely resembled those of the North Atlantic Core in their essentially laissez faire stance

toward the financial system (Zegarra, 2005; Islas Rojas, 2005). All these countries had

considerably more banks per capita than Mexico for most of the half century preceding

World War I. Nonetheless, compared to the countries of the North Atlantic Core, their
                                                                                           37



banking sectors look underdeveloped. As Luis Zegarra (2005) has argued, this difference

seems to have resulted from the relative absence of demand for financial services. A

combination of high levels of wealth inequality and the general poverty of the population

meant that there just was not much opportunity for small local financial intermediaries to

make money (see also Hoffman, Postel-Vinay, and Rosenthal, 2005).

       It thus seems that, even where the regulatory environment was supportive, there

were factors on the demand side that limited financial development across Latin America.

Again, such a finding does not necessarily imply that better designed institutions could

not have helped to remedy the situation or that there were no potentially beneficial

policies that could have assisted SMEs in these countries. Similarly, it does not

necessarily follow that governments cannot improve financial conditions for SMEs in

developing countries today. Certainly, interventions that address underlying

informational and monitoring problems can expand financial services to SMEs. For

example, Powell et al. (2005) argue that, because private financial institutions in

developing economies want to protect their own informational rents, they are more

willing to share negative data about borrowers than information about successful

repayment. Thus, publicly owned credit registries can improve information flows by

making positive information available. Based on data for Argentina, Brazil, and Mexico,

those authors claim that public provisions of such facilities can increase the proportion of

the population with access to credit by as much as 50 percent. This is an area, moreover,

where technological advance has been important. Not only can the information in such

registries be disseminated cheaply and quickly to lenders, but modern credit scoring

models may provide a less costly way of using personal information than traditional
                                                                                           38



forms of relationship lending (Frame, Padhi, and Woosley, 2004; Berger, Frame, and

Miller, 2005).

       Of course, registries can only benefit borrowers with a credit history, and thus

many potential entrepreneurs without collateral would still lack access to credit.

Successful policy interventions for that group would require different solutions to

selection and monitoring problems. Perhaps the most promising is joint liability loans

through microfinance institutions, where loans typically are granted to individuals but

liability for repayment extends to a small group of borrowers, who then have the

incentive to monitor other group members (like the German credit cooperatives of the

late nineteenth century). The amount of such finance that is currently available is modest.

Moreover, most of the enterprises that obtain credit from these institutions are smaller

than the SMEs that are the focus of this paper. But this type of lending has the potential

to enable borrowers to establish a track record that would enable them to secure larger

loans based on individual liability in the future (Armendáriz de Aghion and Morduch,

2005, ch. 4; Cull, Demirgüç-Kunt, and Morduch, 2005).

       A final set of policy alternatives might focus on barriers that prevent small

entrepreneurs from organizing their businesses as formal legal entities. Recent research

on the costs of doing business in developing countries suggests that it may pay enterprise

owners to remain informal, which could limit their access to external finance and thus

their growth opportunities (World Bank, 2004). Removing some of the obstacles

associated with registering a business and reducing the costs of complying with

regulation, to say nothing of eliminating the corruption that can make formal businesses

the victims of expropriation, should not only relax the financial constraints SMEs face
                                                                                            39



but also stimulate the demand for the kinds of local institutions that emerged

endogenously throughout the North Atlantic Core.



                                        References


Annuaire Didot-Bottin, 1829, 1840, 1899. Firmin Didot, Paris.

Annuaire Statistique de la France, 1899. Institut national de la statistique et des tudes

        conomiques, Paris.

Armendáriz de Aghion, B., Morduch, J., 2005. The Economics of Microfinance. MIT

       Press, Cambridge.

Balleisen, E.J., 2001. Navigating Failure: Bankruptcy and Commercial Society in

       Antebellum America. University of North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill.

Barnett, G.E., 1911. State Banks and Trust Companies Since the Passage of the National-

       Bank Act. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

Baskin, J.B., Miranti, P.J., Jr., 1997. A History of Corporate Finance. Cambridge

       University Press, New York.

Baten, J., 2001. Produktivitätsvorteil in kleinen und mittelgroßen Industrieunternehmen,

       Sicherheit in Großunternhmen? Die Gesamtfaktorproduktivität um 1900.

       Tübinger Diskussionsbeitrag 217.

Beck, T., Demirgüç-Kunt, A., Maksimovic, V., 2004. Financing patterns around the

       world: Are small firms different? World Bank mimeo.

Beck, T., Levine, R., Loayza, N., 2000. Finance and the sources of growth. Journal of

       Financial Economics, 58, 261--300.
                                                                                        40



Benston, G.J., 1994. Universal banking. Journal of Economic Perspectives 8, 121--143.

Berger, A.N., Frame, W.S., Miller, N.H., 2005. Credit scoring and the availability, price,

       and risk of small business credit. Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 37, 191-

       -222.

Best, M.H., Humphries, J., 1986. The city and industrial decline, in: Elbaum, B.,

       Lazonick, W. (Eds.), The Decline of the British Economy. Clarendon Press,

       Oxford, pp. 223--239.

Bodenhorn, H., 2000. A History of Banking in Antebellum America. Financial Markets

       and Economic Development in an Era of Nation-Building. Cambridge University

       Press, New York.

Bodenhorn, H., 2003. State Banking in Early America: A New Economic History.

       Oxford University Press, New York.

Bonnin, H., 2004. Histoire de Banques: Crédit du Nord, 1848-2003. Hervas, Paris.

Brennan, T., 1997. Burgundy to Champagne: The Wine Trade in Early Modern France.

       Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore.

Calomiris, C.W., 1995. The costs of rejecting universal banking: American finance in the

       German mirror, 1870-1914, in: Lamoreaux, N.R., Raff, D.M.G. (Eds.),

       Coordination and Information: Historical Perspectives on the Organization of

       Enterprise. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 257--315.

Cameron, R. (Ed.), 1972. Banking and Economic Development: Some Lessons of

       History. Oxford University Press, New York.
                                                                                             41



Capie, F., Collins, M., 1992. Have the Banks Failed British Industry? An Historical

       Survey of Bank/Industry Relations in Britain, 1870-1990. Institute of Economic

       Affairs, London.

Chassagne, S., 1991. Le Cotton et Ses Patrons; France, 1760-1840. Ecole des Hautes

       Etudes en Sciences Sociales. Paris.

Collins, M., 1991. Banks and Industrial Finance in Britain, 1800-1939. Macmillan,

       Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire.

Collins, M., 1998. English bank development within a European context, 1870-1939.

       Economic History Review 51, 1--24.

Compte général de l'
                   administration de la justice civile et commerciale, 1919-1933.

       Imprimerie Nationale, Paris.

Compte général de l'
                   administration de la justice civile et commerciale et criminelle,

       1933-1960. Imprimerie Nationale, Paris.

Compte général de l'
                   administration de la justice criminelle et de la justice civile et

       commerciale, 1961-1980. Documentation Française, Paris.

Cottrell, P.L., 1979. Industrial Finance, 1830-1914. Methuen, London.

Cottrell, P., Newton, L., 1999. Banking liberalization in England and Wales, 1826-1844,

       in: Sylla, R., Tilly, R., Tortella, G. (Eds.), The State, the Financial System, and

       Economic Modernization. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 75--117.

Cull, R., Demirgüç-Kunt, A., Morduch, J., 2005. Financial performance and outreach: A

       global analysis of leading microbanks.” World Bank mimeo.
                                                                                        42



Da Rin, M., 1996. Understanding the development of the German kreditbanken, 1850-

       1914: An approach from the economics of information. Financial History

       Review 3, 29--47.

Daumard, A., 1973. Les Fortunes Francaises au XIXe Siecle: Enquête sur la R partition

       et la Composition des Capitaux P     s Paris, Lyon, Lille, Bordeaux et Toulouse

       d’    s l’Enregistrement des D clarations de Succession. Mouton, Paris.

Davis, L.E., 1966. The capital markets and industrial concentration: The U.S. and the

       U.K., a comparative study. Economic History Review 19, 255--272.

Davis, L.E., Gallman, R.E., 1978. Capital formation in the United States during the

       nineteenth century, in: Mathias, P., Postan, M.M. (Eds.), The Cambridge

       Economic History of Europe, Vol. VII, The Industrial Economies: Capital,

       Labour, and Enterprise, Part 2, The United States, Japan, and Russia. Cambridge

       University Press, Cambridge. pp. 1--69.

Davis, L.E., Gallman, R.E., 2001. Evolving Financial Markets and International Capital

       Flows: Britain, the Americas, and Australia, 1870-1914. Cambridge University

       Press, New York.

Doyle, W.M., 1991. The evolution of financial practices and financial structures among

       American manufacturers, 1875-1905: Case studies of the sugar refining and meat

       packing industries.” Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Tennessee.

Doyle, W.M., 2000. Capital structure and the financial development of the U.S. sugar-

       refining industry, 1875-1905. Journal of Economic History 60, 190--215.

Edwards, J., Ogilvie, S., 1996. Universal banks and German industrialization: A

       reappraisal. Economic History Review 49, 427--46.
                                                                                          43



Feldenkirchen, W., 1981. The banks and the steel industry in the Ruhr: Developments in

       relations from 1873 to 1914.” German Yearbook on Business History 1981, 27--

       51.

Feldenkirchen, W., 1991. Banking and economic growth: Banks and industry in

       Germany in the nineteenth century and their changing relationship during

       industrialization, in: Lee, W. R. (Ed.), German Industry and German

       Industrialisation: Essays in German Economic and Business History in the

       Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries. Routledge, London, pp. 116--143.

Fohlin, C., 1997a. Bank securities holdings and industrial finance before World War I:

       Britain and Germany compared. Business and Economic History 26, 463--475.

Fohlin, C., 1997b. Universal banking networks in pre-war Germany: New evidence from

       company financial data. Research in Economics 51, 201--225.

Fohlin, C., 1998. Relationship banking, liquidity, and investment in German

       industrialization. Journal of Finance 53, 1737--1758.

Fohlin, C., 1999a. The rise of interlocking directorates in imperial Germany. Economic

       History Review 52, 307--333.

Fohlin, C., 1999b. Universal banking in pre-World War I Germany: Model or myth?

       Explorations in Economic History 36, 305--343.

Frame, W.S., Padhi, M., Woosley, L., 2004. Credit scoring and the availability of small

       business credit in low- and moderate-income areas. Financial Review 39, 35--54.

Franks, J., Mayer, C., Rossi, S., 2005. Spending less time with the family: The decline of

       family ownership in the UK, in: Morck, R. (Ed.), The History of Corporate
                                                                                        44



       Governance Around the World: Family Business Groups to Professional

       Managers. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, forthcoming.

Gelderblom, O., Jonkers, J., 2004. Completing a financial revolution: The finance of the

       Dutch East India trade and the rise of the Amsterdam capital market, 1595-1612.

       Journal of Economic History 64, 641-672.

Gerschenkron, A., 1962. Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective: A Book of

       Essays. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass.

Ghatak, M., Guinnane, T.W., 1999. The economics of lending with joint liability:

       Theory and practice. Journal of Development Economics 60, 195--228.

Goldsmith, R.W., 1969. Financial Structure and Development. Yale University Press,

       New Haven.

Guinnane, T.W., 1997. Regional organizations in the German cooperative banking

       system in the late 19th century. Research in Economics 51, 251--274.

Guinnane, T.W., 2001. Cooperatives as information machines: German rural credit

       cooperatives, 1883-1914. Journal of Economic History 61, 366--389.

Guinnane, T.W., 2002. Delegated monitors, large and small: Germany’s banking

       system, 1800-1914. Journal of Economic Literature 40, 73--124.

Haber, S.H., 1991. Industrial concentration and the capital markets: A comparative study

       of Brazil, Mexico, and the United States, 1830-1930. Journal of Economic

       History 51, 559--580.

Haber, S.H., 1997. Financial markets and industrial development: A comparative study

       of governmental regulation, financial innovation, and industrial structure in Brazil

       and Mexico, 1840-1930, in: Haber, S. (Ed.), How Latin America Fell Behind:
                                                                                         45



       Essays on the Economic Histories of Brazil and Mexico, 1800-1914. Stanford

       University Press, Stanford. [p. 146--178.

Haber, S.H., 2006. It wasn’t all Prebisch’s fault: The political economy of Latin

       American industrialization, in: Thomas, V.B. (Ed.), The Cambridge Economic

       History of Latin American. Cambridge University Press, New York,

       forthcoming.

Hautcoeur, P., 1994. Le Marché Boursier et le Financement des Entreprises Francaises

       (1890-1939). Doctoral dissertation, Paris 1, Paris.

Herrigel, G., 1996. Industrial Constructions: The Sources of German Industrial Power.

       Cambridge University Press, New York.

Hirsch, J., 1991. Les Deux Rêves du Commerce: Entreprise et Institution Dans la Région

       Lilloise (1780-1860). Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales, Paris.

Hoffman, P., Postel-Vinay, G., Rosenthal, J., 2000. Priceless Markets: The Political

       Economy of Credit in Paris, 1660-1870. Chicago, University of Chicago Press.

Hoffman, P., Postel-Vinay, G., Rosenthal, J., 2003. No exit: Notarial bankruptcies and

       the evolution of financial intermediation in nineteenth century Paris, in:

       Engerman, S.L., Hoffman, P.T., Rosenthal, J., Sokoloff, K.L. (Eds.), Finance,

       Intermediaries, and Economic Development. Cambridge University Press, New

       York, pp. 75--108.

Hoffman, P., Postel-Vinay, G., Rosenthal, J., 2004. Révolution et évolution: Les marchés

       de crédit notarié en France 1780-1840. Annales ESC 59, 387--424.
                                                                                         46



Hoffman, P., Postel-Vinay, G., Rosenthal, J., 2005. Surviving Large Losses: Financial

       Crises, the Middle Class, and the Development of Capital Market. Harvard

       University Press, Cambridge, Mass., forthcoming.

Islas Rojas, G., 2005. Does regulation matter? An analysis of Chilean corporate charters

       in the nineteenth century. Unpublished paper.

Kennedy, W.P., 1987. Industrial Structure, Capital Markets and the Origins of British

       Economic Decline. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Lamoreaux, N.R., 1994. Insider Lending: Banks, Personal Connections, and Economic

       Development in Industrial New England. Cambridge University Press, New York.

Lamoreaux, N.R., Levenstein, M., Sokoloff, KL., 2006. Financing invention during the

       Second Industrial Revolution: Cleveland, Ohio, 1870-1920, in: Lamoreaux, N.R.,

       Sokoloff, K. L. (Eds.), The Financing of Innovation in Historical Perspective.

       MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., forthcoming.

Lamoreaux, N.R., Rosenthal, J., 2005. Legal regime and contractual flexibility: A

       comparison of business’s organizational choices in France and the United States

       during the era of industrialization. American Law and Economics Review 7, 28--

       61.

Lamoreaux, N.R., Rosenthal, J., 2006. Corporate governance and the plight of minority

       shareholders in the United States before the Great Depression, in: Glaeser, E.,

       Goldin, C. (Eds.), Corruption and Reform. University of Chicago Press, Chicago,

       forthcoming.

Lehnardt, A., 1955. Quelques Points de Comparaison Entre le Régime Français et le

       Régime Allemand des Sociétés à Responsabilité Limitée. Anger, Lanion.
                                                                                       47



Lemercier, C., 2003. Un Si Discret Pouvoir: Aux Origines de la Chambre de Commerce

       de Paris, 1803-1853. Découverte, Paris.

Lescure, M., 1999. Small- and medium-size industrial enterprises in France, 1900-1975,

       in: Odaka, K., Sawai, M. (Eds.), Small Firms, Large Concerns: The Development

       of Small Business in Comparative Perspective. Oxford University Press, Oxford,

       pp. 140--167.

Levine, R., 1997. Financial development and economic growth: Views and agenda.

       Journal of Economic Literature 35, 688--726.

Levine, R., 2005. Finance and growth: Theory and evidence, in: Aghion, P., Durlauf, S.

       (Eds.), Handbook of Economic Growth. Elsevier Science, Amsterdam,

       forthcoming.

Levine, R., Loayza, N., Beck, T., 2000. Financial intermediation and growth: Causality

       and causes. Journal of Monetary Economics 46, 31--77.

Lévy-Leboyer, M., 1964. Les Banques Européenes et l’Industrialisation Internationale

       dans la Première Moitié du XIXe Siècle. Presses Universitaires de France, Paris.

Madison, J.H., 1974. The evolution of commercial credit reporting agencies in

       nineteenth-century America. Business History Review 48, 164--186.

Martin, J.G., 1898. A Century of Finance: Martin’s History of the Boston Stock and

       Money Markets. Privately printed, Boston.

Maurer, N., Haber, S., 2004. Related lending and economic performance: Evidence from

       Mexico. Unpublished paper.

Meissner, C.M., 2005. Voting rules and the success of connected lending in 19th century

       New England banks. Explorations in Economic History, forthcoming.
                                                                                           48



Michie, R.C., 1999. The London Stock Exchange: A History. Oxford University Press,

       Oxford.

Navin, T.R., Sears, M.V. 1955. The rise of a market for industrial securities, 1887-1902.

       Business History Review 29, 105--138.

Neal, L., 1971. Trust companies and financial innovation, 1897-1914. Business History

       Review 45, 35--51.

Neal, L., 1994. The finance of business during the Industrial Revolution, in: Floud, R.,

       McCloskey, D. (Eds.), The Economic History of Britain since 1700, Vol. I.

       Cambridge University Press , Cambridge, pp. 151--181.

Newton, L., 1997. Domestic institutional change: Regional English joint-stock banking,

       1826-1880. Unpublished paper.

Norris, J.D., 1978. R. D. Dun & Co. 1841-1900: The Development of Credit-Reporting

       in the Nineteenth Century. Greenwood Press, Westport, Conn.

Olegario, R., 2001. Institutions and markets: U.S. credit reporting in historical

       perspective. Unpublished paper.

Piketty, T., Postel-Vinay, G., Rosenthal, J., 2005. Wealth concentration in a developing

       economy: Paris and France, 1807-1994. American Economic Review,

       forthcoming.

Plache, L., 1999. Financial institutions, government policy and industrialization: The

       development of the French stock market, 1852-1875. Unpublished Ph.D.

       Dissertation, University of California, Los Angeles.

Pohl, H., 1984. Forms and phases of industry finance up to the Second World War.

       German Yearbook on Business History 1984, 75--94.
                                                                                         49



Pohl, M., 1991. Überlebenschanden fon Unternehmungsgründungen 1870 bis 1918.

       Zeitschrift für Unternehmensgeschichte 63, 29--47.

Powell, A., Mylenko, N., Miller, M., Majnoni, G., 2004. Improving credit information,

       bank regulation and supervision: On the role and design of public credit

       registries. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 3443.

Riesser, J., 1911. The German Great Banks and their Concentration in Connection with

       the Economic Development of Germany. Government Printing Office,

       Washington, D.C.

Snodgrass, D.R., Biggs, T., 1996. Industrialization and the Small Firm: Patterns and

       Policies. ICS Press, San Francisco.

Snowden, K.A., 1995. The evolution of interregional mortgage lending channels, 1870-

       1940: The life insurance-mortgage company connection, in: Lamoreaux, N. R.,

       Raff, D.M.G. (Eds.), Coordination and Information: Historical Perspectives on the

       Organization of Enterprise. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 209--247.

Snowden, K.A., 1997. Building and loan associations in the U.S., 1880-1893: The

       origins of localization in the residential mortgage market. Research in Economics

       51, 227--250.

Sylla, R., 1976. Forgotten men of money: Private bankers in early U.S. history. Journal

       of Economic History 36, 173--188.

Thomas, W.A., 1973. The Provincial Stock Exchanges. Cass, London.

Tilly, R., 1966. Financial Institutions and Industrialization in the Rhineland, 1815-1870.

       University of Wisconsin Press, Madison.
                                                                                      50



Tilly, R.H., 1986. German banking, 1850-1914: Development assistance for the strong.

       Journal of European Economic History 15, 113--152.

Tilly, R.H., 1989. Banking institutions in historical and comparative perspective:

       Germany, Great Britain and the United States in the nineteenth and early

       twentieth century. Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics 145, 189--

       209.

Tilly, R., 1992. An overview on the role of the large German banks up to 1914, in:

       Cassis, Y. (Ed.), Finance and Financiers in European History, 1880-1960.

       Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. pp. 93--112.

Wellhöner, V., Wixforth, H., 2003. Finance and industry, in: Ogilvie, S., Overy, R.

       (Eds.), Germany: A New Social and Economic History, Vol. III, Since 1800.

       Arnold, London, pp. 152--191.

Wengenroth, U., 1994. Enterprise and Technology: The German and British Steel

       Industries, 1865-1895, trans. Sarah Hanbury Tenison. Cambridge University

       Press, Cambridge.

Wengenroth, U., 1999. Small-scale business in Germany: The flexible element of

       economic growth, in: Odaka, K., Sawai, M. (Eds.), Small Firms, Large Concerns:

       The Development of Small Business in Comparative Perspective. Oxford

       University Press, Oxford, pp. 117--139.

White, E.N., 1982. The political economy of banking regulation, 1864-1933. Journal of

       Economic History 42, 33--40.

White, E.N., 1983. The Regulation and Reform of the American Banking System, 1900-

       1929. Princeton University Press, Princeton.
                                                                                   51



World Bank., 2004. Doing Business in 2004: Understanding Regulation. Oxford

       University Press and the World Bank, Oxford and Washington, D.C.

Wright, R.E., 1999. Bank ownership and lending patterns in New York and Pennsylvania,

       1781-1831. Business History Review 73, 40--60.

Zegarra, L., 2005. Institutions, economic development and early banking in Latin

       America, 1850-1930. Unpublished paper.
                                                                                             52




                   Table 1: Sources of Funds for Small Firms, By Country

Country      N      Internal    Family,   Banks   Equity,     Leasing, Trade    Total   Share of
                     Funds,    Friends,           Sale of     Credit, Credit             Firms
                    Retained   Informal            Stock    Card, Development           with No
                    Earnings   Sources                            funds                 External
                                                                                        Finance
    (1)      (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)      (6)            (7)          (8)        (9)
Albania      70       77.4       9.1       5.3       0             3.6          95.4      62.9

Armenia      59       87.5       5.9       1.9      0              2.7           98      72.9

Azerbaijan   59       81.8       5.3       1.5      0              7.1          95.7     71.2

Bangladesh   175      67.4       7.8      20.2     0.3             3.5          99.2     40.6

Belarus      51       76.8       7.8       6.3      0              5.7          96.6     56.9

Bosnia       24       69.2       4.2       6.6      0              4.2          84.2     50.0

Brazil       686      59         3.2      14.1     3.4            18.1          97.8     44.3

Bulgaria     56       68.9      10.4       6.4     2.2             4.9          92.8     58.9

Croatia      26       46.3       2.9      18.2     7.6             8.4          83.4     19.2

Czech Rep    62       46.6       6.6      12.3     6.7            14.8           87      32.3

Ecuador      131      45.7       7.8      24.1     3.5            16.6          97.7     34.4

Estonia      37       53.5        0       12.6     2.7            26.3          95.1     29.7

Ethiopia     43       67.7      5.45      21.1      1              2.5          97.75    51.2

Macedonia    12       75         4.2      10.8      0              0             90      50.0

Georgia      29       71.6       3.3        9       0              2.8          86.7     58.6

Honduras     132      54         10        23      1.8            10.1          98.9     43.2

Hungary      73       51.1       2.1       7.6     17.1            9.5          87.4     34.3

Kazakhstan   48       70.9       8.3       3.4     4.2             5.3          92.1     56.3

Kenya        63       48.6       2.5      37.7     0.4             6.7          95.9     38.1

Kyrgyzstan   44       69.1       9.1       4.8      0              6             89      54.6

Latvia       23       41.4       6.1       5.1      10            15.8          78.4     21.7

Lithuania    57       80.1       3.3       4.3      0              7.7          95.4     66.7

Moldova      45       64.4      12.9      15.7      0              7            100      31.1

Nicaragua    130      68.2        6       13.2      0             10.2          97.6     59.2

Nigeria      34       47.8       4.4      13.1     6.1             1.2          72.6     44.1
                                                                                         53



Philippines   69    58.3      14.1      8.3        5.3         7.7          93.7      43.4

Poland        95    58.5       0.2      11.9       0.5        13.1          84.2      43.2

Romania       69     72        5        9.2        1.7         8.5          96.4      59.4

Russia        126   75.7       4.4      5.2        0.6         8.9          94.8      56.4

Slovakia      42    59.6       2.6      4.1        12.4       15.8          94.5      31.0

Slovenia      54    70.3       0        4.3         0         10.1          84.7      24.1

Tajikistan    46    81.6       9.9       0         1.1         4.1          96.7      60.9

Tanzania      68    76.5       4.7      12.6       3.7          1           98.5      66.2

Turkey        99    80.5       4.7      6.6        0.8         1.4          94        62.6

Uganda        84    59.8       1.9      13.3        0         13.1          88.1      66.7

Ukraine       111   80.9       9.8      2.1        0.05        4.7         97.55      68.5

Uzbekistan    47    81.9       2.6       3         0.5         5.5          93.5      72.3

Yugoslavia    57     81        4.6      5.9        4.9         3.2          99.6      64.9



Source: World Bank Investment Climate Surveys (ICS) in 2002-2003. See

http://research.worldbank.org/ics/jsp/index.jsp.

Note: Small firms had more than ten but fewer than fifty full-time workers. N refers to

the number of firms surveyed. Columns 3-4 are internal sources of finance; 5-7 are

external. Columns 3-7 are summed in column 8. Column 8 does not equal 100% because

survey respondents were also given the choice of a catch-all category called “other

sources of funds.” In column 9, we report the share of firms with no access to the sources

of funds summarized in columns 5-7.
                                                                                                 54



                Table 2: Financial indicators for France and selected departments


Bank Type                                              France
                                                       Without Paris     Massif Central Ratio
Large Bank Branches, 1898                              18.6              12.2           0.65

Bank of France Discounts, 1898                         245 MF            69 MF            0.28

Crédit Foncier de France, number of loans, 1853-98     1651              1534             0.92

Crédit Foncier de France, value of loans, 1853-98      44.5 MF           23.1 MF          0.52

Savings Banks, Branches, 1898                          15.4              15.19            0.98

Savings Banks, Accounts, 1898                          171,000           67,000           0.39

Savings Banks, Value of accounts, 1898                 93 MF             34.3 MF          0.47

All Bank Branches, 1829                                18.3              10.26            0.56

All Bank Branches, 1840                                32.4              21.9             0.68

All Bank Branches, 1898                                70.7              64.5             0.91


       Source: Annuaire statistique de la France, 1899; Annuaire Didot-Bottin, 1829, 1840,

       1899.

       Note: The Massif Central includes Aveyron, Cantal, Coreze, Lot, and Lozere. France is

       net of Paris. All values are per million persons. MF is Million Francs. Large banks are the

       Banque de France, Crédit Foncier de France, Crédit Lyonnais, Comptoir National

       d’Escompte de Paris, and Société Générale.
                                                                                                                                                  55



                                   Table 3: Principal Source of External Finance, By Firm Size

             Size            N         Family, Friends,             Banks            Equity, Sale of Stock is     Leasing, Trade Credit,    % of Firms with
                                     Informal Sources are   are Principal External     Principal External       Credit Card, Develop-ment    No External
                                      Principal External            Source                   Source                funds are Principal         Finance
                                           Source                (% of Firms)             (% of Firms)               External Source
                                         (% of Firms)                                                                  (% of Firms)
Micro                       1756             14.4                    9.5                       3.2                          8.9                  64.0

Small                       2988             9.4                    17.6                       3.0                        15.4                   54.6

Medium                      1036             4.6                    25.2                       2.8                        16.6                   50.8

Large                       1036             3.6                    29.5                       4.1                        17.0                   45.9

very large                  1317             2.7                    31.5                       2.9                        14.7                   48.1



Source: See Table 2.

Note: N is the number of firms. Only firms with complete data for all four forms of external finance are included in the calculations.

Firms for which the category “other” was the leading source of external finance are also excluded. Micro enterprises have less than ten

full-time workers; small firms, more than ten but fewer than fifty; medium, more than fifty but less than 100; large, more than 100 but

less than 250; and very large, more than 250.
                                                                                                                                             56




                               Table 4: Principal Source of External Finance, By Type of Ownership

      Ownership Type          N        Family, Friends,             Banks            Equity, Sale of Stock     Leasing, Trade Credit,    % of Firms
                                     Informal Sources are   are Principal External   is Principal External   Credit Card, Develop-ment    with No
                                      Principal External            Source                  Source              funds are Principal       External
                                           Source                (% of Firms)            (% of Firms)             External Source         Finance
                                         (% of Firms)                                                               (% of Firms)
Sole Proprietorship         2030             14.9                   16.8                      --                        11.2                57.0

Partnership                 1351             8.6                    22.7                     3.6                       10.7                 54.4

Privately Held, Limited     3183             5.9                    22.9                     3.8                       19.4                 48.0

Liability Company

Publicly Listed              474             2.3                    33.6                     4.9                       15.9                 43.3

Cooperative                  188             4.3                     6.4                     2.1                       12.2                 75.0



Source: See Table 2.

Note: N is the number of firms. Only firms with complete data for all four forms of external finance are included in the calculations.

Firms for which the category “other” was the leading source of external finance are also excluded. Sole proprietorships that report

sales of stock (equity) as a source of external finance are excluded from the calculations.
                                                                                     57



       Figure 1: Distribution of New Multi-Owner Firms in France 1919-1980


100%
                                                           SARLs
                                                           Cooperatives and Others
80%                                                        Corporations
                                                           Commandites Simples
                                                           Partnerships

60%




40%




20%




 0%
  19

  22

  25

  28

  31

  34

  37

  40

  43

  46

  49

  52

  55

  58

  61

  64

  67

  70

  73

  76

  79
19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19
                                                                                                                                       58



Source: Compte général de l'
                           administration de la justice civile et commerciale, 1919-1933; Compte général de l'
                                                                                                             administration de la

justice civile et commerciale et criminelle, 1933-1960; Compte général de l'
                                                                           administration de la justice criminelle et de la justice civile

et commerciale, 1961-1980.
