NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

REAL EXCHANGE RATE VOLATILITY
AND THE PRICE OF NONTRADABLES
IN SUDDEN-STOP-PRONE ECONOMIES
Enrique G. Mendoza
Working Paper 11691
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11691
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2005

Comments and suggestions by Marcelo Oviedo and by the participants at the Economia panel meeting,
particularly those of the discussants, Rafael Bergoeing and Nouriel Roubini, and the editor, Andrés Velasco,
are gratefully acknowledged. An earlier version of the empirical section of this paper circulated as a working
paper under the title “On the Instability of Variance Decompositions of the Real Exchange Rate across
Exchange Rate Regimes: Evidence from Mexico and the United States,” which benefited from comments
by Charles Engel, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohe and Martín Uribe. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Enrique G. Mendoza. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

Real Exchange Rate Volatility and the Price of Nontradables in Sudden-Stop-Prone Economies
Enrique G. Mendoza
NBER Working Paper No. 11691
October 2005
JEL No. F30, F41, G11
ABSTRACT
The dominant view in the empirical literature on exchange rates is that the high variability of real
exchange rates is due to movements in exchange-rate-adjusted prices of tradable goods. This paper
shows that this dominant view does not hold in Mexican data for the periods in which the country
had managed exchange rate regimes. Variance analysis of a 30-year sample of monthly data shows
that movements in the price of nontradables relative to tradables account for up to 70 percent of the
variability of the real exchange rate during these periods. The paper proposes a model in which this
stylized fact, and the Sudden Stops that accompanied the collapse of Mexico's managed exchange
rates, could result from an endogenous amplification mechanism operating via nontradables prices
in economies with dollarized liabilities and credit constraints. The key feature of this mechanism is
Irving Fisher's debt-deflation process. Numerical evaluation suggests that the Fisherian deflation
effects on consumption, the current account, and relative prices dwarf those induced by the standard
balance sheet effect typical of the Sudden Stops literature.
Enrique G. Mendoza
Department of Economics
3105 Tydings Hall
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
mendozae@econ.umd.edu

-11. Introduction
The dominant view in the empirical literature on real exchange rates is that exchangerate-adjusted relative prices of tradable goods account for most of the observed high variability
of CPI-based real exchange rates (see the classic article by Engel (1999) and earlier work by
Jenkins and Rogers (1995)). In an application of the variance analysis of his 1999 article to
Mexican data, Engel (2000) concluded that this dominant view also applies to Mexico. Using a
sample of monthly data from 1991 to 1999, he found that the fraction of the variance of the pesodollar real exchange rate accounted for by the variance of the Mexico-U.S. ratio of prices of
tradable goods adjusted by the nominal exchange rate exceeds 90 percent, regardless of the time
horizon over which the data are differenced.
Engel’s finding raises serious questions about the empirical relevance of a large literature
that emphasizes the nontradables price as a key factor for explaining real exchange rates and
economic fluctuations in emerging economies. The studies developed in the research program on
“non-credible” exchange-rate-based stabilizations surveyed by Calvo and Vegh (1999) model the
real exchange rate as a positive, monotonic function of the relative price of nontradables (with
the latter determined at equilibrium by the optimality conditions for sectoral allocation of
consumption and production). Lack of credibility in a currency peg leads to a temporary increase
in tradables consumption and to a rise in the relative price of nontradables, and hence to a
temporary real appreciation of the currency. More recently, the literature on Sudden Stops in
emerging economies has emphasized the phenomenon of liability dollarization (i.e., the fact that
debts in emerging economies are generally denominated in units of tradable goods, or in hard
currencies, but partially leveraged on the incomes and assets of the large nontradables sector
typical of these economies). With liability dollarization, real-exchange-rate collapses induced by
sharp declines in the price of nontradables can trigger financial crashes and deep recessions. For
example, Calvo (1998) showed how a sudden loss of world credit market access triggers a real

-2depreciation of the currency and systemic bankruptcies in the nontradables sector. The real
depreciation occurs because the market price of nontradables collapses as the lack of credit
forces a reduction of tradables consumption, while the supply of nontradables remains unaltered.
If nontradables prices account only for a negligible fraction of real exchange rate
variability in emerging economies like Mexico, however, the above theories of Sudden Stops and
of the real effects of exchange-rate-based stabilizations would lack empirical foundation.
Moreover, the key policy lessons derived from these theories regarding strategies to cope with
the adverse effects of non-credible stabilization policies, or to prevent Sudden Stops with their
dramatic consequences for economic performance and welfare, would be rendered irrelevant.
For example, the push to develop foreign debt instruments better protected from the adverse
effects of liability dollarization, by indexing debt to output or commodity prices or by issuing
debt at longer maturities or in domestic currencies, would be a costly effort that a key piece of
empirical evidence does not support, despite the benefits that it could seem to have in theory.
Thus, determining the main sources of the observed fluctuations of real exchange rates in
emerging economies is a central issue for theory and policy.
A closer look at the empirical evidence suggests, however, that the relative price of
nontradables may not be irrelevant. Mendoza and Uribe (2001) reported large variations in
Mexico’s relative price of nontradables during the country’s exchange-rate-based stabilization of
1988-1994. They did not conduct Engel’s variance analysis, so while they showed that the price
of nontradables rose sharply, their findings cannot establish whether or not the movement in the
nontradables price was important for the large real appreciation of the Mexican peso.
Nevertheless, their results suggest that one potential problem with Engel’s analysis of Mexican
data is that it did not separate periods of managed exchange rates from periods of floating
exchange rates. There is also panel data evidence on the role that liability dollarization has
played in Emerging Markets crises, which suggests that a link between the relative price of

-3nontradables and the real exchange rate exists and is systematically related to the occurrence of
Sudden Stops (see Calvo, Izquierdo and Loo-Kung (2005) and the analysis of credit booms in
Chapter 4 of International Monetary Fund (2004)).
This paper has two objectives. The first objective is to conduct a variance analysis to
determine the contribution of fluctuations in domestic prices of nontradable goods relative to
tradable goods, vis-a-vis fluctuations in exchange-rate-adjusted relative prices of tradable goods,
for explaining the variability of the real exchange rate of the Mexican peso against the U.S.
dollar. The results show that Mexico’s nontradables goods prices display high variability and
account for a significant fraction of real-exchange-rate variability in periods of managed
exchange rates. In light of these results, the second objective of the paper is to show that a
financial accelerator mechanism at work in economies with liability dollarization and credit
constraints produces amplification and asymmetry in the responses of the price of nontradables,
the real exchange rate, consumption, and the current account to exogenous shocks. In particular,
the model predicts that sudden policy-induced changes in relative prices, analogous to those
induced by the collapse of managed exchange rate regimes, can set in motion this financial
accelerator mechanism. Thus, the model predicts that, because of the effects of liability
dollarization in credit-constrained economies, economies with managed exchange rates can
display high volatility in the real exchange rate driven by the relative price of nontradables.
The variance analysis is based on a sample of monthly data for the 1969-2000 period.
The results replicate Engel’s (2000) results for a sub-sample that matches his sample. The same
holds for the full sample and for all sub-sample periods in which Mexico did not follow an
explicit policy of exchange rate management. The results are markedly different in periods in
which Mexico managed its exchange rate (including periods with a fixed exchange rate and with
crawling pegs). In these periods, the fraction of real-exchange-rate variability accounted for by
movements of tradable-goods prices and the nominal exchange rate falls sharply and varies

-4widely with the time horizon of the variance ratios. Movements in Mexico’s nontradables
relative prices can account for up to 70 percent of the variance of the real exchange rate. In short,
whenever Mexico managed its exchange rate, the country experienced high real-exchange-rate
variability but movements in the price of nontradables contributed significantly to explain it.
The Mexican data also fail to reproduce two other key findings of Engel’s work. In
addition to the overwhelming role of tradables goods prices in explaining real exchange rates,
Engel found that (a) covariances across domestic nontradables relative prices and cross-country
tradables relative prices tend to be generally positive or negligible and (b) variance ratios
corrected to take into account these covariances generally do not change results derived using
approximate variance ratios that ignore them. Contrary to these findings, in periods in which
Mexico had a managed exchange rate, the correlation between domestic nontradables relative
prices and international tradables relative prices is sharply negative. The standard deviation of
Mexico’s domestic relative prices is also markedly higher during these periods. As a result,
measures of the contribution of tradables goods prices to real-exchange-rate variability corrected
to take into account these features of the data are significantly lower than those that do not.
Recent cross-country empirical studies provide further time series and cross sectional
evidence indicating that the relative price of nontradables explains a significantly higher fraction
of real exchange rate variability in the presence of managed exchange rates. Naknoi (2005)
constructed a large data set covering 35 countries and nearly 600 pairs of bilateral real exchange
rates. She found that for many of these pairs Engel’s (1999) result hold but there are also many
for which it does not, and in some the relative price of nontradables accounts for about 50
percent of real exchange rate variability. She also found that the variability of the relative price
of nontradables rises as that of the nominal exchange rate falls, and in some cases it exceeds the
variability of exchange-rate-adjusted relative prices of tradable goods. Parsley (2003) examined
the cross-paired and U.S.-dollar-based real exchange rates of six countries of South East Asia

-5using monthly data. He found that in subsamples with managed exchange rates for Hong Kong,
Malaysia and Thailand, the relative price of nontradables could explain up to 50 percent of the
variability of the real exchange rate. All these findings are also related to the well-known
findings of Mussa (1986) and Baxter and Stockman (1989) showing that the variability of the
real exchange rate is higher under flexible exchange rate regimes, although they did not study the
decomposition of this variability in terms of the contributions of the relative prices of tradables
vis-a-vis nontradables.
A common approach followed in the recent International Macroeconomics literature is to
take the above empirical evidence as an indication of the existence of nominal rigidities affecting
price or wage setting. This approach has been the focus of extensive research examining the
interaction of nominal rigidities with alternative pricing arrangements (e.g., pricing to market,
local v. foreign currency invoicing) and with different industrial organization arrangements (e.g.,
endogenous tradability). Unfortunately, the ability of these models to explain the variability of
real exchange rates, even amongst country pairs for which the “dominant view” holds, is limited.
Chari, Kehoe and McGrattan (2002) found that models with nominal rigidities cannot explain the
variability of real exchange rates in industrial countries unless the models adopt preferences
separable in leisure and values for coefficients of relative risk aversion and capital adjustment
costs, and for the periodicity of staggered price adjustments, that are at odds with empirical
evidence. Moreover, theoretical analysis shows that it does not follow from the observation that
the variance analysis of the real exchange rate changes in favor of the price of nontradables
under managed exchange rates that nominal rigidities must be at work. This is because the
equilibria obtained for monetary economies under alternative exchange rate regimes, and with or
without nominal rigidities, can be reproduced in monetary economies with flexible prices, or
even in non-monetary economies, with appropriate combinations of tax-equivalent distortions on
consumption and factor incomes (see Adao, Correia and Teles (2005), Coleman (1996),

-6Mendoza (2001) and Mendoza and Uribe (2001)).
Instead of emphasizing the role of nominal rigidities, this paper shows, using a simple
non-monetary model of endogenous credit constraints with liability dollarization, that a strong
amplification mechanism driven by a variant of Fisher’s debt-deflation process can induce high
variability in the price of nontradables and in the real exchange rate in response to exogenous
shocks. In particular, policy-induced shocks to relative prices akin to those triggered by a
currency devaluation can set in motion this amplification mechanism. The financial accelerator
that amplifies the responses of consumption, the current account, and the price of nontradables to
shocks of “usual” magnitudes combines a standard balance sheet effect (because of the mismatch
between the units in which debt is denominated and the units of the assets or incomes on which
some of this debt is leveraged) with the Fisherian debt-deflation process (because an initial fall in
the price of nontradables triggered by an exogenous shock tightens further credit constraints
leading to a downard spiral in access to debt and the price of nontradables).
A set of basic numerical experiments suggests that the quantitative implications of this
financial accelerator are significant. The Fisherian debt-deflation process is a powerful vehicle
for inducing amplification and asymmetry in the responses of the economy to exogenous shocks
(particularly to changes in taxes that approximate the relative price effects of changes in the rate
of devaluation of the currency). The magnitude of the effects that the Fisherian deflation has on
the nontradables price, the real exchange rate and the current account dwarf those that result
from the standard balance sheet effect that has been widely studied in the Sudden Stops
literature. In this way, the model can account simultaneously for high variability of the real
exchange rate and key features of the Sudden Stop phenomenon as the result of (endogenous)
high variability of the relative price of nontradables.
The model is analogous to the models with liquidity-constrained consumers of the closedeconomy macro literature and to the Sudden Stop dynamic, stochastic general equilibrium

-7models reviewed by Arellano and Mendoza (2003). The setup provided in this paper is simpler in
order to focus the analysis on the amplification mechanism linking Sudden Stops and real
exchange rate movements driven by the relative price of nontradables.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 conducts the variance analysis of
the Mexico-U.S. real exchange rate. Section 3 develops the model of liability dollarization with
financial frictions in which “excess volatility” of the real exchange rate is caused by fluctuations
in the relative price of nontradables. Section 4 presents conclusions and policy implications.
2.

Variance Analysis of the Peso-Dollar Real Exchange Rate
This section presents the results of a variance analysis that follows closely the

methodology applied in Engel (1999) and (2000). The analysis uses non-seasonally-adjusted
monthly observations of the consumer price index (CPI) and some of its components for Mexico
(MX) and the United States (US) covering the period January, 1969 to February, 2000. Mexican
data were retrieved from the Bank of Mexico’s web site (http://www.banxico.org.mx), and those
for the U.S. from the site maintained by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (http://stats.bls.gov).
Three price indexes were retrieved for each country: the aggregate CPI (P i for i=MX, US) and
the consumer price indexes for durable goods (PD i for i=MX, US) and services (PS i for i=MX,
US). The dataset also includes the nominal exchange rate series for the monthly-average
exchange rate of Mexican pesos per U.S. dollar (E) reported in the IMF’s International Financial
Statistics. The real exchange rate was generated using the IMF’s convention: RER=PMX/(EPUS).
The data were transformed into logs, with logged variables written in lowercase letters.
Durable goods are treated as tradable goods and services are treated as nontradable
goods. This definition is in line with standard treatment in empirical studies of real exchange
rates, and is also roughly consistent with a sectoral classification of Mexican data based on a
definition of tradable goods as those pertaining to sectors for which the ratio of total trade to
gross output exceeds 5 percent (see Mendoza and Uribe (2001)).

-8Following Engel (2000), simple algebraic manipulation of the definition of the real
exchange rate yields this expression: rert = xt + yt. The variable xt is the log of the exchangerate-adjusted price ratio of tradables across Mexico and the United States: xt = pdt MX-et - pdt US
(this is the negative of Engel’s measure because the real exchange rate is defined here using the
IMF’s definition). If the strong assumptions needed for the law of one price to hold in this
context were satisfied, xt should be a constant that does not contribute to explain variations in
rert. The variable yt includes the terms that reflect domestic prices of nontradables relative to
tradables inside each country: yt = bt MX(pst MX-pdt MX) - bt US(pst US-pdt US), where bt MX and btUS
are the (potentially time-varying) weights of nontradables in each country’s CPI. The logs of the
relative prices of nontradables are therefore: mxpnt ≡ pst MX-pdt MX and uspnt ≡ pst US-pdt US.
The results of the variance analysis of the peso-dollar real exchange rate are summarized
in the four plots of Figure 1, which are based on the detailed results reported in Table 1 of
Mendoza (2000). This Table reports, in addition to the variance ratios for the real exchange rate,
the standard deviations and correlations of rer, y, x, mxpn, and uspn. As argued below, changes
in these moments are useful for explaining the changes in the results of the variance analysis
across fixed and floating exchange rate regimes. The discussion of the results below refers to the
changes in the relevant moments, but the reader is referred to Mendoza (2000) for the complete
set of moments.
Each plot in Figure 1 shows curves for five different sample periods: (1) the full sample,
(2) the sample studied by Engel (2000), which is a sample retrieved from Datastream for the
period September, 1991 to August, 1999, (3) a sample that includes only data for the post-1994
floating exchange rate, (4) a fixed exchange rate sample covering January, 1969 to July, 1976,
and (5) a sample that spans the duration of the managed exchange rate regime that anchored the
stabilization plan known as El Pacto (March, 1988-November, 1994). This regime included an

-9initial one-year period with a fixed exchange rate followed by a crawling peg within a narrow
band (the boundaries of which were revised occasionally).
Each of the four plots shows results for an alternative measure of the variance ratio that
quantifies the fraction of real exchange rate variability explained by xt (i.e., the relative price of
tradables). The ratios are plotted as functions of the time frequency over which the data were
differenced (1, 6, 12, 24 and, for the samples with sufficient observations, 72 months). The four
variance ratios considered are the following:
(1) Engel’s (2000) basic ratio σ 2(x)/σ 2(rer). Since in general σ 2(rer) = σ 2(x) + σ 2(y)
+2 cov(x,y), where cov(x,y) is the covariance between x and y, this basic ratio is accurate
only when x and y are independent random variables (i.e., when cov(x,y) = 0). For this
reason, Engel (1995) computed the following second and third ratios as alternatives that
adjust for covariance terms.
(2) The independent variables ratio, σ 2(x)/[ σ 2(rer) - cov(x,y)] , deducts from the variance
of rer in the denominator of the variance ratio the effect of cov(x,y).
(3) The half covariance ratio, [σ 2(x) + cov(x,y)] / σ 2(rer), measures the contribution of x to
the variability of rer by assigning to x half of the effect of cov(x,y) on the variance of rer.
Since this half covariance ratio can be written as the product of the basic ratio multiplied
by 1+ρ(x,y)(σ(y)/ σ(x)), where ρ(x,y) is the correlation between x and y, the basic ratio
approximates well the half covariance ratio if ρ(x,y) is low and/or the standard deviation
of x is large relative to that of y.
(4) The nontradables weighted covariance ratio, controls only for the covariance between x
and the domestic relative price of nontradables in Mexico by re-writing the variance ratio
as [σ 2(x)/σ 2(rer)] {1 + ρ(x,mxpn) [bMXσ (mxpn) / σ (x)] }. The basic ratio approximates
accurately this fourth variance ratio when the correlation between x and mxpn is low

-10and/or the standard deviation of x is large relative to that of mxpn.
The motivation for the fourth ratio follows from the fact that, while the half covariance
ratio aims to correct for how much of the variance of rer is due to variables x and y taking their
covariance into account, it is silent about the contributions of the various elements that conform y
itself. The latter can be important because y captures the combined changes in domestic relative
prices of nontradables in Mexico and the United States, as well as the recurrent revisions to the
weights used in each country’s CPI (which take place at different intervals in each country).
Moreover, since the aggregate CPIs include nondurables, in addition to durables and services, y
captures also the effects of cross-country differences in the prices of nondurables relative to
durables. Computing an exact variance ratio that decomposes all of these effects requires to
control for the full variance-covariance matrix of y, x, mxpn, uspn, bMX and bN . Since data to
calculate this matrix are not available, the nontradables weighted covariance ratio is used as a
proxy that isolates the effect of the covariance between mxpn and rer. The complement (i.e., 1
minus the fourth variance ratio) is a good measure of the contribution of Mexico’s relative price
of nontradables to the variance of the real exchange rate to the extent that: (a) movements in the
CPI weights play a minor role, and (b) the correlation between mxpn and uspn is low and/or the
variance of mxpn largely exceeds that of uspn.2
The potential importance of covariance terms in the calculation of a variance ratio, and
hence the need to consider alternative definitions of this ratio, is a classic problem in variance
analysis. Engel considered this issue carefully in his work on industrial country real exchange
rates and on the peso-dollar real exchange rate, and he concluded that it could be set aside safely.
As shown below, however, the features of the data that support this conclusion are not present in
the data for Mexico’s managed exchange rates, and hence in this case the variance ratios that

2

Computing this variance ratio requires an estimate for a constant value of bMX, which was determined using 1994
weights from the Mexican CPI, extracted from a methodological note provided by the Bank of Mexico (bMX = 0.6).

-11control for covariance effects play a crucial role. Engel (1995) argued that in the case of the
components of the real exchange rate of the United States vis-a-vis industrial countries,
“comovements between x and y are insignificant in all cases, except when we use the aggregate
PPI (producer price index) as the traded goods price index” (p. 31). In addition, Engel (2000)
noted that the basic ratio “tends to underestimate the importance of the x as long as the covariance term (between x and y) is positive (which it is at most short horizons), but any
alternative treatment of the covariance has very little effect on the measured relative importance
of the x component” (p. 9). Under these conditions, the basic ratio is either very accurate (if

ρ(x,y) is low) or in the worst-case scenario it represents a lower bound for the true variance ratio
(if ρ(x,y) is positive). In either case, a high ratio σ 2(x)/σ 2(rer) indicates correctly that realexchange-rate fluctuations are mostly explained by movements in tradable goods prices and in
the nominal exchange rate.
The results shown in the four plots of Figure 1 for the full sample period are firmly in line
with Engel’s findings, except in the very long horizon of 72 months. At frequencies of 24
months or less, the basic ratio always exceeds 0.94, and using any of the other ratios to correct
for covariances across x and y, or across x and mxpn, makes no difference. These results reflect
the facts that, for the full sample, the correlations between x and y and between x and mxpn are
always close to zero, and the standard deviation of x is 3.5 to 3.7 times larger than that of y and
2.9 to 3.7 times larger than that of mxpn (see Table 1 in Mendoza (2000) for details).
Covariances of x with uspn are also irrelevant because the correlations between these variables
are generally negligible and the standard deviations of uspn are all small. Moreover, the
correlations between mxpn and uspn are also negligible.
A very similar picture emerges for Engel’s (2000) sample and for the post-1994 floating
period. The one notable difference is that at frequencies higher than 1 month there are marked
negative correlations between x and uspn and between mxpn and uspn. These correlations could

-12in principle add to the contribution of domestic relative price variations in explaining the
variance of rer. However, they can be safely ignored because the standard deviation of x dwarfs
those of uspn and mxpn at all time horizons, and the latter still have to be reduced by the
fractions bMX and bUS respectively. In summary, in periods in which the Mexican peso is
floating, the variability of exchange-rate-adjusted tradables goods prices is so much larger than
that of nontradables relative prices that covariance adjustments cannot alter the result that the
relative price of nontradables is of little consequence for movements in the real exchange rate.
The picture that emerges from Mexico’s managed exchange-rate regimes is very
different. For both the fixed rate sample and the sample for El Pacto, the basic ratio is very high
but it often exceeds 1, indicating the presence of large covariance terms. The other three
variance ratios show dramatic reductions in the share of real-exchange-rate variability
attributable to x compared to the results for periods without exchange rate management. For
instance, the half covariance ratio for the fixed exchange rate sample shows that the contribution
of x to the variability of the real exchange rate reaches a minimum of 0.29 at the 6-month
frequency and remains low at around 0.36 for 12- and 24-month frequencies. The nontradables
weighted ratio, which corrects for the covariance between x and mxpn, is below 0.61 at
frequencies higher than one month. In the sample for El Pacto, the independent variables and
half covariance ratios indicate that the contribution of x to the variability of the real exchange
rate is below 0.6 at all frequencies (except for the half covariance ratio at the 12-month
frequency, in which case it increases to 0.7). The nontradables weighted ratio shows that, if only
the covariance between x and mxpn is considered, the variance of rer attributable to x reaches a
lower bound of 0.55 at the one-month frequency (although it increases sharply at the 24-month
frequency before declining again at the 72-month frequency).
These striking differences in the outcome of the variance analysis for periods of exchange
rate management reflect two critical changes:

-13(a) The standard deviations of the Mexican relative price of nontradables and the composite
variable y increase significantly relative to the standard deviations of x (the ratios of the
standard deviation of x to that of y now range between 0.7 and 1.2).
(b) The correlations between x and y, and between x and mxpn fall sharply and become
markedly negative (approaching -0.6 in most cases).
Two other important features are worth noting in comparing periods of managed and
floating exchange rates: (a) The correlation between x and rer is much lower in the former than
in the latter (the correlation between x and rer is almost 1 at all time horizons in periods of
floating exchange rates, while it ranges between 0.29 and 0.7 in the samples of managed
exchange rates), and (b) in some of the managed exchange rate scenarios, particularly the 12and 24-month horizons of the sample for El Pacto, the correlation between nontradable goods
relative prices in Mexico and the United States is positive (it can be as high as 0.32). This
second result actually reduces the share of fluctuations in rer that can be accounted for by y
because, as U.S. and Mexican relative prices of nontradable goods are more likely to increase
together, differences in these domestic relative prices across countries tend to offset each other
more, and hence are less important for real-exchange-rate fluctuations.
It is also worth noting that the only feature of the statistical moments of the data
examined here that is robust to changes in the exchange rate regime is the fact that the variability
of nontradables relative prices in Mexico always exceeds by a large margin that of the United
States. For the full (El Pacto) sample, the ratio of the standard deviation of mxpn to that of uspn
ranges from 3.7 (3.4) at the one-month frequency to 4.9 (7.1) at the 24-month frequency. It is
also true, however, that Mexico’s nontradables relative prices tend to be more volatile during
currency pegs than when the exchange rate floats. The ratio of the standard deviation of mxpn for
the sample for El Pacto to that for the post-1994 floating period doubles from 1 at the one-month
frequency to about 2 at the 24-month frequency. The higher volatility of the relative price of

-14nontradables in Mexico than in the United States, and when Mexico manages the exchange rate
than when the peso floats, are significant features of the data that, according to the theoretical
analysis of the next section, can play a central role in explaining why the price of nontradables
accounts for a nontrivial fraction of the variability of Mexico’s real exchange rate in periods of
exchange rate management.
3.

Sudden Stops & Nontradables-Driven Real Exchange Rate Volatility
Section 2 showed that in periods in which Mexico managed its exchange rate, the relative

price of nontradables accounted for a significant fraction of the high variability of the real
exchange rate. This evidence raises the question: should we be concerned about volatility of the
real exchange rate driven by nontradables goods prices? This Section argues that we should. The
main argument is that, in economies that suffer from liability dollarization, the Sudden Stop
phenomenon and the high variability of the real exchange rate may both be the result of high
volatility in nontradables goods prices. To make this argument, the Section examines a simple
model in which endogenous credit constraints and liability dollarization produce a financial
accelerator mechanism that amplifies the responses of consumption, the current account, the
price of nontradables and the real exchange rate to exogenous shocks.
Credit frictions and liability dollarization have been widely studied in the Sudden Stops
literature. The goal here is to provide a basic framework that highlights how balance sheet effects
and the Fisherian deflation process interact to trigger high volatility of the real exchange rate and
Sudden Stops. The mechanism is similar to the ones that have been explored in more detail in the
studies reviewed by Arellano and Mendoza (2003), particularly the two-sector dynamic
stochastic equilibrium setup of Mendoza (2002).
Consider a conventional non-stochastic intertemporal equilibrium setup of a two-sector,
representative-agent small open economy with endowments of tradables (ytT ) and nontradables
(ytN ). The households of this economy solve the following problem:

-15∞

max
T T

∑ βtu (c (cTt , ctN ))

(1)

{ct ,ct ,bt +1 }∞
0 t =0

subject to:
cTt + (1 + τt )ptN ctN = yTt + ptN ytN − bt +1 + bt R + Tt

(2)

bt +1 ≥ −κ ( yTt + ptN ytN ) ≥ −Ω

(3)

Utility is defined in terms of a composite good c that depends on consumption of tradables (ctT )
and nontradables (ctN ). This composite good takes the form of a standard constant-elasticity-ofsubstitution (CES) function, and the utility function u(⋅) is a standard increasing, twicecontinuously-differentiable and concave utility function. Since c is a CES aggregator, the
marginal rate of substitution between nontradables and tradables satisfies

c2 ( cTt , ctN

(

c1 cTt , ctN

⎛ cT ⎞
)
= Φ ⎜⎜ tN ⎟⎟⎟ ,
⎜⎝ ct ⎠
)

where Φ is an increasing, strictly convex function of the ratio ctT / ctN. The price of tradables is
determined in competitive world markets and normalized to unity without loss of generality. ptN
denotes the price of nontradable goods relative to tradables.
As is evident from the budget constraint (2), international debt contracts are denominated
in units of tradables, so this economy features liability dollarization. The only asset traded with
the rest of the world is a one-period bond that pays a constant gross real interest rate of R in units
of tradables.
World credit markets are imperfect. In particular, constraint (3) states that foreign
creditors limit their lending to the small open economy so as to satisfy a liquidity constraint up to
a debt ceiling. The liquidity constraint limits debt to a fraction κ of the value of the economy’s
current income in units of tradables. The debt ceiling requires the debt allowed by the liquidity
constraint not to exceed a maximum level Ω. This maximum debt helps rule out “perverse”
equilibria in which agents could satisfy the liquidity constraint by running very large debts that
finance high levels of tradables consumption and prop up the price of nontradables.

-16The above credit constraints can be the result of informational frictions or institutional
weaknesses affecting credit relationships (such as monitoring costs, limited enforcement, costly
information, etc). The contracting environment that yields the constraints is not modeled here
for simplicity. Instead, following the line of the studies on endogenous borrowing constraints
surveyed by Arellano and Mendoza (2003), we take the credit constraints as given to focus on
their implications for equilibrium allocations and prices. Note also that credit limits set in terms
of the debt-income ratio as in (3) are common practice in actual credit markets, particularly in
household mortgage and consumer loans.
The government imposes a tax τt on private consumption of nontradable goods, which is
intended to approximate some of the effects of a change in the rate of depreciation of the
currency that would emerge in a monetary model in which money economizes transaction costs
or enters in the utility function (see Mendoza (2001)).3 The government also maintains timeinvariant levels of unproductive government expenditures in tradables and nontradables,
(g T , g N ) , and it is assumed to run a balanced budget policy for simplicity. Hence, any movements

in the primary fiscal balance due to exogenous policy changes in the tax rate, or endogenous
movements in the price of nontradables, are offset via lump-sum rebates or taxes Tt. The
government’s budget constraint is therefore:
τt ptN ctN = g T + ptN g N + Tt

(4)

∞
A competitive equilibrium for this economy is a sequence of allocations ⎡⎣ cTt , ctN ,Tt , bt +1 ⎤⎦ 0
∞
and prices ⎡⎣ ptN ⎤⎦ 0 such that: (a) the allocations represent a solution to the households’ problem

taking the price of notradables, the tax rate, and government transfers as given, (b) the sequence
of transfers satisfies the government budget constraint given the tax policy, government

3

Adao, Correia and Teles (2005), Coleman (1996), and Mendoza and Uribe (2001) provide other examples in which
the equilibria of monetary economies with alternative exchange rate regimes, and with or without nominal rigidities,
can be reproduced in non-monetary economies with appropriate combinations of tax-equivalent distortions.

-17expenditures, private consumption of nontradables and the relative price of nontradables, and (c)
the following market-clearing condition in the nontradables sector holds:
(5)

ctN + g N = ytN

Note also that given (2), (4) and (5), the resource constraint in the tradables sector is:
(6)

cTt + gt = yTt − bt +1 + Rbt

The analysis that follows shows that, in the economy described by equations (1)-(6), the
responses of consumption, the current account, the real exchange rate, and the price of
nontradables to exogenous shocks exhibit endogenous amplification via a financial accelerator
mechanism when the credit constraints bind, and that this mechanism operates via balance-sheet
and Fisherian-deflation effects triggered by movements in the relative price of nontradables.
Since other studies have examined the quantitative implications of more sophisticated variants of
this model that incorporate uncertainty, incomplete financial markets, and labor demand and
supply decisions in the nontradables sector (see Mendoza (2002)), we focus here on the key
aspects of the economic intuition behind the model’s financial accelerator.
Equilibrium when the Credit Constraints Never Bind: Perfectly Smooth Consumption
Consider first a scenario in which the credit constraints never bind. In this case, the
model yields an equilibrium identical to the one that would be obtained with perfect credit
markets. The economy borrows or lends at the world-determined interest rate with no other
limitation that the standard No-Ponzi-Game condition, which requires the present value of
tradables absorption to equal the tradables sector’s wealth. The latter is composed of
nonfinancial wealth (W0) and financial wealth (Rb0), so that the economy faces this intertemporal
budget constraint:
∞

∞

∑ R−tcTt =∑ R−t ( yTt − g T ) + Rb0

t =0

t =0

= W0 −

( R R− 1 )g

T

+ Rb0

(7)

Next we adopt a set of assumptions that imply that, when the credit frictions never bind,

-18the equilibrium reduces to a textbook case of perfectly smooth consumption. In particular,
assume that the economy satisfies the traditional stationarity condition βR=1 and that the
nontradables output is time invariant ( ytN = y N for all t). Hence, it follows from (5) and the
standard Euler equation for tradables consumption that cTt = c T for all t. The intertemporal
constraint in (7) implies then that the equilibrium sequence of tradables consumption is perfectly
smooth at this level:
(8)

c T = (1 − β )[W0 + Rb0 ] − g T

In addition, the optimality condition that equates the marginal rate of substitution in consumption
of tradables and nontradables with the after-tax relative price of nontradables implies that the
equilibrium price of nontradables is:
ptN = pt N =

c2 ( c T , y N − g N
c1 ( c , y
T

N

−g

N

)
(1 + τt )−1
)

⎛ cT
= Φ ⎜⎜ N
⎜⎝ y − g N

⎞⎟
⎟ (1 + τt )−1
⎠⎟

(9)

Since consumption of tradables is perfectly smooth and both the endowment and government
consumption of nontradables are time-invariant by assumption, the result in (9) states that any
variations in the relative price of nontradables result only from government-induced variations in
the tax on nontradables consumption. Tax policy is neutral in the sense that variations in the tax
alter the price of nontradables but not consumption allocations or the current account. Thus, if
credit constraints never bind, tax-induced real devaluations are neutral (i.e., changes in the
exchange rate regime make no difference for the behavior of the real exchange rate).
As long as the credit constraints do not bind, the results in (8) and (9) hold for any timevarying, deterministic, non-negative stream of tradables endowments. To compare this perfectly
smooth equilibrium with the equilibrium of the economy with binding credit constraints, we
study a particular stream of tradables income that provides an incentive for the economy to
borrow at date 0. Using standard concepts from the Permanent Income Theory of consumption,
we can define an arbitrary time-varying sequence of tradables endowments as an equivalent

-19sequence with a time-invariant endowment (or “permanent income”). Hence, the level of
nonfinancial wealth in (7) satisfies: y T = (1 − β )W0 , where y T is the time-invariant tradables
endowment that yields the same present value of tradables income (i.e., the same wealth) as a
given time-varying sequence paid to households. Define then a “wealth neutral” shock to date-0
tradables income as a change in the date-0 endowment offset by a change in the date-1
endowment that keeps the present value of the two constant (leaving the rest of the sequence of
tradables income in W0 unchanged). Thus, wealth neutral shocks to date-0 income satisfy:
T
yT
= β −1 ( y T − yT0
1 −y

)

(10)

Condition (10) states that, if the date-0 endowment falls below permanent income, the date-1
endowment increases above permanent income by enough to keep the present value constant.
Clearly, for any 0 < yT0 < y T < y1T that satisfies (10) and for which the credit constraints
do not bind, the economy maintains the perfectly smooth equilibrium with these results:
c T = ( 1 − β )[W0 + Rb0 ] − g T
⎛ cT
pt N = Φ ⎜⎜ N
⎜⎝ y − g N

⎞⎟
⎟ ( 1 + τt )−1
⎠⎟

b1 − b0 = yT0 − y ,

(11)

b2 − b1 = − ( b1 − b0 ) , bt = b0 for t ≥ 2

Hence, consumption allocations and the price of nontradables remain at their first-best levels,
and there is a current account deficit at date-0 of equal size as the current account surplus at date
1. Thus, the economy reduces asset holdings below b0 at date 0 (i.e., borrows), and returns to its
initial asset position at date 1. Policy-induced real devaluations of the currency are still neutral
with respect to all of these outcomes.
The Economy with Binding Credit Constraints
Now consider unanticipated, wealth-neutral shocks to y0T that satisfy condition (10). If
the shock to y0T is not large enough to trigger the credit constraints, the solutions obtained in (11)
still hold, but if the shock lowers y0T to a level at or below a critical level, it will make the
liquidity constraint bind. This critical level is given by:

-20yˆT =

y T − b0 − κp0N y N
1+κ

(12)

Since we restrict the analysis to strictly positive endowments, condition (12) also implies an
⎛
b ⎞ ⎛p y
upper bound for κ : κ < κh = ⎜⎜⎜ 1 − T0 ⎟⎟⎟ ⎜⎜⎜ 0 T
⎝
y ⎠ ⎝ y
N

N

⎞⎟
⎟.
⎠⎟

If κ exceeds this critical value, the model

allows for enough debt so that the liquidity constraint never binds for any positive value of y0T.
On the other hand, κ has a lower bound at the level at which satisfying the liquidity constraint
would make tradables consumption and the nontradables price fall to zero:
κ > κl =

g T − yT0 − Rb0
yT0

A critical observation about the result in (12) is that, for a given wealth-neutral pair (y0T,
y1T ), a sufficiently large and unanticipated tax increase at date 0 (i.e., a policy-induced real
depreciation) can also move the economy below the critical level of tradables income, and thus
trigger the credit constraints, because it lowers the price of nontradables and the value of the
nontradables endowment. Since, as shown below, this affects the equilibrium outcomes of
consumption, the current account, the price of nontradables, and the real exchange rate, a policyinduced real depreciation of the currency is no longer neutral once the credit constraints bind.
Now alternative policy regimes yield very different outcomes for real exchange rate behavior.
Assume a debt ceiling set at Ω = −b1 for simplicity. For shocks that put y0T below its
critical level, triggering the liquidity constraint, equilibrium allocations and prices for date 0 are:
cT0 = yT0 − g T + κ ⎡⎣ yT0 + p0N y N ⎤⎦ + Rb0

⎛
cT
p0N = Φ ⎜⎜ N 0 N
⎜⎝ y − g

⎞⎟
⎟( 1 + τ 0 )−1
⎠⎟

b1 − b0 = −κ ⎡⎣ yT0 + p0N y N ⎤⎦ − b0 > Ω − b0

(13)
(14)
(15)

Since b1 = −κ ⎡⎣ yT0 + p0N y N ⎤⎦ > b1 , it is clearly the case that cT0 < c T , p0N < p0N , b1 − b0 > b1 − b0 .
Thus, when the credit constraint binds, tradables consumption and the price of nontradables are

-21lower than in the perfectly smooth case, and the current account is higher. In other words, for
shocks that put the tradables endowment below the critical level, the economy responds with a
drop in tradables consumption, a real depreciation and a current account reversal (i.e., a Sudden
Stop takes place).
The above argument is similar to Calvo’s (1998): if the country cannot borrow, tradables
consumption falls and this lowers the price of nontradables, which via a balance sheet effect and
the liability dollarization feature of the credit constraint validates the country’s reduced
borrowing ability. The difference with Calvo’s setup is that the equilibrium characterized by
conditions (13)-(15) features also Fisher’s debt-deflation mechanism.
The Fisherian deflation amplifies the responses of quantities and prices. In particular, the
date-0 tradables consumption and price of nontradables are determined by solving the twoequation system formed by (13)-(14). Equation (13) shows that tradables consumption depends
on the nontradables price when the credit constraint binds because of liability dollarization:
changes in the value of the nontradables endowment affect the agents’ ability to borrow in
tradables-denominated debt. Equation (14) shows that the price of nontradables depends on the
consumption of tradables via the standard optimality condition for sectoral consumption
allocations. The Fisherian deflation occurs then because, as tradables consumption falls, the price
of nontradables falls, and as this price falls the credit constraint tightens, which makes tradables
consumption fall more, which then makes the price of nontradables fall more.
Figure 2 illustrates the determination of the date-0 equilibrium when this Fisherian
deflation process is at work. The vertical line TT represents the perfectly smooth tradables
consumption allocation, which is independent of the price of nontradables. The PP curve
represents the optimality condition for sectoral consumption allocations, which equates the
marginal rate of substitution between tradables and nontradables with the corresponding after tax
relative price (i.e., equation (14)). Since the consumption aggregator is CES and nontradables

-22consumption is constant at y N − g N , PP is an increasing, convex function of tradables
consumption. TT and PP intersect at the equilibrium price of the perfectly smooth consumption
case (point A).
The SS line represents equation (13), which is the tradables resource constraint when the
liquidity constraint binds. SS is an upward-sloping, linear function of tradables consumption with
a slope of 1 κy N . Since the horizontal intercept of SS is Rb0 − g T + (1 + κ)yT0 , SS shifts to the left
as y0T falls. In Figure 2, SS corresponds to the case when yT0 = yˆT , so that tradables output is just
at the point where the credit constraint is marginally binding. In this case, SS intersects TT and
PP at point A, so that the outcome with constrained debt is the same as the perfectly smooth case.
Consider a wealth-neutral shock to the date-0 tradables endowment such that yT0 < yˆT .
The SS curve shifts to SS’ and the new equilibrium is determined at point D. If prices did not
respond to the drop in consumption, or if the borrowing constraint were set as a fixed amount
independent of income and prices, the new equilibrium would be at point B. At B, however,
tradables consumption is lower than in the perfectly smooth case, so equilibrium requires the
price of nontradables to fall. If the credit constraint were independent on the nontradables price
(as, for example, in the setup of Calvo (1998)), the new equilibrium would be at point C, with a
lower nontradables price and lower tradables consumption. This outcome reflects the balance
sheet effect induced by liability dollarization. But at C the Fisherian deflation is not yet taken
into account. With the lower price at C in the PP line, the liquidity constraint tightens because
the value of the nontradables endowment falls, forcing tradables consumption to fall so as to
satisfy the constraint at a point in SS’, but at that point the nontradables price must fall again to
re-attain a point along PP, but at that point tradables consumption falls again because the credit
constraint tightens further. This Fisherian debt-deflation process continues until it converges to
point D, at which the liquidity constraint is satisfied for a nontradables price and a level of

-23tradables consumption that are also consistent with the equilibrium condition for sectoral
consumption allocations. In short, the response to the tradables endowment shock, which would
be at point A for any shock that satisfies yT0 ≥ yˆT , is amplified to point D because of the
combined effects of the balance sheet effect and the Fisherian deflation.
The above results apply also to the case in which there is no shock to the tradables
endowment but the government increases τ0 by enough so that the resulting fall in p0N puts
T

yˆT above y0 . In this case, a policy change that could be intended to yield a “small” real

depreciation of the currency can trigger the credit constraint, and result in a large current account
reversal and collapses in tradables consumption, the price of nontradables and the real exchange
rate. The policy neutrality of the perfectly smooth case no longer holds.
One caveat of this analysis is that for low enough y0T the economy would not be able to
borrow at the competitive equilibrium. This occurs when y0T is so low that the level of debt that
satisfies the liquidity constraint exceeds Ω (or, in this case, the debt that would be contracted in
the perfectly smooth equilibrium). Setting debt at this debt ceiling would imply a nontradables
price at which the liquidity constraint is violated, but on the other hand, the debt level that
satisfies (13)-(14), so that the liquidity constraint holds, would violate the debt ceiling. At
corners like these, debt is set to zero and the economy is in financial autarky. In the remainder of
this paper we concentrate on situations in which shocks result in values yT0 ≤ yˆT such that there
are internal solutions with debt (i.e., solutions for which Ω is not binding).
Further analysis of Figure 2 could raise questions about the existence and uniqueness of
the equilibrium with Fisherian deflation, depending on assumptions about the position and slope
of the SS line and the curvature of the PP curve. The model produces results that shed light on
this issue, but these are highly dependent on the simplicity of the setup, which was motivated by
the interest in deriving tractable analytical results to illustrate the effects of the Fisherian

-24deflation. Hence, the following results regarding the conditions that can produce or rule out
multiple equilibria need to be considered with caution, as they may not be robust to important
extensions of the model (like including uncertainty, capital accumulation or a labor market).
Figure 2 suggests that a sufficiency condition to ensure a unique equilibrium with
Fisherian deflation (for cases with yT0 ≤ yˆT that yield internal solutions with debt) is that the PP
curve be flatter than the SS line around point A. Since SS is an upward-sloping, linear function
and PP is increasing and strictly convex, this assumption ensures that the two curves intersect
only once in the interval between 0 and c T .4
Given (13) and (14), the assumption that PP is flatter than SS around A implies that:

κ<

1
z
1+μ

with

⎛ c T ⎞⎟
⎜⎜
⎜⎝ y T ⎠⎟⎟
z =
⎛ p0N y N
⎜⎜
⎜⎝ y T

⎞⎟
⎟
⎠⎟

(16)

where 1/(1+μ) is the elasticity of substitution in consumption of tradables and nontradables.
This condition sets an upper bound for the liquidity coefficient κ (different from the upper bound
identified earlier, which determined a value of κ that is high enough to make the liquidity
constraint irrelevant). Since in most countries the nontradables sector is at least as large as the
tradables sector, and consumption of tradables is lower than tradables output, it follows that z <1.
Hence, (16) states that the sufficiency condition for a unique equilibrium with Fisherian deflation
requires the liquidity coefficient to be lower than the fraction z of the elasticity of substitution.
Existing empirical studies for developing countries show that the elasticity of substitution
is less than unitary, ranging between 0.4 and 0.83 (see Ostry and Reinhart (1992), Mendoza
(1995), Gonzales and Neumeyer (2003) and Lorenzo, Aboal and Osimani (2003)). The sectoral
data for Mexico reported by Mendoza (2002) show that, on average over the 1988-1998 period,
4

Unless P and SS are tangent at A, the curves also intersect once in the region with cT0 > c T because (13) and (14)
can be satisfied by setting cT0 high enough to yield a p 0N at which the credit constraint supports the high debt needed

-25⎛ p0N y N
⎜⎜⎜ T
⎝ y

⎞⎟
⎛ cT
⎟⎟ = 1.543, ⎜⎜ T
⎜⎝ y
⎠

⎞⎟
⎟ = 0.665 , so that in Mexico z = 0.43. Given this value of z, supporting a
⎠⎟

debt ratio equal to the lowest net foreign asset-output ratio estimated for Mexico by Lane and
Milesi-Ferretti (1999), which is about -36 percent, requires using the upper bound of the
estimates of the elasticity of substitution (i.e., 1/(1+μ) = 0.83). With this elasticity and z =0.43,
condition (16) implies κ < 0.357. This result also meets the condition required for the credit
⎛
b ⎞ ⎛p y
constraint to bind at positive values of the tradables endowment, κ < κh = ⎜⎜⎜ 1 − T0 ⎟⎟⎟ ⎜⎜⎜ 0 T
⎝
y ⎠ ⎝ y
N

N

⎞⎟
⎟ , for
⎠⎟

any b0 ≤0. Hence, this rough review of empirical facts suggests that the sufficiency condition for
which the model yields a unique equilibrium with Fisherian deflation is in line with the data.
Quantitative Implications: Balance Sheet Effect v. Fisherian Deflation Effect
What are the relative magnitudes of the balance-sheet and Fisherian-deflation effects that
move the economy from A to D in Figure 2? The Figure suggests that, for a given value of the
tradables endowment shock, the magnitude of the two effects depends on the curvature of the SS
and PP curves, which in turn depends on the relative magnitudes of the liquidity coefficient and
the sectoral elasticity of substitution in consumption.
A lower liquidity coefficient increases the slope of the SS curve. This strengthens the
balance sheet effect but its effect on the Fisherian deflation is not monotonic. Starting from a
high κ at which the credit constraint was just marginally binding (and hence the Fisherian
deflation effect was irrelevant), lowering κ strengthens the Fisherian deflation. As κ falls further,
however, the Fisherian deflation weakens because the feedback between the nontradables price
and the ability to borrow weakens (in the limit, for κ = 0 there is no Fisherian deflation, but this
is also the case when κ is too high for the credit constraint to ever bind). A higher elasticity of

to finance this high consumption. This outcome is not an equilibrium, however, because the resulting debt level
violates the debt ceiling (which is the debt of the perfectly smooth case implicit at point A).

-26substitution between tradables and nontradables makes the PP curve flatter, which strengthens
both the balance sheet effect and the Fisherian deflation.
The following numerical experiments illustrate the potential magnitudes of the balancesheet and Fisherian-deflation effects, using a set of parameter values and calibration assumptions
that match some empirical evidence from Mexico. We consider a Constant Relative Risk
Aversion (CRRA) period utility function, u(c ) = ( c1−σ ) /(1 − σ ) , and a CES aggregator for sectoral
consumption, c = ⎣⎡ a(cT )−μ + (1 − a )(c N )−μ ⎦⎤

−1/ μ

.

The subjective discount factor and the coefficient of relative risk aversion are set to
standard values of β =0.96 and σ =2. We take Mendoza’s (2002) estimate of the share parameter
of the CES aggregator for Mexico, a =0.342. The elasticity of substitution between tradables and
nontradables is set to the upper bound of the range of estimates cited earlier (0.83), which
implies μ =0.204.
The model is calibrated to match Mendoza’s (2002) estimates of Mexico’s ratio of
nontradables GDP to tradables GDP at current prices (1.543), and the sectoral shares of tradables
(nontradables) consumption in tradables (nontradables) GDP, which are 66 and 71 percent
respectively. Total “permanent” output is normalized to 1, so that the results of the quantitative
experiments can be interpreted as shares of “permanent” GDP. We also allow for “permanent”
absorption of tradables and nontradables that include government purchases and private
investment, so that the model can match the observed consumption-output ratios. The tax rate is
set to zero, which implies a baseline scenario in which government expenditures are financed
with lump sump taxation. Initial external debt is set to 1/3 of permanent GDP, in the range of the
time series of the net foreign asset-GDP ratio produced for Mexico by Lane and Milesi-Ferretti
(1999). With these calibrated parameter values, the perfectly smooth equilibrium yields
consumption allocations c T = 0.26, c N = 0.56 , and an equilibrium price of nontradables of

-27p N = 0.77 , so that the aggregate consumption-output

(c T

ratio matches the ratio from Mexican data:

+ p N c N ) / ( y T + p N y N ) = 0.69 .

Figure 3 illustrates the quantitative predictions of the model for a range of values of the
liquidity coefficient 0.21<κ<35, assuming a shock that lowers yT0 to a level 3 percent below its
permanent level. The lower bound of the liquidity coefficient is the lowest value of κ that can
support positive tradables consumption with a binding liquidity constraint. The upper bound is
the highest value of κ at which the constraint still binds (higher values would imply that the
credit constraint does not bind for the 3 percent shock to tradables income, so that the perfectly
smooth equilibrium would be maintained).
Figure 3.a shows the bond position of the economy at date 0 in three situations: the
continuous curve is for the economy with the binding credit constraint, the dotted line is for the
economy with perfect credit markets, and the dashed line is the value of the fraction κ of income
valued at tradables goods prices in this same economy (i.e., it shows the value of bonds that
would satisfy the liquidity constraint at the nontradables price of the perfectly smooth
equilibrium). The credit constraint binds whenever the dashed line is above the dotted line. The
vertical distance between the dashed line and the continuous curve represents the effect of the
endogenous collapse in the price of nontradables on the ability to contract debt. This effect
grows very rapidly as κ falls, and it can imply a correction in the debt position (and in the current
account) of over 10 percentage points of permanent GDP.
Figures 3b and 3c illustrate the effects of the credit constraints on tradables consumption,
the relative price of nontradables, and the real exchange rate (measuring each as a percent
deviation from their values in the perfectly smooth equilibrium). The plots decompose the total
effect of the constraints on tradables consumption and the nontradables price into two
components, one that represents the balance sheet effect and another representing the Fisherian

-28deflation. The total effect corresponds to a comparison of points A and D in Figure 2. The
balance sheet effect compares A and C, and the Fisherian deflation compares C and D.
The negative effects of the liquidity constraint on tradables consumption and the relative
price of nontradables are large and grow rapidly as κ falls. With κ set at 33 percent, tradables
consumption and the price of nontradables fall by nearly 50 percent, and the CPI-based measure
of the real exchange rate (i.e., the CES price index associated with the CES aggregator of
sectoral consumption) falls nearly 37 percent. These declines are driven mainly by the Fisherian
deflation, as the contribution of the pure balance sheet effect is less than 7 percent for both
tradables consumption and the price of nontradables.
The effect of the Fisherian deflation is strongest with κ around 30 percent, and it becomes
weaker for lower values of κ. In the worst-case scenario, with κ at 20 percent, tradables
consumption and the nontradables price approach zero. However, even for these low values of
the liquidity coefficient, the contribution to the collapses in consumption and prices are split
about 50-50 between the balance sheet effect and the Fisherian deflation. Hence, the contribution
of the Fisherian deflation process is at least as large as that of the balance sheet effect.
Figure 3d shows the welfare cost of the Sudden Stops shown in Figures 3a-3c. Welfare
costs are computed as compensating variations in a time-invariant consumption level that equates
lifetime utility in the economy with credit constraints with that of the economy with perfect
credit markets (in which the perfectly smooth equilibrium prevails at all times). With κ at 33
percent, the welfare loss measures 1.1 percent, and the loss increases rapidly as κ falls.
Figure 4 shows a similar set of results as Figure 3 but for adverse shocks to the date-0
tradables endowment of different magnitudes, fixing κ at 34 percent. The shocks range between
0 and 12.4 percent of the permanent tradables endowment (1-0.124 = 0.876 and 1 in the
horizontal axes of the plots). Notice that in this experiment the smallest shock for which the

-29liquidity constraint begins to bind is 1.9 percent, so shocks between 0 and 1.9 percent do not
trigger the constraint and yield the perfectly smooth equilibrium. The upper bound of the shocks
at 12.4 percent is the largest shock that satisfies the maximum debt constraint (i.e., the constraint
stating that debt must not exceed the level corresponding to the perfectly smooth equilibrium).
The adjustment in the debt position is severe and increases rapidly with the size of the
shock. A 5 percent shock to the tradables endowment implies a reduction in debt of about 15
percentage points of permanent income. Tradables consumption and the price of nontradables
fall about 60 percent below the levels of the perfectly smooth equilibrium, with most of the
decline accounted for by the Fisherian deflation. The CPI-based measure of the real exchange
rate falls by about 47 percent. The welfare loss implied by the Sudden Stops triggered by this 5
percent shock measures 1.7 percent in terms of a compensating variation in a lifetime-utilityequivalent level of consumption. All these effects (except the contribution of the Fisherian
deflation) grow rapidly as the size of the shock increases.
Finally, consider a policy experiment that switches from the tax rate consistent with a
fixed exchange rate (i.e., τ =0) to a floating rate for which the rate of depreciation of the currency
settles at levels consistent with a fixed, positive value of τ (alternatively, this experiment can be
viewed as a case in which the government aims to induce a real depreciation by increasing τ).
This experiment sets yT0 = yˆT , which by construction implies that at a zero tax rate the credit
constraint is marginally binding (i.e., at τ = 0 the economy is at point A in Figure 2). Figure 5
shows the results of tax increases varying from 0 to 5 percent. Note that, since for a zero tax rate
and yT0 = yˆT the credit constraint is marginally binding, and since with a non-binding credit
constraint the tax hike would induce at most a real depreciation of 3 percent (if the tax were
raised to the 5-percent maximum), the government could have good reason to expect that the tax
hike should induce a “small’ real depreciation. As the plots in Figure 5 show, however, the actual

-30outcome would deviate sharply from this expectation because increasing the tax triggers the
credit constraint. Increasing the tax rate by 5 percentage points induces a correction of 8
percentage points of permanent tradables income in the net foreign asset position of the
economy. Consumption falls by 30 percent relative to the perfectly smooth equilibrium, the
relative price of nontradables falls by 35 percent, and the real exchange rate depreciates by about
23 percent. As in the other two experiments, the amplification in the declines of consumption,
the price of nontradables, and the real exchange rate is largely due to the Fisherian debt-deflation
effect, with a negligible contribution of the balance sheet effect. This policy-induced real
depreciation results in a welfare loss of nearly 0.4 percent in terms of a stationary tradables
consumption path.
In summary, the results of these numerical experiments suggest that, in the presence of
liability dollarization and credit-market frictions, the Fisherian deflation mechanism can be an
important source of amplification and asymmetry in the response of emerging economies to
negative shocks. The Fisherian deflation causes large declines in consumption and the price of
nontradables, as well as large real depreciations and large reversals in the current account.
Moroever, in this environment, policy-induced real depreciations can trigger the credit
constraints and the Fisherian deflation mechanism, and therefore they can induce collapses in the
price of nontradables and large real depreciations of the currency. These results suggest that the
Fisherian deflation mechanism may help account for the empirical observation that the relative
price of nontradables accounts for a significant fraction of the variability of the real exchange
rate in economies with managed exchange rate regimes.
4.

Conclusions
This paper reported empirical evidence based on Mexican and U.S. monthly data for the

1969-2000 period showing that fluctuations in Mexico’s relative price of nontradable goods
account for 50 to 70 percent of the variability of the Mexico-U.S. real exchange rate when

-31Mexico was under a managed exchange rate regime. The main lesson drawn from this evidence,
and from cross-country studies by Naknoi (2005) and Parsley (2003) showing that this is a robust
result across developing countries, is that the behavior of the determinants of the real exchange
rate differs sharply between countries with features similar to Mexico’s and the industrial
countries to which variance analysis of real exchange rates is normally applied. In particular, the
overwhelming role of movements in prices of tradable goods and nominal exchange rates found
in industrial countries, or in developing countries with floating exchange rates, is sharply
diminished in developing countries with managed exchange rates.
The finding that in a typical emerging economy like Mexico, large fluctuations in the real
exchange rate can be driven by movements in the relative price of nontradables during periods of
exchange rate management, suggests that the phenomenon of liability dollarization emphasized
in the Sudden Stops literature deserves more attention. This paper proposed a basic model to
illustrate how liability dollarization introduces amplification and asymmetry in the responses of
the economy to adverse shocks via a financial accelerator that combines a balance sheet effect
with Irving Fisher’s debt-deflation mechanism. The balance sheet effect and the Fisherian
deflation result in collapses in the real exchange rate that are driven by collapses in the relative
price of nontradables. A set of basic numerical experiments suggests that the quantitative
implications of these frictions, particularly the effects of the Fisherian deflation, can be
significant. Of particular interest are the results for a policy-induced real depreciation (or a shift
from a fixed exchange rate regime to a constant, positive rate of depreciation), showing that this
paper’s financial accelerator can produce large collapses in the relative price of nontradables, the
real exchange rate and consumption, together with a large current account reversal (starting from
a situation in which credit constraints were marginally binding).
The results indicating that roughly a half of the variability of the real exchange rate can
be attributed to movements in nontradables goods prices are in line with the quantitative findings

-32that the recent literature on the business cycle implications of exchange rate management has
produced (see Mendoza and Uribe (2001)). Further empirical research along the lines of the
studies by Naknoi (2005) and Parsley (2003) should focus on comparing the experiences of
industrial and developing countries so as to shed more light on whether variance analysis of
other real exchange rates pairing emerging markets with industrial countries display similar
sensitiveness to the exchange-rate regime as the peso-dollar real exchange rate. In addition,
further analysis is needed to examine whether the role of the nontradables price in accounting for
real-exchange-rate variability depends on the degree of liability dollarization of the economy.
The analysis undertaken here avoided intentionally taking a position on the best modeling
strategy to account for the nontrivial fraction of real-exchange-rate variability explained by
movements in tradable goods prices and the nominal exchange rate. In particular, the evidence
reported here for periods without exchange rate management, in which a large fraction of realexchange-rate variability is due to changes in relative prices of tradable goods and the nominal
exchange rate, does not suggest per se that one should view fluctuations in the variable x as
deviations from the law of one price or evidence of price or wage stickiness. It simply shows
how much x (i.e., the ratio of exchange-rate-adjusted CPI prices of durable goods across Mexico
and the United States) contributes to explain the variance of the ratio of exchange-rate-adjusted
aggregate CPIs. This is distant from the ideal scenario needed to interpret changes in x as
deviations from the law of one price. The law of one price applies to single, homogeneous goods
sold in a freely-accessible market and in the absence of frictions like transportation costs and tax
or tariff distortions. Clearly, aggregate data for the CPIs of Mexico and the United States violate
these conditions. The goods included in these indexes are different, carry different weights, and
the weights change a different intervals. Access to a “common market” has varied widely over
the sample period and across goods, and similar caveats apply to transportation costs and tariffs.
There are detailed studies on purchasing power parity (PPP) and the law of one price that

-33take the above issues into account, and still find evidence of large price differentials for highly
disaggregated consumer goods. Some researchers are concerned with the impossibility of
defining a pure concept of “tradable” goods as required by the law of one, and are thus studying
the “degree of tradability of goods” (see Betts and Kehoe (2000)) or distribution costs (see
Busrtein, Neves, and Rebelo (2000)).
The treatment of the data in the empirical analysis conducted here abstracts from
medium- to low-frequency considerations, including those related to mean-reverting properties
of real exchange rates and to the long-run determination of real exchange rates. However,
research in this direction is also inconclusive, as the survey by Froot and Rogoff (1995) shows.
For example, Asea and Mendoza (1994) find that while the data support predictions of long-run
neoclassical models in which cross-country differences in the relative price of nontradable goods
reflect differences in productivity across sectors that produce tradables and nontradables,
measures of the long-run relative price of nontradables do poorly in explaining cross-country
differences in CPI-based measures of the real exchange rate. At medium time frequencies, it is
interesting to note that the variance ratios based on 72-month differences of the data, which
correspond to the six-year periodicity of recent Mexican business cycles, the contribution of
variable x to the variance of the real exchange rate is about 65 percent (both for the full sample
and for the period of the managed exchange rate that ended in 1994).
The findings of this paper provide an argument in favor of policies that seek to stabilize
the real value of the currency. Traditional exchange rate management is not useful because
currency collapses trigger large movements in relative prices together with Sudden Stops in
consumption and the current account. Instead, the model favors policies that can be successful at
preventing large fluctuations in the real exchange rate. The setup of the model suggests in
particular the use of sectoral tax policy, which would seek to contain the deflationary pressure on
the relative price of nontradables as this pressure builds up. However, this policy can be

-34interpreted more broadly to consider policies that can remove the liability dollarization problem
(for example, the full adoption of a hard currency as the domestic currency) or monetary policies
under “de jure” floating exchange rates that can prove effective to prevent large swings in the
real value of the currency (as many emerging countries that claim adherence to inflation
targeting rules could be showing in practice).
An alternative to policies that prevent large fluctuations in the relative price of
nontradables is to consider changing the nature of emerging economies’ debt instruments to
make them less susceptible to the adverse effects of balance sheet and Fisherian deflation effects.
This is in line with recent proposals favoring issuing bonds only in domestic currencies or
indexed to the evolution of output or key commodity prices (as was done by Argentina in its
recent debt conversion using partially bonds indexed to output). However, whether emerging
economies can be successful at establishing liquid markets for these instruments unilaterally, or
whether there is enough interest in them in world financial markets, remains an open question.
Clearly, if creating markets for the state-contingent claims that can neutralize financial
accelerator mechanisms driving Sudden Stops is feasible, this is the most preferable policy. But
assuming that this is not feasible, domestic policies aimed at stabilizing the relative price of
nontradables are an appealing alternative.

-35References
Adao, B., I. Correia and P. Teles (2005), “On the Relevance of Exchange Rate Regimes for
Stabilization Policies,” mimeo, Department of Economic Studies, Bank of Portugal.
Arellano, C. and E.G. Mendoza (2003), “Credit Frictions and ‘Sudden Stops’ in Small Open
Economies: An Equilibrium Business Cycle Framework for Emerging Markets Crises,”
in Dynamic Macroeconomic Analysis: Theory and Policy in General Equilibrium, edited
by S. Altug, J. Chadha and J. Nolan, Cambridge University Press.
Baxter, M. and A. C. Stockman, (1989), “Business cycles and the exchange rate regime: Some
International Evidence,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 23:377–400.
Betts, C. and T.J. Kehoe (2000), “Tradeability of Goods and Real Exchange Rate Fluctuations,”
mimeo, Department of Economics, University of Minnesota.
Burstein, A. T., Joao C. Neves and S. Rebelo, (2000), “Distribution Costs and Real Exchange
Rate Dynamics During Exchange-Rate-Based Stabilizations,” mimeo, Northwestern
University.
Calvo, G.A. and C. A. Vegh, (1999) “Inflation Stabilization and BOP Crises in Developing
Countries,” in J. Taylor and M. Woodford, eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics, Volume
C; North Holland, pp. 1531-1614.
Calvo, G.A. (1998), “Capital Flows and Capital-Market Crises: The Simple Economics of
Sudden Stops,” Journal of Applied Economics, v.1, pp 35-54.
Calvo, G.A., A. Izquierdo and R. Loo-Kung (2005), “Relative Prices Under Sudden Stop: Level
and Volatility Effects,” Journal of International Economics, forthcoming.
Chari, V. V., P. J. Kehoe, and E. R. McGrattan (2002), “Can sticky price models generate
volatile and persistent real exchange rates?,” Review of Economic Studies, 69:533–563.
Coleman, J. W. (1996), “Functional Equivalence between Transactions-Based Models of Money
and Distorted Real Economies,” mimeo, Fuqua School of Business, Duke University.

-36-

Engel, C. (1995), “Accounting for U.S. Real Exchange Rate Changes,” NBER Working Paper
No. 5394, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge: MA.
Engel, C. (1999), “Accounting for U.S. Real Exchange Rate Changes,” Journal of Political
Economy, v. 107, pp. 507-538
Engel, C. (2000), “Optimal Exchange Rate Policy: The Influence of Price-Setting and Asset
Markets,” mimeo, Department of Economics, University of Washington.
Froot, K. and K. Rogoff (1995), “Perspectives on PPP and Long-Run Real Exchange Rates,” in
Handbook of International Economics, ed. by G.M. Grossman and K. Rogoff, Ch. 32.
Gonzales, M. and P. A. Neumeyer (2003), “The Elasticity of Substitution in Demand for Nontradable Goods in Latin America. Case Study: Argentina,” mimeo, Universidad T. Di
Tella, Buenos Aires: Argentina.
International Monetary Fund (2004), World Economic Outlook, April, International Monetary
Fund, Washington D.C.
Jenkins, M. and J.H. Rogers (1995), “'Haircuts or Hysteresis? Sources of Movements in Real
Exchange Rates,” Journal of International Economics, vol. 38, pp. 339-60.
Lane, P. and G. M. Milesi-Ferretti, (1999), “The External Wealth of Nations: Measures of
Foreign Assets and Liabilities for Industrial and Developing Countries,” Journal of
International Economics.
Lorenzo, F., D. Aboal and R. Osimani (2003), “The Elasticity of Substitution in Demand for
Non-tradable Goods in Uruguay,” mimeo, Centro de Investigaciones Económicas cinve –
Uruguay, Montevideo.
Mendoza, E.G., (1995), “The Terms of Trade, The Real Exchange Rate, and Economic
Fluctuations,” International Economic Review, v. 36, n0. 1, 101-137.

-37Mendoza, E. G. (2000), “On the Instability of Variance Decompositions of the Real Exchange
Rate across Exchange Rate Regimes: Evidence from Mexico and the United States,”
NBER Working Paper No. W7768, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Mendoza, E.G. and M. Uribe (2001), “Devaluation Risk and the Business Cycle Implications of
Exchange Rate Management,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy,
v. 51, 239-296.
Mendoza, E.G. (2001), “The Benefits of Dollarization when Stabilization Policy Lacks
Credibility and Financial Markets are Imperfect,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
v. 33, n. 2, 440-474.
Mendoza, E.G. (2002), “Credit, Prices, and Crashes: Business Cycles with a Sudden Stop,” in
Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets, S. Edwards and J. Frankel eds.
National Bureau of Economic Research, University of Chicago Press.
Mussa, M (1986), “Nominal exchange rate regimes and the behavior of real exchange rates:
Evidence and implications,” Carnegie-Rochester Conferences Series on Public Policy,
25:117–214.
Naknoi, K. (2005), “Real Exchange Rate Fluctuations, Endogenous Tradability and Exchange
Rate Regime,” mimeo, Department of Economics, Purdue University.
Parsley, D. C. (2003), “Accounting for Real Exchange Rate Changes in East Asia,” Hong Kong
Institute for Monetary Research Working Paper No. 6, Hong Kong.
Ostry, J. D. and C. M. Reinhart (1992), “Private Saving and Terms of Trade Shocks,” IMF Staff
Papers, 39, 495-517.

Figure 1. Fraction of Mexico's Real Exchange Rate Variability Explained by Tradables Goods Prices
at Different Time Frequencies
Independent Variables Ratio

Basic Variance Ratio
1.8

1.0

1.6

0.9

1.4

0.8

1.2

0.7

1.0

0.6

0.8

0.5

0.6

0.4
10

20

30

40

month

50

60

70

10

20

30

40

month

50

60

70

Nontradables Weighted Covariance Ratio

Half Covariance Ratio
1.0

1.2

0.9

1.1

0.8

1.0

0.7

0.9

0.6
0.8

0.5

0.7

0.4

0.6

0.3
0.2

0.5
10

20

30

40
month

50

60

70

10

20

Full sample: Jan. 69-Feb. 00
Engel's sample: Sept. 91-Aug. 99
Fixed rate sample: Jan. 69-July 76
El pacto sample: March 88-Nov. 94
Floating rate sample: Dec. 94-Feb. 00

30

40

month

50

60

70

Figure 2. Equilibrium in the Nontradables Market with Fisherian Deflation

Figure 3. Date-0 Effects of Changes in the Liquidity Coefficient

3a. Bond Positions

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.2

0.25

0.3

3b. Consumption Effects

0

% relative to perf, smooth eq.

bonds in % of permanent yT

0

50

100

0.35

0.2

0.25

kappa

constrained economy
perf. smooth equilibrium
constrained at perf. smooth prices

3c. Nontradables Price Effects

20

40

60

80

100

total effect
balance sheet effect
Fisherian deflation effect

0.2

0.25

0.3

kappa

total effect
balance sheet effect
Fisherian deflation effect
real exchange rate (total effect)

3d. Welfare Cost of Credit Constraints

0

compensating variation in cT (%)

% relative to perf. smooth eq.

0

0.3
kappa

20

40

60

0.2

0.25

0.3

kappa

Figure 4. Date-0 Effects of Shocks to Tradables Endowment
4a. Bond Positions

0.2

0.3

0.4

50

% relative to perf, smooth eq.

bonds in % of permanent yT

0.1

0

50

100

150

0.9
0.95
date-0 yT (fraction of permanent yT)

constrained economy
perf. smooth equilibrium
constrained at perf. smooth prices

4c. Nontradables Price Effects

0

50

100

0.9
0.95
date-0 yT (fraction of permanent yT)

total effect
balance sheet effect
Fisherian deflation effect
real exchange rate (total effect)

0.9
0.95
date-0 yT (fraction of permanent yT)

total effect
balance sheet effect
Fisherian deflation effect

0

compensating variation in cT (%)

% relative to perf. smooth eq.

50

4b. Consumption Effects

4d. Welfare Cost of Credit Constraints

10

20

30

40

50

0.9
0.95
date-0 yT (fraction of permanent yT

Figure 5. Date-0 Effects of a Policy-Induced Real Depreciation
5b. Consumption Effects

5a. Bond Positions

0.24

0.26

% relative to perf, smooth eq.

bonds in % of permanent yT

0

0.28

0.3

0.32

0.34

0

0.01

0.02
0.03
tax rate

10

20

30

40

0.04

0

5c. Nontradables Price Effects

10

20

30

40

0

0.01

0.02
0.03
tax rate

total effect
balance sheet effect
Fisherian deflation effect
real exchange rate (total effect)

0.04

0.04

5d. Welfare Cost of Credit Constraints

0

compensating variation in cT (%)

% relative to perf. smooth eq.

0

0.02
0.03
tax rate

total effect
balance sheet effect
Fisherian deflation effect

constrained economy
perf. smooth equilibrium
constrained at perf. smooth prices

10

0.01

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0

0.01

0.02
0.03
tax rate

0.04

