                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         DO LOCAL ANALYSTS KNOW MORE?
                  A CROSS-COUNTRY STUDY OF THE PERFORMANCE OF
                      LOCAL ANALYSTS AND FOREIGN ANALYSTS

                                             Kee-Hong Bae
                                             René M. Stulz
                                             Hongping Tan

                                         Working Paper 11697
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11697


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2005




Respectively, Bank of Montreal Associate Professor of Finance, Queen’s University, Reese Chair of Banking
and Monetary Economics, The Ohio State University, NBER and ECGI, and Ph.D. candidate in finance,
Queen’s University. We are grateful to Thomson Financial for access to their Institutional Brokers Estimate
System (I/B/E/S) provided as part of a broad academic program to encourage earnings expectations research.
We also thank Roger Loh for useful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Kee-Hong Bae, René M. Stulz, and Hongping Tan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Do Local Analysts Know More? A Cross-Country Study of the Performance of Local Analysts
and Foreign Analysts
Kee-Hong Bae, René M. Stulz, and Hongping Tan
NBER Working Paper No. 11697
October 2005
JEL No. F30, G11, G14, G24

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper examines whether analysts resident in a country make more precise earnings forecasts
for firms in that country than analysts who are not resident in that country. Using a sample of 32
countries, we find that there is an economically and statistically significant analyst local advantage
even after controlling for firm and analyst characteristics. The importance of the local advantage is
inversely related to the quality of the information provided by firms. In particular, the local
advantage is high in countries where earnings are smoothed more, less information is disclosed by
firms, and firm idiosyncratic information explains a smaller fraction of stock returns. The local
advantage is also negatively related to market participation by foreign investors and by institutions
and positively related to holdings by insiders. U.S. investors underweight a country's stocks more
in their portfolios if that country has a higher analyst local advantage.

Kee-Hong Bae
Queen’s University
kbae@business.queensu.ca

René M. Stulz
Fisher College of Business, Ohio State University
806A Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz@cob.osu.edu

Hongping Tan
Queen’s University
ptan@business.queensu.ca
1. Introduction

       Does distance reduce the quality of the information investors have? A large literature investigates the

role of distance in investors’ portfolio decisions and investment performance. The largest segment of this

literature focuses on investors who are separated by borders, but a growing segment investigates the role

of distance within countries. Some of the literature concludes that local investors have an advantage. In

the international finance literature, it is often believed that at least part of the home bias can be accounted

for by the information advantage of local investors.1 However, there are also papers that find that foreign

investors who participate in a market can be better informed than local investors. In contrast to most

studies which focus on investor choices and performance, in this paper we investigate directly whether

distance affects the quality of information possessed by one group of market participants, analysts. It is

known that in the U.S. analysts who are closer to the headquarters of a firm have an information

advantage (Malloy, 2005). We find that local analysts have a significant information advantage over

foreign analysts for a large sample of countries.

       We investigate the relation between the precision of earnings forecasts of local analysts and of foreign

analysts for 32 countries for 2001 through 2003. Our main measure of accuracy for an analyst is the price-

scaled absolute forecast error of the analyst minus the average price-scaled absolute forecast error across

analysts for the earnings forecasted. We define the local analyst advantage as the difference between the

accuracy of local analysts and the accuracy of foreign analysts. If the local analysts have better

information, they should predict earnings with more precision. We find that this is the case both for

univariate comparisons and when we control for various determinants of forecast accuracy. The

difference in the average forecast error in univariate comparisons between local and foreign analysts

corresponds to 7.8 percent of the average price-scaled forecast error. When we control for various

determinants of the forecast error, the local advantage falls slightly in most cases.




1
    See Lewis (1999) and Karolyi and Stulz (2003) for reviews of the literature on the home bias.


                                                            2
    Our dataset makes it possible to investigate whether the advantage of local analysts arises because

they belong to local brokerage houses which might have established relationships with the local firms

they follow or because local analysts are located close to the firms they follow. We consider separately

local analysts belonging to local firms and local analysts belonging to foreign firms. We find that there is

no difference between the two groups of analysts.

    There is considerable variation in the magnitude of the advantage of local analysts. Out of 32

countries, the estimate of the advantage of local analysts is positive in 26 countries and significantly

positive in 10 countries. We use this cross-country variation to investigate why local analysts have an

advantage.

    A plausible explanation for the local advantage is that local analysts have access to information

because they are on the spot. They can talk to firm representatives in person. They have access to

information by observing what goes on in firms directly. For instance, if a firm is unusually busy, they

might observe lots of trucks being loaded. Alternatively, they might talk to employees, customers,

competitors. With this explanation, we would expect that the local advantage is inversely related to the

quality of the information put forward by the firm. We find that this is strongly the case. Using the S&P

Transparency and Disclosure index, we find a smaller analyst local advantage for firms that have an index

value above the sample median. Similarly, the analyst local advantage is significantly lower in countries

with above-median accounting transparency. There is no analyst local advantage in countries where

earnings management is less prevalent. Further, the local advantage is significantly lower in countries

where stock returns incorporate more idiosyncratic information. More precisely, the local advantage is

strong in countries where the aggregate stock market return has much explanatory power for individual

stock returns as measured by the R2 measure of Morck, Yeung, and Yu (2000).

    The local advantage is closely tied to the quality of disclosure. More disclosure levels the playing

field for analysts. Generally, though, countries with low disclosure are also countries with weaker

investor protection and poorer financial and economic development. We find that measures of financial

development are not associated with the local advantage. One would think that local analysts would be


                                                     3
better, in that they would have more resources and better training, in countries with greater financial

development. Foreign analysts typically belong to firms from developed countries, so that they might

have an advantage in resources and training when competing with local analysts in countries with poor

financial development. However, if disclosure in such countries is poor, the advantage local analysts

obtain from poor disclosure seems to offset the disadvantage associated with poor financial development.

Measures of investor rights unrelated to enforcement do not seem to affect the advantage of local

analysts.

    Does the local advantage contribute to the home bias? Unfortunately, it is not straightforward to

answer that question. As Healy and Palepu (2001) emphasize, there is both a demand and a supply for

analyst services. Everything else equal, the demand from foreign investors will be less in countries where

foreign ownership is smaller and where capital flows are lower. When the demand for analyst services

from foreign investors is lower, we would expect fewer resources to be allocated to foreign analysts, so

that the local advantage would be higher. Consequently, a non-information based home bias would lead to

a local advantage. At the same time, however, information asymmetries that make local analysts better

informed and foreign investors less well-informed can, at the same time, reduce the portfolio share of a

country in the portfolio of foreign investors and increase the analyst local advantage. To disentangle these

effects, we conduct a test that helps distinguish between an increase in the demand for analyst services

and an information asymmetry effect and conclude that the information asymmetry is the more powerful

effect, so that information asymmetry is a common cause for the analyst local advantage and the home

bias.

    The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we review the existing literature that addresses issues of

distance. In Section 3, we introduce our sample. In Section 4, we present our analyst accuracy measures

and univariate comparisons of forecasting accuracy. Section 5 establishes the existence of an advantage

for local analysts controlling for firm and analyst characteristics. In Section 6, we investigate the

determinants of the analyst local advantage. We turn to the relation between the analyst local advantage

and the home bias in Section 7. Section 8 presents various robustness checks. We conclude in Section 9.


                                                     4
2. Literature review

    It is well-known that the portfolios of investors are biased towards their home country. There is now a

large literature that attempts to explain this home bias. An important strand of this literature emphasizes

differences in information between domestic and foreign investors. Early papers that focus on differences

in information between domestic and foreign investors include Gehrig (1993) and Kang and Stulz (1997).

The assumption that foreign investors are less well-informed is taken as given by Brennan and Cao (1997)

in a well-known article where they focus on the implications of this assumption for equity flows. A

number of papers attempt to identify more directly whether foreign investors have an information

disadvantage. The literature has mixed results. Hau (2001) investigates trading data for professional

traders and shows that local investors perform better than foreign traders. Choe, Kho, and Stulz (2005)

and Dvorak (2005) find that foreigners trade at worse prices in Korea and Indonesia, respectively.

Grinblatt and Keloharju (2000) and Seasholes (2000) argue that better resources and better access to

expertise allows foreign institutions to perform better than domestic institutions. Using daily data for the

16 largest Finnish stocks, Grinblatt and Keloharju (2000) find that over a two-year period foreigners and

domestic financial corporations buy more stocks that perform well over the next 120 trading days than

domestic individual investors. Seasholes (2000) finds that foreign investors buy (sell) ahead of good (bad)

earnings announcements in Taiwan while domestic investors do the opposite. Froot, O’Connell, and

Seasholes (2001) and Froot and Ramadorai (2001) use flow data to show that foreign investors have some

ability to predict returns. These papers are consistent with better information and greater sophistication on

the part of foreign investors. However, evidence on the performance of foreign investors is mixed. For

instance, Shukla and van Inwegen (1995) show that U.K. money managers underperform American

money managers when picking U.S. stocks. Using 18 years of annual data, Kang and Stulz (1997) find no

evidence that foreign investors outperform domestic investors in Japan.

    More recently, a new literature has developed which looks at the impact of distance on portfolio

choice within countries. Coval and Moskowitz (1999), using only U.S. stock returns, provide evidence

that investor location matters, in that mutual fund managers overweight the stocks of firms located closer


                                                     5
to them. In another paper, Coval and Moskowitz (2001) find that mutual fund managers are better at

picking stocks of firms that are closer to where they are than stocks of firms from a more distant location.

Huberman (2001) finds a local concentration in the ownership of the Baby Bells in the U.S. Ivković and

Weisbrenner (2005) use data from a large discount brokerage house and find the striking result that one

out of six U.S. individuals in their sample only invest in companies headquartered within 250 miles from

the household. Recent papers show that social networks are important for stock holdings. For instance,

Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2004) show that mutual fund managers are more likely to hold a particular stock

if other managers in the same city are holding the same stock.

    A growing number of papers investigate the properties of analyst forecasts across countries. As

documented by Chang, Khanna, and Palepu (2000) and others, there is considerable variation across

countries in the accuracy of analysts’ forecasts. These papers show that country characteristics affect the

extent of analyst following and the properties of analyst forecasts. However, these papers seem to provide

contradictory results on how the level of investor protection affects analyst accuracy. For instance, while

Chang, Khanna, and Palepu (2000) find evidence that a country’s legal system helps understand the

accuracy of analysts, Ang and Ciccone (2001) reach the opposite conclusion. Hope (2003) finds that the

enforcement of accounting standards and firm-level disclosure are important determinants of forecast

accuracy.

    Only a handful of papers investigate the relation between distance and analyst performance. Malloy

(2005) finds evidence that, in U.S., analysts located closer to a firm are more accurate. Bacmann and

Bolliger (2001) examine directly the relative performance of analysts from local and foreign brokerage

houses for seven Latin American stock markets. They conclude that foreign analysts outperform local

analysts. Their study has seven Latin American countries. When they compare the mean difference

forecast error between local and foreign analysts, it is not significantly positive for their whole sample,

but it is significantly positive for Mexico and Columbia. In contrast, Orpurt (2004) finds evidence of a

significant local advantage for a sample of 7 European countries. In his study, local analysts are analysts

resident in a country. Hence, these could be domestic or expatriate analysts. He finds that his results are


                                                     6
driven by Germany. However, while Bolliger (2004) focuses on local versus foreign brokerage houses

and finds an advantage for local brokerage houses in Europe, Orpurt (2004) does not find this type of

local advantage. Conroy, Fukuda, and Harris (1997) also find a local brokerage house advantage in Japan.

Finally, Chang (2003) compares specifically the forecasts of foreign and expatriate analysts for

Taiwanese firms. He finds that there is a local advantage, in that expatriate analysts outperform foreign

analysts, but then he also finds that expatriate analysts outperform local analysts working for domestic

firms. This result is consistent with local analysts working for foreign institutions having the advantage of

typically belonging to more sophisticated and resourceful organizations.



3. The sample.

     Our sample construction begins with the list of firms included in the S&P’s Transparency and

Disclosure dataset (hereafter TD dataset). There are several advantages to using the list of firms included

in the TD dataset. First, the dataset covers a large sample of firms from over 40 countries allowing us to

examine the relation between country-level characteristics and the local analyst advantage. Second, the

sample firms in the TD dataset are the largest and better known firms in each of the sample countries and

attract much interest from international investors and analysts. Thus, to the extent that there is a bias in

our sample construction, the bias leads us to understate the analyst local advantage, since this advantage is

likely to be less severe for these firms. Finally, the TD dataset provides a comprehensive firm-level

transparency and disclosure measure, which allows us to examine the impact of firm-level disclosure

practices on the analyst local advantage. 2 The dataset provides objective rankings of the corporate

reporting practices for firms included in the S&P Global 1200 index and an additional 400 companies in

the Standard & Poor's/IFCI emerging markets index. S&P searches company annual reports and standard

regulatory filings for the inclusion of the 98 most common disclosure items that fall into one of three

categories: financial transparency and information disclosure (35 items), board and management structure


2
  Doidge, Karolyi and Stulz (2004), Khanna, Palepu, and Srinivasan (2004), and Durnev and Kim (2005) also use
this data source for their measures of firm disclosure and corporate governance.


                                                     7
and process (35 items), and ownership structure and investor relations (28 items). The sample provided to

us by Standard and Poor’s in September 2004 covers 894 non-U.S firms from 40 countries.

     For the list of firms included in the TD dataset, we obtain annual earnings per share forecasts as well

as actual annual earnings per share from the I/B/E/S international files. I/B/E/S data includes Detail file,

Identifier file, Actual file, and Broker Translation file. We then match each analyst’s name and brokerage

name in I/B/E/S data with entries from Nelson’s Directory of Investment Research by hand.3 Nelson’s

Directory of Investment Research provides information including the analyst’s full name and the address,

which allows us to tell whether the location of the company that the analyst covers is different from the

location of the analyst.4 Once we match each analyst’s name and brokerage name, we obtain the country

location of the analyst and the corresponding country location of the firm that the analyst covers. If the

country location of an analyst is the same as that of the firm he covers, we classify the analyst as a local

analyst. Otherwise, we classify the analyst as a foreign analyst. Local analysts can be further classified

into pure local analysts and expatriate analysts. A pure local analyst is an analyst working for a local

research firm, while an expatriate analyst is an analyst working for a research firm from a foreign country.

     For the matched sample, we impose several restrictions. First, we select the countries where there are

more than 50 firms followed by I/B/E/S analysts in the I/B/E/S dataset. This is to ensure that we select the

countries that attract a reasonable amount of interest from analysts and international investors.5 Second,

we select the most recent earnings forecast for each analyst analyzing each firm in each year. Finally, we

select only the firms that are followed by both local and foreign analysts.6 Without this restriction, we

could pick up the effect of firm characteristics to the extent that local and foreign analysts follow firms

with different characteristics. It is important to note that this restriction implies that, since we are studying



3
  The major difficulty with the matching procedure is that, in some rare cases, we have duplicate matches that have
exactly the same analyst and broker names. We exclude duplicate matches. However, the results are almost identical
when we include these duplicate matches in the final sample.
4
  Each volume of Nelson’s Directory of Investment Research in year t compiles the data using analyst information
as of November in year t-1. We classify an analyst’s location for year t using information in the Nelson’s Directory
starting in November of year t through October of year t+1.
5
  We drop six countries: Colombia, Greece, Pakistan, Peru, Turkey, and Venezuela.
6
  The results without imposing these restrictions are similar. We provide the robustness tests in Table 9.


                                                         8
the local advantage only for firms which are also followed by foreign analysts, our analysis is likely to

understate the extent of the local advantage across all firms since one would expect that foreign analysts

would stay away from firms where the local advantage is highest. With this restriction, we lose 155 firms.

Eight of these firms are only covered by foreign analysts and the rest are only covered by local analysts.

Adding these firms to our main regression does not affect our conclusion as to the existence of analyst

local advantage.

     Table 1 provides data on our sample. Our Standard & Poor’s TD scores to quantify firm-level

information disclosure are based on information as of June 2002. While it seems reasonable to assume

that data reported at that time might still describe firm disclosure policies for a few years before, it would

be less reasonable to make this assumption going back further in the past. We therefore use 2001-2003 as

our sample years. Our final sample contains 2,563 local and 1,920 foreign analysts providing a total of

20,425 annual earnings forecasts on 611 firms from 32 countries. The table shows that, not surprisingly,

there is considerable variation across countries in the number of firms in our sample. While the smallest

number of firms is 2 for Austria, the largest is 118 for the U.K. The number of local and foreign analysts

also varies substantially. While Austria has 3 local analysts, the U.K. has 690. The variation in the

number of foreign analysts is also considerable, with South Africa having 11 foreign analysts and France

having 526.

     The last column of Table 1 shows that the ratio of the number of foreign analysts to the number of

distinct analysts varies sharply across countries as well. The lowest ratio is 0.12 for Japan and the highest

is 0.91 for China. China has 67 foreign analysts in the sample, but only 7 local analysts. Only 10 countries

have a ratio below 0.5. Consequently, in many of our sample countries there are more foreign analysts

than local analysts.



4. Analyst precision: Univariate comparisons of local, expatriate, and foreign analysts

     Forecast accuracy is one of the most important dimensions along which financial analysts and their

brokerage houses compete. The extant literature mainly uses four proxies for forecast accuracy and/or


                                                      9
forecast error. Unlike studies based on U.S samples, we do not use absolute forecast error as a dependent

variable since our sample includes analyst forecasts made in a variety of currencies. The magnitude of

absolute forecasts errors in small currency units (such as Italian lira) would be much higher than those

using large currency units. Also, applying exchange rates to convert all of the forecasts into a single

currency would introduce noise in our estimates due to exchange rate fluctuations. We use four accuracy

variables and follow Clement and Tse (2005) and Malloy (2005) in constructing these variables. These

variables are:



       Proportional Mean Absolute Forecast Error (pmafeijt): It is defined as the ratio of the difference

between the absolute forecast error (AFEijt) by analyst i for firm j at time t and the mean absolute forecast

error (avgAFEjT) of all of the forecasts for firm j for fiscal year T to the mean absolute forecast error

avgAFEjT. From this, it follows that pmafeijt = (AFEijt-avgAFEjT)/avgAFEjT. A positive pmafeijt indicates

that the absolute forecast error AFEijt by analyst i for firm j at time t is larger than the average absolute

forecast error of all of the forecasts for firm j for the same fiscal year T.

       Proportional Mean Price-Scaled Absolute Forecast Error (pmafepijt): The definition is the same

as the definition of pmafe, except that AFEijt is scaled by the latest monthly stock price available from

Compustat and is denoted as AFEPijt.7 Consequently, pmafepijt=(AFEPijt-avgAFEPjT)/avgAFEPjT.

       Demeaned Absolute Price-Scaled Forecast Error (dafepijt): To reduce heteroskedasticity we

follow Clement (1999) to demean AFEPijt by the mean price-scaled absolute forecast error for firm i in

the same fiscal year T, i.e., dafepijt=AFEPijt-avgAFEPjT.

       Range (rangeijt): The ratio of the difference between the highest AFEPijt for firm j, fiscal year T

(denoted MaxAFEPjT) and the AFEPijt considered to the range of AFEPijt for firm j and fiscal year T, i.e.,

rangeijt =(MaxAFEPjT-AFEPijt)/ (MaxAFEPjT - MinAFEPjT).




7
    We obtain similar result when use monthly stock prices from I/B/E/S summary files.


                                                          10
     Since the first three dependent variables are forecast error proxies, we multiply each of them by

minus one to transform them into forecast accuracy proxies. Consequently, an increase in our dependent

variables means that the forecast becomes more precise. Table 2 provides definitions of all the variables

used in the paper.

     Table 3 provides mean and median values of the accuracy measures. We focus on the first row. The

value of pmafep for pure local analysts is obtained as follows. The sample average absolute forecast error

(avgAFEP) is 0.0232016. The average absolute forecast error for pure local analysts is 0.02267. The

value of pmafep of 0.023 is equal to the difference in average absolute forecast error of pure local

analysts and the sample average as a fraction of the sample average, (0.0232016 – 0.02267)/0.0232016.

The difference in forecast accuracy between pure local and foreign analysts expressed as percentage of

the sample average absolute forecast error is equal to 6.5% (corresponding to 0.023 – (-0.042) in the

Table), while the difference in forecast accuracy between expatriate analysts and foreign analysts is 8.7%.

Table 3 shows that, whether we use means or medians, there is never a significant difference in accuracy

between pure local analysts and expatriates. For the first three accuracy measures, the pure local and the

expatriate analysts are more accurate than foreign analysts. For the last accuracy measure, however, there

is no significant difference between local analysts and foreign analysts whether we use means or medians.

     The results of Table 3 suggest that local analysts generally have an advantage over foreign analysts.

One should be careful, however, in interpreting Table 3 because it does not control for forecast horizon

and it is well-known that forecast horizon is an important determinant of accuracy (see, for instance,

Clement, 1999). Further, stale forecasts could lead to large forecast errors that would not be instructive

for our study. In the following, we eliminate the worst 1% forecast errors to ameliorate this problem.

While none of our main conclusions is affected by this procedure, some subsidiary results are because our

estimates are less precise when we include all observations.

     We also report data on the experience of analysts with a firm. We measure firm-specific experience

as the number of years between the first forecast on the firm by the analyst and the forecast considered in

the analysis. We find that local analysts have more firm-specific experience. On average, local analysts


                                                    11
have followed a firm almost half a year longer than foreign analysts. This is not surprising in an era of

financial globalization, since we would expect more attention to be devoted to firms by foreigners over

time. However, this raises the question of whether the local analyst advantage is simply due to a

difference in experience. While local analysts are more experienced compared to foreign analysts for

local firms, foreign analysts have as much experience as local analysts in the analyst profession. We

compute the number of years from the first I/B/E/S forecast of an analyst (for any firm, whether in our

sample or not) to the current forecast and find that there is no economically significant difference between

domestic and foreign analysts. Finally, we measure the forecast horizon. It could be that local analysts

have an advantage simply because the forecast we consider is closer to the earnings announcement date.

We therefore measure the time period between the forecast and the earnings report date on I/B/E/S. We

find that there is no significant difference in forecast horizon between local and foreign analysts.

     Information asymmetry varies with firm size. We report mean and median market capitalizations of

the firms followed by the three groups of analysts. On average, local analysts do not follow larger or

smaller firms, but their median firm size is significantly smaller. To the extent that one would expect

forecast precision to increase with firm size (Ang and Ciccone, 2001, confirm this relation across

countries), it follows that the firm size difference, if not controlled for, could lead to the spurious result

that foreign analysts have an advantage over local analysts. Another reason that foreigners might have an

advantage is that they come from much larger organizations. The median number of analysts for the

brokerage firm of a pure local analyst is 37, while it is 124 for the brokerage firm of a foreign analyst.

However, local analysts benefit from being more specialized. A typical local analyst follows one country,

his own. In contrast, a typical foreign analyst follows firms in three countries. Foreign analysts also

follow more industries than local analysts. However, foreign analysts are not at a complete disadvantage.

They cover fewer firms than local analysts, but produce more forecasts per firm.




                                                     12
5. Can the analyst local advantage be explained by analyst or firm characteristics?

    We saw in the previous section that local analysts differ from foreign analysts in a number of ways

that are likely to affect the precision of their forecasts. Further, local analysts provide forecasts for smaller

firms, which would affect their performance adversely compared to foreign analysts. To evaluate whether

local analysts have an advantage, it is important to control for analyst and firm characteristics. After all, it

could be that local analysts offer more precise forecasts because they are more specialized and not

because they are local.

    In Table 4, we report estimates of multiple regressions. The regression t-statistics take into account

the firm-level clustering. We also demean all our independent variables by the firm/year averages to

reduce heteroskedasticity. In the first regression, we regress the accuracy measure, the proportional mean

price-scaled absolute forecast error multiplied by -1, on the number of analysts from the analyst’s

brokerage firm, on the forecast horizon, and on the number of industries the analyst covers. We expect

precision to be higher if an analyst comes from a larger firm, to be lower if the forecast horizon is longer,

and to be lower if he covers more industries. The only variable that is significant is the horizon. We find

that a longer horizon reduces the accuracy substantially.

    In regression (2), we add a dummy variable for local analysts. This dummy variable is highly

significant. In the next regression, we add variables for the firm-specific experience of the analyst and

career experience. Consistent with Jacob et al. (1999), Hong et al. (2000), and Bolliger (2004), there is no

general learning effect after we control for firm-specific experience. While analysts with more firm-

specific experience are more accurate, analysts with more career experience are less accurate. It could be

that an analyst with more general experience covers more firms and devotes less resources to each firm he

analyzes. Controlling for these analyst characteristics does not affect our estimate of the local analyst

advantage. Note that our independent variables are demeaned by firm/year averages. Thus, when fixing

independent variables other than the local dummy at their mean values (which are zeros), the predicted

value of forecast accuracy increases from 0.017 (intercept) for foreign investors to 0.060 (intercept plus

the local dummy estimate) for local investors. Even when we control for various determinants of forecast


                                                       13
accuracy, the average forecast accuracy of local analysts therefore exceeds the average forecast accuracy

of foreign analysts by 5.3% of the average absolute forecast error. Finally, in regression (4) we consider

separately the advantage of pure local analysts and expatriate analysts. There is no difference in the

estimate of the advantage for these two types of analysts. Consequently, in the following we focus only

on local analysts and do not make a distinction between pure local and expatriate analysts.

    In Table 5, we estimate regression (4) of Table 4 on subsamples. First, we split the sample between

forecasts made after the fiscal year end and those made before. This is an important distinction in that

access to insiders would make the largest difference in precision for forecasts made after the fiscal year

end. After the fiscal year end, insiders will have a very good sense of how the numbers will look like. If

they tip off their favorite analysts, these analysts should have a substantial advantage in precision. We

find that there is a local advantage for both subsamples. However, the point estimate of the local

advantage is higher (but not significantly so) for forecasts made after the year end. Table 5 also

distinguishes between forecasts made in separate years. We find that the local advantage is significant in

2001 at the 5% level and in 2003 at the 10% level, but only marginally so in 2002 (the p-value is 0.103).

    The second panel of Table 5 reports estimates of the local advantage per country. There is substantial

variation in the number of observations across countries, so that it is not surprising that the precision of

the estimates varies across countries. Nevertheless, the estimate for the local advantage is positive in all

countries but six. There is no country where the local advantage is significantly negative, but the local

advantage is significantly positive in ten countries at the 10% level or better. We discussed in the

introduction the work of Bacman and Bolliger (2001). They have two countries where the local advantage

(using our language) is significantly negative, Mexico and Columbia. Only Mexico is in our sample.

Strikingly, Mexico is the country in our sample where the local advantage is the lowest – it is negative

with a t-statistic of -1.58. It follows that their results are similar to those of our paper.

     We have established that the local advantage is robust to controlling for various analyst characteristic

variables. We now investigate whether the size of the analyst local advantage depends on the information

environment of the firm. In other words, are local analysts better for firms where information


                                                        14
asymmetries are greater? If this were the case, then an important component of the local advantage would

be the ability of local analysts to obtain information that is not readily available to analysts outside the

country.

     We use three different proxies for the firm’s information environment. The first regression in Table 6

uses the Transparency and Disclosure score (TD score) of firms as a measure of the information

environment. Firms with a higher score release more information. We would therefore expect the local

advantage to fall with the TD score. We construct a dummy variable that takes value 1 if the TD score of

the firm is above the median score of our sample firms and then create an interaction variable with the

dummy for local analysts. A significant negative coefficient on the interaction dummy means that an

increase in the transparency level is associated with a lower local advantage. We find that the

transparency itself does not affect the precision of forecasts. However, it does affect the local advantage

significantly. The local advantage of the more transparent firms is lower by 0.038 than the local

advantage of the other firms, so that the local analyst advantage roughly drops in half when one moves

from a less transparent firm to a more transparent firm. In the next regression, we use a dummy variable

for firms with market capitalization above the median market capitalization in our sample. Though

analyst precision is higher for larger firms, firm size does not affect the local advantage at all.

     The last regression in Table 6 contrasts the local advantage for purely domestic firms and for firms

which are cross-listed in the U.S. Firms cross-listed in the U.S. have a more transparent information

environment.8 They are also subject to many U.S. laws and regulations that protect investors.9 Lang, Lins,

and Miller (2003) document that cross-listings are associated with an increase in analyst forecast

precision. We confirm their result in our sample. In addition, however, we find that a cross-listing sharply

reduces the local advantage. The local advantage of a purely domestic firm is 0.062, but that advantage

drops to 0.026 for firms that are cross-listed in the U.S. Nevertheless, the local advantage is still

significant for cross-listed firms.

8
  Bailey, Karolyi, and Salva (2005) investigate the impact of cross-listings on the informational environment of
firms.
9
  See Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2004).


                                                       15
6. Do country characteristics help explain the analyst local advantage?

    There is a robust local advantage. This advantage is strongly related to the firms’ information

environment. The information environment differs across countries. One would therefore expect the local

advantage to differ across countries. There are other reasons for the information advantage to differ across

countries, however. In Table 7, we explore the relation between the local advantage and a large number of

country characteristics which we would expect a priori to influence the local advantage. All the

regressions in that Table have the control variables from Table 5, but we do not report the estimates for

the coefficients on these variables. We focus on the interaction of the local analyst dummy variable with

the country characteristic we are interested in. A significant positive coefficient on the interaction means

that an increase in the country characteristics is associated with a higher local advantage. In all

regressions, we construct a dummy variable that takes a value of 1 if the value of the country

characteristic variable (other than binary variables) is above the median value of our sample countries and

then interact that variable with the local analyst dummy.

    In the first regression, we investigate the language barrier. Foreign analysts are likely to be fluent in

English. We would expect them to be more at a disadvantage for firms in countries where English is not

the main language. We use the CIA World Factbook to identify countries where English is the official

language. The local advantage is weaker in countries where English is the official language. While the

coefficient on the interacted variable is negative, it is insignificant.

    We then turn to measures of economic and financial development. The first measure is GDP per

capita. It plays no role in the local advantage. Next, we divide the countries into developed and

developing countries. There is no evidence that the local advantage differs between the two types of

countries. The development of the equity market does not affect the local advantage significantly. We

would expect financial markets to be less developed if state ownership in the financial sector is more

important. We use a dummy variable that takes value 1 if state ownership of banks in a country is higher

than for the median, using the data from Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2003). The interaction has a positive

sign, but it is only marginally significant. Finally, we use a measure of openness of the financial sector.


                                                        16
From the same data source, we construct a variable that takes value equal to 1 if foreign ownership of

banks exceeds the median. Again, this variable does not help explain the local advantage. While none of

our economic and financial development variables are statistically significant, some of the coefficients

imply that greater economic and financial development might be associated with an economically

significant reduction in the local advantage.

    Dahlquist, Pinkowitz, Stulz, and Williamson (2003) point out portfolio investors can only hold the

shares not held by corporate insiders. Consequently, foreign investors have a lower demand for analyst

services for stocks in countries where insiders have a larger proportional stake. We use next a dummy

variable that takes value 1 if the average ownership of the three largest shareholders for the 10 largest

non-financial domestic private firms in a country is above the median of the sample countries using the

data from La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (1998). The interaction with this dummy variable is

significant and has a positive coefficient as expected.

    The supply of analyst services should increase with the importance of institutional investors in an

economy since these services are primarily directed towards institutional investors. We find that the

precision of analyst forecasts is significantly higher in countries where assets in so-called pooled

investment schemes to GDP (as measured by Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (1999)) exceed the

median in our sample. At the same time, the local advantage is significantly lower in these countries.

    Regressions (9) through (14) control for proxies for investor rights, respect for property rights, and

enforcement. There is no clear prediction for whether protection of investor rights and of property rights

increases the local advantage or reduces it. While poor investor protection is expected to increase the

local advantage through several channels, there are also channels through which it could reduce it. With

poor protection of property rights, transparency and good governance can be costly for firms (see Stulz,

2005). One would expect local analysts to have an advantage when firms are less transparent. Further,

poor protection of property rights affects foreign investors typically more because they are often easier to

expropriate, so that their holdings are smaller. With poor investor protection, an important determinant of

reported earnings is the extent to which insiders can affect reported earnings adversely by expropriating


                                                     17
minority shareholders and other investors. One would expect local analysts to have an advantage in

ferreting out tunneling by being on the spot. However, at the same time, it is also possible that local

analysts are less independent than foreign analysts in countries where protection of investor rights is

weak, in which case foreign analysts might provide more accurate forecasts than local analysts.

    Our first proxy for investor protection is the legal origin variable from La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes,

Shleifer, and Vishny (LLSV, 1998). Using a dummy variable that takes value 0 for common law countries

and 1 for other countries, we find that there is no relation between legal origin and the local advantage in

that the interaction between the local dummy and the legal origin dummy is insignificant. The next

regression uses the anti-director index of LLSV. The coefficient on the interaction is not significant and

its economic significance is trivial. In regression (11), we use a dummy variable that takes value 1 if the

index of the respect for property rights from LLSV is above the median in our sample. Again, the

interaction is not significant. La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2005) use an index of public

enforcement. We construct a dummy variable that gives a value of 1 to the countries that have an above-

median value of this index. The interaction with that dummy variable is not significant. It is worth noting,

however, that the economic significance of the interactions with the property and public enforcement

dummy variables is substantial since the interaction seems to cut the local advantage in half. The final

proxy for investor rights is a dummy variable that takes value 1 if class actions are available in a

prospectus liability case. We use the data from La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2005). The

interaction is significant and negative. The magnitude of the estimate on the interaction term is also

economically large enough to cut the local advantage by more than 70%. Regression (14) uses the

measure of enforcement of insider trading laws of Bushman, Piotroski and Smith (2005). We find that the

enforcement of insider trading laws is not related to analyst precision or to the analyst local advantage.

    We then turn to variables that measure the quality and extent of disclosures. We expect local analysts

to have more of an advantage in countries where the quality and extent of disclosures are poorer because

they benefit more from informal sources of information acquisition. Our first measure of the quality of

disclosures is a proxy for earnings management. This proxy is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the index of


                                                     18
earnings management of a country from Leuz, Nanda, and Wysocki (2003) is above the median of the

countries in our sample. We find that the local advantage is sharply higher in countries with more

earnings management. The local advantage is not significant in countries with below-median earnings

management. We use next a dummy variable equal to 1 if a country’s index of financial disclosures from

the Center for International Financial Analysis and Research (CIFAR) is above the median for our

sample. We use the data from Bushman, Piotroski, and Smith (2005). We find that the local advantage is

significantly weaker in countries with higher disclosure according to that index. Note also that analysts

forecasts are generally more (less) accurate in countries with a higher (lower) disclosure level.

    Finally, we use a measure of functional efficiency of the capital markets, the R2 measure introduced

by Morck, Yeung, and Yu (2000). This measure is the average R2 of market model regressions for a

country. If the market return explains much of the return of individual securities, it means that

idiosyncratic information about firms does not get incorporated into stocks well – or, alternatively, that

idiosyncratic information is not important. A high R2 means that country specific information is more

important for stock returns. Residents may have more information about these factors. For instance,

Kaufmann, Mehrez, and Schmukler (2003) find that local managers have useful information in predicting

future movements in exchange rates. We find that the local advantage is significantly higher in countries

with a high R2 and analyst forecasts are less accurate in these countries.

    The results in Table 7 show that the local advantage is less in countries where firms disclose more,

manipulate earnings less, the stock market is more functionally efficient, and institutional investors are

more active. However, measures of financial development and measures of investor protection do not

seem to have a significant association with the size of the local advantage.



7. Foreign investors and the local analyst advantage

    It would make little sense for foreign analysts to follow firms in a country if foreign investors cannot

invest in these firms. One would therefore expect greater supply of analyst services by foreign firms when

foreign investors are more interested in a country and hold more equity from that country. If analysts


                                                     19
become more accurate when the demand for their services increases, perhaps because they command

more resources, we would expect the local advantage to fall as the portfolio share of foreign investors in a

country increases. At the same time, however, if information asymmetry between local and foreign

investors is a determinant of the home bias, we would expect it to increase the analyst local advantage as

well. In this case, the information asymmetry would contribute both to the home bias and to the analyst

local advantage.

    We use four proxies for foreign interest using data for U.S. investors. The first two proxies use data

for both equity and debt, while the other two use only equity data. The first variable is a dummy variable

that takes value 1 if U.S. holdings of equity and debt scaled by local market GDP are above the median of

the countries in our sample. We use the TIC data from the U.S. Treasury. We find that this variable is

extremely significant, as shown in regression (1) of Table 8. Essentially, there is little local advantage left

for countries where the dummy variable takes a value of 1. Interestingly, analyst forecasts in general are

more precise in countries with greater holdings by U.S. investors. This could be evidence that markets in

which U.S. investors invest more are more functionally efficient. We also construct a dummy variable

that takes value 1 if equity and debt flows scaled by GDP are above the median for a country. Again, the

local advantage is significantly lower for countries where this dummy variable takes value 1 (regression

(2) of Table 8). It follows that there is strong evidence that the analyst local advantage is strongest in

countries that draw the least interest from U.S. investors.

    We now turn to the two proxies that use equity data. The first proxy, used in regression (3), is the

fraction of the equity market capitalization of a country held by U.S. investors. We find that the accuracy

of analyst forecasts generally increases as U.S. investors have a greater presence in a market. Further, the

analyst local advantage is negatively related to the presence of U.S. investors in the market. The second

proxy, used in regression (4), is the share of a country’s equities in the portfolio of U.S. investors. We

find that the accuracy of analysts is not related to that proxy, but the analyst local advantage falls as a

country’s shares become more important in the portfolio of U.S. investors.




                                                      20
       A possible issue with our results is that U.S. investors might invest more in more transparent firms

since there is some evidence in the literature that US investors invest more in better governed firms (see,

for instance, Leuz, Lins, and Warnock, 2005). In this case, controlling directly for governance proxies

would eliminate the effect we uncover. In unreported tests, we include interaction variables with both U.S.

holdings and firm-level transparency variable (TD scores) in the explanatory variables. We find that the

relation between U.S. holdings and the local advantage is robust to allowing for a relation between the TD

score and the local advantage.

       So far, we have shown that the greater the U.S. investor participation in a country, the lower the

analyst local advantage. To try to understand better whether the analyst local advantage causes the home

bias or vice versa, we use the following identification strategy. If the home bias causes the analyst local

advantage, then any increase in the investments of U.S. investors in a country should be associated with a

lower analyst local advantage irrespective of why this increase takes place. We can therefore decompose

the ownership of shares of U.S. investors in a country into two components, one which is related to the

home bias and one which is not. Absent the home bias, U.S. investors would hold the world market float

portfolio.10 The portfolio they hold is the world market float portfolio minus the home bias component,

which we define as the difference between a country’s share in the world market float portfolio and the

country’s share in the portfolio of U.S. investors (the DIFF variable in the regression). Keeping the home

bias component constant, an increase in a country’s share in the world market portfolio (the WORLD

RATIO variable) increases the demand for analyst services by foreign investors and hence should

decrease the analyst local advantage if the causation running from the U.S. investor holdings to analyst

local advantage is important. Regression (5) shows a regression where the interaction variable is a

country’s share in the world market float portfolio. We find that neither analyst precision nor the analyst

local advantage is related to that variable. Regression (6) uses the DIFF variable as the interaction

variable instead. In this case, the analyst precision is negatively related to DIFF. Further, the analyst local

advantage is significantly higher when DIFF is higher (that is, when the home bias is higher). If the

10
     See Dahlquist, Pinkowitz, Stulz, and Williamson (2003).


                                                          21
analyst local advantage is driven by the demand for analyst services by foreign investors, we should find

that DIFF and WORLD RATIO have identical coefficients. This is not the case. To investigate this

directly, we estimate a regression where we include both the WORLD RATIO and DIFF. Strikingly, the

coefficient on DIFF is much larger in absolute value than the coefficient on WORLD RATIO in the

interactions. Equality of the absolute values of the coefficients is rejected with a p-value of 0.0064.

Further, only the interaction with DIFF is significant. All of these results are consistent with causation

from information asymmetry between local and foreign residents to the home bias and the analyst local

advantage, but not with causation from the home bias to the analyst local advantage.

    Our interpretation of the results implies that holdings by U.S. investors in a country should be

negatively related to the size of the analyst local advantage. We find that this is the case. When we regress

the portfolio share of a country for U.S. investors on the country’s share in the world float market

portfolio in 2002 and on our estimates of the analyst local advantage estimated for each country in Table

5, we obtain the following results (p-values in parentheses):



U.S. portfolio share = 0.333 + 0.967*World float market portfolio share – 2.240*Analyst local advantage

                       (0.287) (0.000)                                      (0.074)



The adjusted R-square of the regression is 0.935. The coefficient on analyst local advantage is significant

and negative as expected. We also estimated the regression omitting the U.K. and Japan. Our conclusions

are unchanged.



8. Robustness tests

    We now investigate further the extent to which our estimate of the local advantage is reliable. As

discussed in Section 3, we have four measures of accuracy. Except in Table 3, we used only one of these

measures. Table 9 estimates regression (3) of Table 4 for each of the three accuracy measures we

estimated but have not used so far in our regressions. Because the scale of the measures differs, we would


                                                     22
expect the local advantage estimate to depend on the accuracy measure used. However, we see that the

local advantage is significant irrespective of the measure we use.

    As explained in Section 3, we restrict our analysis to firms that are followed by both local and foreign

analysts. To evaluate how our estimate of the local advantage is affected by that restriction, we extend our

sample to include firms that are followed by only one type of analysts. Again, the significance of our

result is not affected. The regressions reported so far use the latest forecast of each analyst. Regression (5)

extends the sample to include all analyst forecasts during our sample period. We see that the local

advantage remains significant when we add these additional forecasts.

    Finally, in regression (6), we add additional control variables that might be related to accuracy. We

include counts for the number of forecasts made, the number of firms covered, and the number of

countries covered by each analyst. Adding these variables does not affect our results and does not add to

the explanatory power of our regressions.



9. Conclusion

    In this paper, we show that there is a significant analyst local advantage in a sample of 32 countries.

This analyst local advantage holds when we control for analyst characteristics as well as firm

characteristics. However, it varies substantially across countries. The analyst local advantage is strong in

countries where disclosures are weaker, where institutional investors are less important, and where

corporate ownership is more concentrated. It is also strong in countries that are underweighted in U.S.

portfolios, so that the underlying information asymmetries that lead to the analyst local advantage also

contribute to the home bias.




                                                      23
References

Ang, James S., and Stephen J. Ciccone, 2001, International differences in analyst forecast properties,
Working paper, University of New Hampshire.

Bacmann, Jean-Francois, and Guido Bolliger, 2001, Who are the best? Local versus foreign analysts on
the Latin American stock markets, Working paper, University of Neuchâtel, Neuchâtel, Switzerland.

Bailey, Warren, G. Andrew Karolyi, and Carolina Salva, 2005, The economic consequences of increased
disclosure: Evidence from international cross-listings, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Barth, James, Gerard Caprio, and Ross Levine, 2003, Bank regulation and supervision: What works best?
Journal of Financial Intermediation, forthcoming.

Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, and Ross. Levine, 1999, A New Database on Financial
Development and Structure, Working paper, World Bank, Washington, D.C.

Bolliger, Guido, 2004, The characteristics of individual analysts' forecasts in Europe, Journal of Banking
and Finance 28, 2283-2309.

Brennan, Michael J., and H. Henry Cao, 1997, International portfolio investment flows, Journal of
Finance 52, 1851–1880.

Bushman, Robert M., Joseph D. Piotroski and Abbie J. Smith, 2005, Insider trading restrictions and
analysts’ incentives to follow firms, Journal of Finance 60, 35-66.

Chang, Charles, 2003, Information footholds: expatriate analysts in an emerging market, Working paper,
Haas School of Business, U. C. Berkeley.

Chang, James J., Tarun Khanna, and Krishna Palepu, 2000, Analyst activity around the world, Harvard
Business School strategy working paper series.

Choe, Hyuk, Bong-Chan Kho and Rene Stulz, 2005, Do domestic investors have an edge? The trading
experience of foreign investors in Korea, Review of Financial Studies 18, 795-829.

Clement, Michael B., 1999, Analyst forecast accuracy: Do ability, resources, and portfolio complexity
matter?, Journal of Accounting and Economics 27, 285–303.

Clement, Michael B., and Senyo Y. Tse, 2005, Financial analyst characteristics and herding behavior in
forecasting, Journal of Finance 60, (1): 307-341.

Conroy, Robert M., Yujiro Fukuda and Robert S. Harris, 1997, Securities houses and earnings forecasts in
Japan: What makes for an accurate prediction?, Financial Analysts Journal 53, (4): 29-40.

Coval, Joshua D., and Tobias J. Moskowitz, 1999, Home bias at home: Local equity preference in
domestic portfolios, Journal of Finance 54, 2045–2073.




                                                   24
Coval, Joshua D., and Tobias J. Moskowitz, 2001, The geography of investment: Informed trading and
asset prices, Journal of Political Economy 4, 811–841.

Dahlquist, Magnus, Lee Pinkowitz, René M. Stulz, and Rohan Williamson, 2003, Corporate governance
and the home bias, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 38, 87-110.

Doidge, Craig, G. Andrew Karolyi, and René M. Stulz, 2004, Why do countries matter so much for
corporate governance?, ECGI working paper series in finance, ECGI.

Dvorak, Tomas, 2005, Do domestic investors have an information advantage? Evidence from Indonesia,
Journal of Finance 60, 817-839.

Durnev, Art, and E. Han Kim, 2004, To steal or not to steal: firm attributes, legal environment, and
valuation, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Froot, Kenneth K., Paul. O’Connell, and Mark Seasholes, 2001, The portfolio flows of international
investors, Journal of Financial Economics 59, 151-193.

Froot, Kenneth K., and Tarun Ramadorai, 2001, The information content of international portfolio flows,
unpublished working paper, Harvard Business School, Cambridge, MA.

Gehrig, Thomas., 1993, An information based explanation of the domestic bias in international equity
investment, Scandinavian Journal of Economics 95, 97-109.

Grinblatt, Mark, and Matti Keloharju, 2000, The investment behavior and performance of various
investor types: A study of Finland’s unique data set, Journal of Financial Economics 55, 43-67.

Hau, Harald, 2001, Location matters: An examination of trading profits, Journal of Finance 56, 1959-
1983.

Healy, Paul M., and Krishna G. Palepu, 2001, Information asymmetry, corporate disclosure, and the
capital markets: A review of the empirical disclosure literature, Journal of Accounting and Economics 31,
405-440.

Hong, Harrison, Jeffrey D. Kubik, and Jeremy C. Stein, 2004, Thy neighbor’s portfolio: word-of-mouth
effects in the holdings and trades of money managers, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Hope, Ole-Kristian, 2003, Disclosure practices, enforcement of accounting standards, and analysts'
forecast accuracy: An international study, Journal of Accounting Research 41, (2), 235-272.

Huberman, Gur, 2001, Familiarity breeds investment, Review of Financial Studies 14, 659–680.

Ivkovic, Zoran and Scott Weisbenner, 2005, Local does as local is: information content of the geography
of individual investors common stock investments, Journal of Finance 60, 267-306.

Jacob, John, Thomas. Lys, and Margaret Neale, 1999, Expertise in forecasting performance of security
analysts, Journal of accounting Economics 28, 51-82.




                                                   25
Kang, Jun-Koo. and René M. Stulz, 1997, Why is there a home bias? An analysis of foreign portfolio
equity ownership in Japan, Journal of Financial Economics 46, 3-28.

Khanna, Tarun, Krishna G. Palepu, and Suraj Srinivasan, 2004, Disclosure practices of foreign companies
interacting with U.S. markets, Journal of Accounting Research 42, 475-508.

Karolyi, G. Andrew, and René M. Stulz, 2003, Are assets priced locally or globally?, in G.
Constantinides, M. Harris and R. M. Stulz, eds.: The Handbook of the Economics of Finance, North-
Holland Publishers, New York, NY.

Kaufmann, Daniel, Gil Mehrez, and Sergio L. Schmukler, 2003, Predicting currency fluctuations and
crises: Do resident firms have an informational advantage?, World Bank Policy Research Paper No. 2259,
World Bank, Washington, D.C.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 1998, Law and
Finance, Journal of Political Economy 106, 1113-1155.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, 2005, What works in Securities laws,
Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Lang, Mark H., Lins, Karl V., and Darius Miller, 2003, ADRs., analysts, and accuracy: Does cross-listing
in the U.S. improve a firm’s information environment and increase market value?, Journal of Accounting
Research 41, 317-346.

Leuz, Christian, Karl V. Linz, and Francis E. Warnock, 2005, Do foreigners invest less in poorly
governed firms?, unpublished working paper, Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
PA.

Leuz, Christian, Dhananjay Nanda, and Peter D. Wysocki, 2003, Earnings management and investor
protection: an international comparison, Journal of Financial Economics 69, 505–527.

Lewis, Karen K, 1999, Trying to explain home bias in equities and consumption, Journal of Economic
Literature 37, 571-608.

Malloy, Christopher J., 2005, The Geography of equity analysis, Journal of Finance 60, 719-755.

Morck, Randall, Bernard Yeung and Wayne Yu, 2000, The Information content of stock markets: why do
emerging markets have synchronous stock price movements?, Journal of Financial Economics 58, 215-
260.

Orpurt, Steven, 2004, Local analyst earnings forecast advantages in Europe, Working paper, University of
Chicago.

Seasholes, Mark, 2000, Smart foreign traders in emerging markets, Working paper, Harvard University.

Stulz, René M., 2005, The limits of financial globalization, Journal of Finance 60, 1595-1638.




                                                   26
Table 1 Distribution of sample firms and analysts by country and analyst group
The table shows the number of firms, pure local, expatriate, and foreign analysts in each country. The sample firms are the intersection of I/B/E/S for non-U.S.
firms, Nelson’s Directories of Investment Research, and Standard and Poor’s Transparency and Disclosure. The final sample contains 1,020 pure local, 1,563
expatriate, and 1,920 foreign analysts covering 611 firms from 32 countries over the period of 2001 to 2003. Local analysts are analysts located in the same
country as their covered firms, while foreign analysts are located in a different country from the firms they cover. Local analysts are furthered classified into pure
local and expatriate analysts. Pure local analysts work for local research firms, while expatriate analysts work for research firms from foreign countries. The
number of analysts across countries does not add up to the total number since an analyst (particularly a foreign analyst) can analyze several firms in different
countries. Similarly, the number of local and foreign analysts does not add up to the total number of distinct analysts since an analyst can switch her brokerage
firm across borders.

                                                                                    Number of analysts
    Country                 No. of firms                                            Local analysts (B)                    Total number of               A/C
                                                    Foreign (A)
                                                                             Pure local             Expatriate           distinct analyst (C)
    Argentina                      7                      25                       2                       2                      29                    0.86
    Australia                     16                      27                      20                      77                    123                     0.22
    Austria                        2                      24                       2                       1                      27                    0.89
    Belgium                        6                      70                      13                       9                      92                    0.76
    Brazil                        23                      85                      16                      27                    126                     0.66
    Chile                          7                      25                       1                       3                      29                    0.86
    China                          9                      67                       0                       7                      74                    0.91
    Denmark                        6                      99                       7                      26                    132                     0.75
    Finland                        4                      80                      10                      10                    100                     0.80
    France                        47                     526                     153                    130                     806                     0.65
    Germany                       31                     454                      94                      64                    611                     0.74
    Hong Kong                     17                      26                      37                    141                     202                     0.13
    India                         17                      25                      10                      53                      86                    0.29
    Indonesia                     11                      23                       0                      19                      42                    0.55
    Ireland                        3                      43                       8                       1                      51                    0.84
    Italy                         26                     250                      32                      56                    335                     0.75
    Japan                         61                      18                      25                    108                     146                     0.12
    Korea                         13                      13                       7                      27                      47                    0.28


                                                                                 27
Malaysia       23      63      27      53     140    0.45
Mexico         14      72       7      11      90    0.80
Netherlands    23     405      69      32     503    0.80
Norway          4      32       5      23      60    0.53
Philippines     8      34       0      26      60    0.57
Portugal        7      87      16       2     105    0.83
Singapore       9      40      28      55     123    0.33
South Africa     3     11       1      16      28    0.39
Spain          17     208       8      56     271    0.77
Sweden         18     217      47      39     298    0.73
Switzerland    17     300      61      11     372    0.81
Taiwan         25      48       4      62     113    0.42
Thailand       19      41       5      33      77    0.53
The U.K.       118    291     305     385     950    0.30

Total          611   1,920   1,020   1,563   3,482




                              28
Table 2 Description of variables
The table describes the variable definitions.


A. Dependent variables


                      Proportional Mean Absolute Forecast Error is defined as the ratio of difference between the absolute forecast error (AFEijt) by analyst i for
                      firm j at time t and the mean absolute forecast error (avgAFEjT) of all of the forecasts for firm j for fiscal year T, to the mean absolute
pmafeijt              forecast error avgAFEjT, i.e. pmafeijt=(AFEijt-avgAFEjT)/avgAFEjT. A positive pmafeijt indicates that the absolute forecast error AFEijt by
                      analyst i for firm j at time t is larger than the average absolute forecast error of all of the forecasts for the firm j for the same fiscal year T.
                      To facilitate interpretation we multiply this variable with minus one.


                      Proportional Mean Price-scaled Absolute Forecast Error is defined similarly as pmafe, except that AFEijt is scaled by the latest available
pmafepijt             monthly stock price from Compustat, i.e. pmafepijt=(AFEPijt-avgAFEPjT)/avgAFEPjT. To facilitate interpretation we multiply this variable
                      with minus one.


                      Demeaned Absolute Forecast Errors scaled by the most recent stock prices in the previous fiscal year. The price-scaled absolute forecast
                      error AFEPijt of analyst i for firm j at time t is computed as the price-scaled absolute difference between an earnings forecast and the
dafepijt
                      actually disclosed earnings. To reduce heteroskedasticity we follow Clement (1999) to demean AFEPijt by the mean price-scaled absolute
                      forecast error for firm j in the same fiscal year. To facilitate interpretation we multiply this variable with minus one.


                      rangeijt is the ratio of the difference between the maximum afepijt for firm j, fiscal year T and a particular afepijt, to the range of afepijt for
rangeijt
                      firm j and fiscal year T.


B. Independent variables (firm- or analyst-level)



localijt              Dummy variable that equals 1 if analyst i is located in the same country as the covered firm j at time t, and 0 otherwise.



                      Dummy variable that equals 1 if analyst i is located in the same country as the covered firm j at time t and work for local research firms,
pure localijt
                      and 0 otherwise.




                                                                                  29
                Dummy variable that equals 1 if analyst i is located in the same country as the covered firm j at time t and work for research firms from
expatriateijt
                foreign countries, and 0 otherwise.


                Forecast age in years between the forecast date t and the corresponding I/B/E/S report date of the actual earnings. i denotes analysts and j
horizonijt
                denotes firms.


                Analyst firm specific experience, defined as the time interval in years between analyst i’s first forecast for a particular firm j and his
firmexpijt
                forecast at time t for firm j.


                Analyst general experience, defined as the time interval in years between analyst i’s first forecast in the I/B/E/S database and his current
genexpit
                forecast at time t.


mvjy            Market capitalization in US million dollars for firm j in year Y.


                Dummy variable indicating firm size. It is 1 if the market value of firm j is above the median market value of all of the firms from the same
mvdumjY-1
                country in year Y-1.


brsizeiY        Brokerage size, defined as the number of analysts working for the I/B/E/S brokerage that analyst i is associated with in year Y.


indiY           Number of I/B/E/S industries analyst i covers in year Y.


nctryiY         Number of countries analyst i covers in year Y.


ntikiY          Number of firms analyst i covers in year Y.


nfcstiY         Number of forecasts analyst i provides in year Y for all of the firms he covers.


                Transparency dummy equal to 1 if the overall score in Standard & Poor’s Transparency and Disclosure dataset for firm j is above the
tdscorej
                median score for all of the covered firms in the final sample, and 0 otherwise.



                                                                           30
                     Dummy variable indicating whether firm j has an ADR program in place at time t. The ADR information is from the website of the Bank
adrjt
                     of New York.


C. Independent variables (country-level)


                     Dummy variable equal to 1 if English is an official language for the domicile country of the covered firm, and 0 otherwise. The original
English languagei
                     source is from the CIA World Factbook and the website of http://www.cepii.fr/anglaisgraph/bdd/distances.htm


                     Dummy variable equal to 1 if the GDP of a country is above the median of the countries in the final sample, and 0 otherwise. The data is
GDP per capitai
                     from the World Development Indicator 2002.


developed marketi    Dummy variable equal to 1 if country i is a developed country, and 0 otherwise.


                     Dummy variable equal to 1 if the index of the equity market importance is above the median of the countries in the final sample, and 0
equity marketi
                     otherwise. The raw data are from Leuz, Nanda, and Wysocki (2003).


                     Dummy variable equal to 1 if the state ownership of banking for country i is above the median of the countries in the final sample, and 0
state ownershipi
                     otherwise. The data are from Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2003).


foreign bank         Dummy variable equal to 1 if the foreign ownership of banking for country i is above the median of the countries in the final sample, and 0
ownershipi           otherwise. The data are from Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2003).

ownership
                     Dummy variable equal to 1 if the average ownership of three largest shareholders for the 10 largest non-financial domestic private firms in
concentrationi
                     country i is above the median of the countries in the final sample, and 0 otherwise. The data are from La Porta et al. (1998).

                     Dummy variable equal to 1 if the average of total assets of pooled investment schemes to GDP between 1993 and 1995 for country i is
pooled investmenti
                     above the median of the countries in the final sample, and 0 otherwise. The data are from Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (1999).


legal origini        Dummy variable equal to 0 if the legal origin of country i is common law, and 1 otherwise. The raw data are from La Porta et al. (1998).




                                                                              31
                       Dummy variable equal to 1 if anti-director index for country i is above the median of the countries in the final sample. The raw anti-
antidirector rightsi
                       director index ranges from 0 to 5, with higher scores for stronger rights. The raw data are from La Porta et al. (1998).


                       Dummy variable equal to 1 if the property rights index for country i is above the median of the countries in the final sample, and 0
property rightsi
                       otherwise. The raw data are from La Porta et al. (1998).


                       Dummy variable equal to 1 if the index of public enforcement for country i is above the median of the countries in the final sample, and 0
publ enforcementi      otherwise. The index equals the arithmetic mean of: (1) Supervisor characteristics index; (2) Investigative powers index; (3) Orders index;
                       and (4) Criminal index. The data are from La Porta et al. (2005).


class actioni          Dummy variable equal to 1 if class action suits are available in a prospectus liability case. The data are from La Porta et al. (2005).


insider trading        Dummy variable indicating whether a covered firm j is from a country with insider trading law enforcement according to the data source
enforcementj           from Bushman, Piotroski and Smith (2005).


earnings               Dummy variable equal to 1 if the index of earnings management for country i is above the median of the countries in the final sample, and
managementi            0 otherwise. The data are from Leuz, Nanda and Wysocki (2003).


                       Dummy variable equal to 1 if the index of financial disclosure for country i is above the median of the countries in the final sample, and 0
CIFARi
                       otherwise. The data are from Bushman, Piotroski, and Smith (2004).


                       Dummy variable equal to 1 if the average of the R2s estimated from the market model for country i is above the median of the countries in
R2_Morcki
                       the final sample, and 0 otherwise. The data are from Morck, Yeung, and Yu (2000).


                       Dummy variable equal to 1 if US investors’ overseas holding of equity and debt scaled by local market GDP is above the median of the
US holdingsi
                       countries in the final sample, and 0 otherwise. The data are from the US Treasury Department.


                       Dummy variable equal to 1 if the US investors’ overseas equity and debt flow scaled by local market GDP is above the median of the
US flowsi
                       countries in the final sample, and 0 otherwise. The data are from the US Treasury Department.




                                                                                  32
US equityi      The fraction of the local equity market capitalization held by U.S. investors.


US portfolioi   The share of a country’s equities in the portfolio of U.S. investors.


WORLD RATIOi    The share of a country’s market capitalization in the world market portfolio.


DIFFi           The difference between a country’s share in the world market portfolio and the country’s share in the portfolio of U.S. investors.




                                                                           33
Table 3 Summary statistics by analysts groups
The table shows summary statistics of main variables used in the analysis. The sample firms are the intersection of I/B/E/S for non-U.S. firms, Nelson’s
Directories of Investment Research, and Standard and Poor’s Transparency and Disclosure. The final sample contains 1,020 pure local, 1,563 expatriate, and
1,920 foreign analysts covering 611 firms from 32 countries over the period of 2001 to 2003. Local analysts are analysts located in the same country as the firms
they cover, while foreign analysts are located in a different country from the firms they cover. Local analysts are furthered classified into pure local and
expatriate analysts. Pure local analysts work for local research firms, while expatriate analysts work for research firms from foreign countries. The summary
statistics of forecast-related variables are computed by partitioning each earning forecast (and its related variables) into one of the three different groups
depending on the analyst identity. The summary statistics of analyst-related variables are computed as follows. The average value of analyst-related variable is
computed for each analyst in each of the three different analyst groups. The mean and median are then computed across analysts for each analyst group. To
facilitate interpretation, we multiply the forecast variables by minus one, so that higher values of dependent variable imply more accurate forecasts. All variables
are as defined in Table 2. Numbers in parenthesis are p-values.

                  Pure local (A)           Expatriate (B)            Foreign (C)                     A-B                       B-C                      A-C

  Variable                                                                                             Wilcoxon                  Wilcoxon                 Wilcoxon
                                                                                            Mean                     Mean                      Mean
                  Mean      Median         Mean      Median         Mean       Median                  Median                    Median                   Median
                                                                                            t-test                   t-test                    t-test
                                                                                                         test                      test                     test

Panel A: Forecast-related variables
pmafep          0.023           0.168    0.045        0.156       -0.042        0.153       (0.16)         (0.91)     (0.00)         (0.00)    (0.00)         (0.00)
pmafe           0.024           0.141    0.049        0.155       -0.045        0.146       (0.10)         (0.64)     (0.00)         (0.00)    (0.00)         (0.01)
dafep           0.001           0.001    0.000        0.001       -0.001        0.001       (0.68)         (0.22)     (0.01)         (0.36)    (0.01)         (0.04)
range           0.638           0.736    0.634        0.728        0.639        0.735       (0.51)         (0.56)     (0.31)         (0.95)    (0.84)         (0.52)
firmexp         2.077           1.315    1.968        1.422        1.595        1.005       (0.01)         (0.80)     (0.00)         (0.00)    (0.00)         (0.00)
genexp          3.386           2.704    3.288        2.753        3.648        2.778       (0.06)         (0.47)     (0.00)         (0.00)    (0.00)         (0.00)
horizon         0.406           0.321    0.408      0.321          0.411      0.321         (0.77)         (0.50)     (0.50)         (0.20)    (0.36)         (0.66)
No. of obs.             4,412                 6,536                     9,477




                                                                                34
                  Pure local (A)        Expatriate (B)         Foreign (C)                A-B                     B-C                     A-C

  Variable                                                                                  Wilcoxon                Wilcoxon                Wilcoxon
                                                                                 Mean                    Mean                    Mean
                 Mean       Median      Mean      Median      Mean      Median              Median                  Median                  Median
                                                                                 t-test                  t-test                  t-test
                                                                                              test                    test                    test

Panel B: Analyst-related variables
mv             17,723        8,681    16,082       7,145    18,243      9,993    (0.15)         (0.00)   (0.02)         (0.00)   (0.57)         (0.05)
brsize         90.439       37.857   133.795    109.000    137.234    124.000    (0.00)         (0.00)   (0.32)         (0.14)   (0.00)         (0.00)
ind             4.028        3.000     4.022       3.000     4.377      3.750    (0.96)         (0.48)   (0.00)         (0.00)   (0.00)         (0.00)
nctry           2.020        1.000     2.241       1.683     3.225      3.000    (0.00)         (0.00)   (0.00)         (0.00)   (0.00)         (0.00)
ntik            9.784        8.250     8.995       8.000     8.375      7.528    (0.00)         (0.09)   (0.00)         (0.00)   (0.00)         (0.00)
nfcst          20.913       18.000    24.541      21.688    22.823      19.000   (0.00)         (0.00)   (0.02)         (0.00)   (0.00)         (0.00)
No. of obs.             1,020               1,563                 1,920




                                                                         35
Table 4 Forecast accuracy and local analyst advantage
This table presents ordinary least squares regression results of forecast accuracy on local analyst dummy and
analyst, forecast and firm characteristics. The dependent variable (Pmafep) is computed as Pmafepijt=(AFEPijt-
avgAFEPjT)/avgAFEPjT where AFEPijt is the absolute forecast error by analyst i for firm j at time t scaled by the
latest available monthly stock price and avgAFEPjT is the mean absolute forecast error of all of the forecasts for firm
j for fiscal year T. To facilitate interpretation, we multiply this variable by minus one, so that higher values of the
dependent variable imply more accurate forecasts. All variables are as defined in Table 2. Independent variables are
demeaned by the firm/year averages to reduce heteroskedasticity. T-statistics adjusted for firm-level clustering are in
parentheses.


Variables                            (1)                       (2)                  (3)                    (4)

Dummy for                                                   0.046                  0.043
local analysts                                             (4.31)                 (3.98)
Dummy for                                                                                                 0.045
pure local analysts                                                                                      (3.00)
Dummy for                                                                                                 0.041
Expatriate analysts                                                                                      (3.46)
                                    0.002                   0.006                  0.007                  0.007
Broker size
                                   (0.36)                  (1.00)                 (1.23)                 (1.27)
                                   -0.571                  -0.568                 -0.570                 -0.570
Forecast horizon
                                 (-15.58)                (-15.50)               (-15.55)               (-15.57)
Number of industries                -0.002                 -0.000                  0.000                  0.000
covered                            (-0.80)                (-0.24)                 (0.05)                 (0.05)
Firm-specific                                                                      0.008                  0.008
experience                                                                        (2.03)                 (2.02)
                                                                                  -0.010                 -0.010
Career experience
                                                                                 (-3.85)                (-3.85)
                                    0.040                   0.015                  0.017                  0.017
Constant
                                  (11.43)                  (2.36)                 (2.67)                 (2.66)

No. of obs.                         20,221                 20,221                 20,221                 20,221

Adjusted R2                         0.041                   0.042                  0.043                  0.043


Test: pure local=expatriate
F-statistic                                                                                               0.08
(p-value)                                                                                                 0.78




                                                          36
Table 5 Forecast accuracy for subsamples partitioned by forecast horizon, fiscal year, and country
This table presents ordinary least squares regression results of forecast accuracy on local analyst dummy and
analyst, forecast and firm characteristics for the subsamples partitioned by forecast horizon, by year, and by country.
Horizon zero refers to forecasts provided within 180 days after the fiscal year end but at least 5 days before the
reporting dates of actual earnings according to I/B/E/S. Horizon one refers to forecasts provided within one year
before the fiscal year end. The dependent variable (Pmafep) is computed as Pmafepijt=(AFEPijt-
avgAFEPjT)/avgAFEPjT where AFEPijt is the absolute forecast error by analyst i for firm j at time t scaled by the
latest available monthly stock price and avgAFEPjT is the mean absolute forecast error of all of the forecasts for firm
j for fiscal year T. To facilitate interpretation, we multiply this variable by minus one, so that higher values of the
dependent variable imply more accurate forecasts. All variables are as defined in Table 2. Independent variables are
demeaned by the firm/year averages to reduce heteroskedasticity. T-statistics adjusted for firm-level clustering are in
parentheses.


                                       Horizon                                         Year
Variables
                                  0                    1             2001               2002               2003

Dummy for                      0.071               0.034               0.063              0.029              0.034
local analysts                (2.78)              (2.76)              (3.39)             (1.63)             (1.83)
                              -0.004               0.009               0.002              0.009              0.010
Broker size
                             (-0.32)              (1.42)              (0.18)             (0.84)             (1.03)
                              -0.419               -0.673             -0.748             -0.483             -0.472
Forecast horizon
                             (-3.29)             (-17.24)           (-12.70)            (-8.47)            (-8.05)
Number of industries          -0.003               0.000               0.001              0.003             -0.004
covered                      (-0.60)              (0.17)              (0.45)             (0.82)            (-1.18)
Firm-specific                  0.010               0.007               0.016              0.005              0.005
experience                    (1.40)              (1.58)              (2.42)             (0.81)             (0.78)
                              -0.010               -0.009             -0.012             -0.009             -0.009
Career experience
                             (-2.13)              (-3.39)            (-2.64)            (-1.86)            (-2.41)
                              -0.031               0.049               0.007              0.029              0.017
Constant
                             (-0.88)              (6.00)              (0.62)             (2.35)             (1.56)

No. of obs                     4,528               15,693              6,598             6,507              7,116


Adjusted R2                    0.006               0.055               0.074              0.033             0.026




                                                            37
                                 By country
Country        Coef. for local       t-statistic   No. of obs   Adjusted R2
Argentina            0.663                2.17          48        0.157
Australia           -0.088               -0.73         265        0.060
Austria             -0.325               -0.67          44        0.093
Belgium              0.323                2.62         201        0.097
Brazil               0.067                0.89         471        0.064
Chile                0.046                0.20          52        0.250
China                0.347                1.90         208        0.073
Denmark              0.382                2.49         244        0.036
Finland             -0.081               -0.53         184        0.033
France               0.017                0.51       2,569        0.029
Germany              0.088                1.98       1,794        0.050
Hong Kong           -0.016               -0.18         558        0.134
India                0.308                3.41         287        0.080
Indonesia            0.355                2.96         159        0.190
Ireland              0.106                0.48         152        0.027
Italy                0.066                1.38       1,091        0.040
Japan                0.199                3.04         834        0.148
Korea                0.240                1.86         103        0.275
Malaysia             0.029                0.47         614        0.164
Mexico              -0.159               -1.58         267        0.051
Netherlands          0.011                0.22       1,335        0.064
Norway              -0.309               -1.31         103        0.110
Philippines          0.124                0.86         131        0.118
Portugal             0.126                0.75         187        0.078
Singapore            0.170                1.83         316        0.099
South Africa         0.307                1.57          59        0.100
Spain                0.045                0.73         773        0.037
Sweden               0.076                1.17         857        0.037
Switzerland          0.079                1.17         952        0.057
Taiwan               0.063                0.85         480        0.320
Thailand             0.032                0.38         362        0.203
The U.K.             0.014                0.53       4,521        0.013




                                    38
Table 6 Local analyst advantage and firm-level corporate governance
This table presents ordinary least squares regression results of forecast accuracy on local analyst dummy, analyst,
firm and forecast characteristics, and governance variables. Three proxies for firm-level governance are used: S&P’s
Transparency and Disclosure Score (tdscore), dummy for large firm (mvdum), and dummy for a firm with ADR
program. Dependent variable (Pmafep) is computed Pmafepijt=(AFEPijt-avgAFEPjT)/avgAFEPjT where AFEPijt is the
absolute forecast error by analyst i for firm j at time t scaled by the latest available monthly stock price and
avgAFEPjT is the mean absolute forecast error of all of the forecasts for firm j for fiscal year T. To facilitate
interpretation, we multiply this variable by minus one, so that higher values of dependent variable imply more
accurate forecasts. All variables are as defined in Table 2. Independent variables are demeaned by the firm/year
averages to reduce heteroskedasticity. T-statistics adjusted for firm-level clustering are in parentheses.

Variables                               (1)                          (2)                          (3)
Dummy for                              0.064                        0.046                        0.062
local analysts (a)                    (3.68)                       (3.08)                       (4.20)
                                       0.019
Dummy for transparency (b)
                                      (1.38)
                                      -0.038
(a) * (b)
                                     (-1.73)
                                                                    0.030
Dummy for firm size (c)
                                                                   (2.20)
                                                                   -0.004
(a) *(c)
                                                                  (-0.17)
                                                                                                 0.025
Dummy for ADR firm (d)
                                                                                                (1.92)
                                                                                                -0.036
(a)*(d)
                                                                                               (-1.64)
                                       0.007                        0.007                        0.007
Broker size
                                      (1.27)                       (1.26)                       (1.27)
                                      -0.569                       -0.570                       -0.570
Forecast horizon
                                    (-15.54)                     (-15.58)                     (-15.55)
Number of industries                   0.000                        0.000                        0.000
covered                               (0.05)                       (0.06)                       (0.08)
Firm-specific                          0.007                        0.007                        0.008
experience                            (2.01)                       (2.01)                       (2.03)
                                      -0.010                       -0.010                       -0.010
Career experience
                                     (-3.84)                      (-3.84)                      (-3.84)
                                       0.008                        0.003                        0.004
Constant
                                      (0.66)                       (0.28)                       (0.43)

No. of obs                            20,221                       20,221                       20,221

Adjusted R2                            0.043                        0.043                        0.043




                                                        39
Table 7 Local analyst advantage and country characteristics
This table presents ordinary least squares regression results of forecast error on local analyst dummy, analyst, firm
and forecast characteristics, and country characteristics. Country characteristic variables include variables related to
culture, degree of economic and financial development, degree of foreign portfolio investment, degree of investor
protection, transparency and disclosure, and private information acquisition and communication. Dependent variable
(Pmafep) is computed Pmafepijt=(AFEPijt-avgAFEPjT)/avgAFEPjT where AFEPijt is the absolute forecast error by
analyst i for firm j at time t scaled by the latest available monthly stock price and avgAFEPjT is the mean absolute
forecast error of all of the forecasts for firm j for fiscal year T. To facilitate interpretation, we multiply this variable
by minus one, so that higher values of dependent variable imply more accurate forecasts. All country characteristic
variables are as defined in Table 2. The regressions include the same controlling variables as in Table 5 and are not
reported for brevity. T-statistics adjusted for firm-level clustering are in parentheses.

                                                                        Local dummy
                                                        Country               x
           Country                      Local                                               Number of
Model                                                 Characteristic      Country                               Adj. R2
           characteristics             dummy                                               observations
                                                        variable        Characteristic
                                                                          variable
                                          0.058            -0.009            -0.026
(1)        English language                                                                   20,221             0.043
                                         (4.16)           (-0.48)           (-0.98)

                                          0.069             0.033            -0.037
(2)        GDP per capita                                                                     19,741             0.038
                                         (3.47)            (2.52)           (-1.54)

                                          0.065             0.023            -0.026
(3)        Developed market                                                                   20,221             0.043
                                         (2.85)            (1.48)           (-1.00)

                                          0.062             0.014            -0.032
(4)        Equity market                                                                      19,175             0.043
                                         (3.23)            (0.97)           (-1.30)

                                          0.024            -0.011             0.040
(5)        State ownership                                                                    15,110             0.044
                                         (1.50)           (-0.77)            (1.60)

           Foreign bank                   0.080             0.006            -0.034
(6)                                                                                            8,785             0.050
           ownership                     (3.86)            (0.33)           (-1.03)

           Ownership                      0.027            -0.016             0.045
(7)                                                                                           20,013             0.043
           concentration                 (1.85)           (-1.20)            (2.02)

                                          0.112             0.048            -0.098
(8)        Pooled investment                                                                  16,141             0.028
                                         (4.22)            (3.39)           (-3.22)

                                          0.032             0.007             0.029
(9)        Legal origin                                                                       20,221             0.043
                                         (1.61)            (0.41)            (1.14)

                                          0.053            -0.06             -0.002
(10)       Antidirector rights                                                                20,013             0.043
                                         (3.26)           (-1.60)           (-0.10)

                                          0.068             0.032            -0.036
(11)       Property rights                                                                    20,013             0.043
                                         (3.50)            (2.36)           (-1.52)

                                          0.066            -0.011            -0.027
(12)       Public enforcement                                                                 20,013             0.043
                                         (3.72)           (-0.81)           (-1.15)

                                          0.075             0.011            -0.053
(13)       Class action                                                                       20,013             0.043
                                         (4.81)            (0.82)           (-2.36)




                                                            40
                                                     Local dummy
                                      Country              x
        Country            Local                                       Number of
Model                               Characteristic     Country                       Adj. R2
        characteristics   dummy                                       observations
                                      variable       Characteristic
                                                       variable
        Insider trading     0.058        0.022            -0.023
(14)                                                                    19,854       0.043
        enforcement        (2.58)       (1.55)           (-0.89)

        Earnings            0.017        -0.023           0.068
(15)                                                                    19,175       0.044
        management         (1.09)       (-1.60)          (2.97)

                            0.081        0.026            -0.061
(16)    CIFAR                                                           19,854       0.043
                           (4.90)       (1.94)           (-2.72)

                            0.026        -0.043           0.056
(17)    R2_Morck                                                        18,746       0.043
                           (1.89)       (-2.96)          (2.41)




                                         41
Table 8 Foreign investors and local analyst advantage
This table presents ordinary least squares regression results of forecast error on local analyst dummy, analyst, firm
and forecast characteristics, and foreign investment. Variables that proxy for the degree of foreign investment and
demand for analyst services by foreign investors include (1) dummy variable that takes value 1 if a country’s U.S
holdings of equity and debt scaled by local market GDP is greater than the median of the sample countries (US
holdings), (2) dummy variable that takes value 1 if a country’s U.S. flow of equity and debt scaled by local market
GDP is greater than the median of the sample countries (US flow), (3) the fraction of the equity market
capitalization held by U.S. investors (US equity), (4) the share of a country’s equities in the portfolio of U.S.
investors (US portfolio), (5) a country’s share in the world market portfolio (WORLD RATIO), and (6) the
difference between a country’s share in the world market portfolio and the country’s share in the portfolio of U.S.
investors (DIFF). Dependent variable (Pmafep) is computed Pmafepijt=(AFEPijt-avgAFEPjT)/avgAFEPjT where
AFEPijt is the absolute forecast error by analyst i for firm j at time t scaled by the latest available monthly stock price
and avgAFEPjT is the mean absolute forecast error of all of the forecasts for firm j for fiscal year T. To facilitate
interpretation, we multiply this variable by minus one, so that higher values of dependent variable imply more
accurate forecasts. All country characteristic variables are as defined in Table 2. The regressions include the same
control variables as in Table 5 and are not reported for brevity. T-statistics adjusted for firm-level clustering are in
parentheses.

                                                                        Local dummy
           Country
                                                        Country               x
           characteristics that         Local                                              Number of
Model                                                 Characteristic      Country                              Adj. R2
           proxy for foreign           dummy                                              observations
                                                        variable        Characteristic
           investment
                                                                          variable
                                          0.097             0.054            -0.078
(1)        US holdings                                                                       20,221             0.044
                                         (5.54)            (3.93)           (-3.49)

                                          0.085             0.042            -0.057
(2)        US flows                                                                          19,741             0.039
                                         (4.21)            (3.15)           (-2.38)

                                          0.079             0.001            -0.002
(3)        US equity                                                                         20,221             0.043
                                         (4.65)            (2.74)           (-2.77)

                                          0.071             0.001            -0.003
(4)        US portfolio                                                                      20,221             0.043
                                         (4.65)            (0.73)           (-2.07)

                                          0.067             0.001            -0.002
(5)        WORLD RATIO                                                                       20,221             0.043
                                         (4.28)            (0.09)           (-1.53)
           DIFF (WORLD
                                          0.048            -0.011             0.019
(6)        RATIO – US                                                                        20,221             0.044
                                         (4.46)           (-2.67)            (3.05)
           portfolio)
                                          0.065            -0.001            -0.001
(7)        WORLD RATIO                                                                       20,221             0.044
                                         (4.10)           (-0.36)           (-0.91)

                                                           -0.011             0.016
           DIFF
                                                          (-2.67)            (2.45)




                                                            42
Table 9 Robustness tests
The table presents the results of robustness tests using different proxies for forecast accuracies and different samples.
Models (1) through (3) use alternative proxies for forecast errors as dependent variables. Model (1) uses ‘pmafe’ as
dependent variable, Model (2) ‘dafep’, and Model (3) ‘range’. All variables are defined in Table 2 and rescaled such
that higher values indicate more accurate forecasts. Model (4) is estimated for the sample that does not impose
restriction that a firm is followed by both local and foreign analysts. Model (5) is estimated for the sample that
contains all the annual earnings forecasts that analysts provide for the firms they cover over 2001-2003. Model (6)
adds additional control variables that may affect forecast accuracy. Independent variables are demeaned by the
firm/year averages to reduce heteroskedasticity. All models are estimated with ordinary least squares regressions
except Model (3) that uses random effect regression at the firm-level. T-statistics adjusted for firm-level clustering
are in parentheses.

                                 (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)
Dummy for                       0.039           0.001            0.010          0.032            0.019           0.040
local analysts                 (3.68)          (2.27)           (2.15)         (3.50)           (2.31)          (3.67)

                                0.005           0.002            0.003          0.009            0.279           0.007
Broker size
                               (0.89)          (1.27)           (1.32)         (1.76)           (0.72)          (1.24)

                               -0.730          -0.010            -0.162        -0.615          -0.679           -0.555
Forecast horizon
                             (-20.15)        (-10.43)          (-21.12)      (-18.40)        (-25.46)         (-15.06)

Number of industries            0.000           0.000            0.000          0.001           -0.317           0.002
covered                        (0.01)          (0.85)           (0.35)         (0.54)          (-2.27)          (0.64)

Firm-specific                   0.008           0.000            0.002          0.008            1.019           0.007
experience                     (2.22)          (0.57)           (1.20)         (2.40)           (4.06)          (1.81)

                               -0.010          -0.001            -0.003         -0.010          -0.537          -0.009
Career experience
                              (-3.98)         (-1.39)           (-3.95)        (-4.52)         (-2.72)         (-3.78)

Number of forecasts                                                                                              0.001
made                                                                                                            (2.81)

Number of firms                                                                                                 -0.002
covered                                                                                                        (-1.27)

Number of countries                                                                                             -0.006
covered                                                                                                        (-1.38)

                                0.018           0.001           0.674           0.020            0.038           0.019
constant
                               (2.82)          (4.24)        (148.52)          (3.03)           (6.24)          (2.86)


No. of obs                     20,056          20,221            19,008         25,615          63,617          20,221


Adjusted R2                     0.070           0.020            0.020          0.048           0.101            0.043




                                                          43
