NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GOOD BYE LENIN (OR NOT?):
THE EFFECT OF COMMUNISM ON PEOPLE’S PREFERENCES
Alberto Alesina
Nicola Fuchs-Schündeln
Working Paper 11700
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11700
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2005

We thank Matthias Schündeln and Andrei Shleifer for conversations, Susanto Basu and participants in
seminars at Boston College, Harvard University, and the Max Planck Institute for Research on Collective
Goods, Bonn, for comments, and Antonia Attanassova, Filipe Campante, and Francesco Trebbi for excellent
research assistantship. Alesina gratefully acknowledges financial support from the NSF with a grant through
the NBER. Fuchs-Schündeln thanks the Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA) for its hospitality. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
©2005 by Alberto Alesina and Nicola Fuchs-Schündeln. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Good bye Lenin (or not?): The Effect of Communism on People’s Preferences
Alberto Alesina and Nicola Fuchs-Schündeln
NBER Working Paper No. 11700
October 2005
JEL No. H3, E6
ABSTRACT
Preferences for redistribution, as well as the generosities of welfare states, differ significantly across
countries. In this paper, we test whether there exists a feedback process of the economic regime on
individual preferences. We exploit the "experiment" of German separation and reunification to
establish exogeneity of the economic system. From 1945 to 1990, East Germans lived under a
Communist regime with heavy state intervention and extensive redistribution. We find that, after
German reunification, East Germans are more in favor of redistribution and state intervention than
West Germans, even after controlling for economic incentives. This effect is especially strong for
older cohorts, who lived under Communism for a longer time period. We further find that East
Germans' preferences converge towards those of West Germans. We calculate that it will take one
to two generations for preferences to converge completely.
Alberto Alesina
Department of Economics
210 Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
aalesina@harvard.edu
Nicholas Fuchs Schündeln
Department of Economics
212 Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
nfuchs@harvard.edu

1

Introduction

Are individual policy preferences exogenous or are they endogenous to political regimes?
We focus in particular on tastes for redistribution and redistributive policies which in
fact diﬀer significantly across countries.1 Are the regimes diﬀerent solely because of
diﬀerent initial preferences for redistribution in the populations? Or is there a feedback eﬀect from the regime on preferences? Is it possible that living under a specific
system leads to adaptation of preferences?2
In order to analyze these questions empirically, one needs an exogenous shock to
the regime; post war Germany oﬀers an opportunity to analyze the eﬀect of Communism on people’s preferences. From 1945 to 1990, Germany was split into two parts
for reasons that had nothing to do with Germans’ desire for separation, or diversity
of tastes between East Germans and West Germans: the division of Germany into
two parts was exogenous with respect to underlying individual preferences. Since the
political and economic system has been the same in the eastern and western parts of
Germany since reunification in 1990, and was the same before 1945, West Germans
constitute a meaningful control group for East Germans. Therefore, comparing the
diﬀerences in attitudes and preferences of Germans after the reunification can give us
a clue about the eﬀects of living for 45 years under a Communist regime on attitudes,
beliefs and political preferences.
We are especially interested in measuring how 45 years of Communism aﬀected
individuals’ thinking toward market capitalism and the role of the state in providing
insurance and redistribution from the rich to the poor. If political regimes had no
eﬀect on individual preferences, one should not observe any systematic diﬀerences
between East and West Germans after reunification. If Communism had an eﬀect, in
1

For instance, the diﬀerence between Europe and the US has been discussed recently by Alesina
and Glaeser (2004).
2
Several recent theoretical papers have shown that there is scope for multiple equilibria and selffulfilling beliefs in redistributive policies (see e.g. Piketty 1995, Alesina and Angeletos 2005, and
Benabou and Tirole 2005).

2

principle one could think of two possible reactions to 45 years of Communist dictatorship. One is that people turn strongly against the “state” and switch to preferences
in the opposite direction, namely in favor of libertarian free markets, as a reaction
to an all intrusive state. The opposite hypothesis is that 45 years of heavy state
intervention and indoctrination instill in people the view that the state is essential
for individual well being. As we shall see, we quickly and soundly reject the first
hypothesis in favor of the second. In fact, we find that the eﬀects of Communism are
large and long lasting. It will take about one to two generations for former East and
West Germans to look alike in terms of preferences and attitudes about fundamental
questions regarding the role of the government in society.
We are interested in the eﬀect of Communism on intrinsic preferences. This eﬀect
could arise because of Marxist Leninist indoctrination, state control over school, press,
or state television, etc. Also, simply becoming accustomed to an all encompassing
state may make people think of it as necessary and preferable despite the suﬀocating
aspects of the East German regime. Beside this eﬀect, there exists a purely economic
eﬀect, which arises because Communism has made former East Germany relatively
poorer than former West Germany. Since the poor disproportionately benefit from
government redistribution, they favor it. We find evidence of both types of eﬀects.
We also investigate why former East Germans are more likely to favor state intervention (beside the economic eﬀect). One reason is that they are simply used to it.
Another reason is that East Germans believe much more so than West Germans that
social conditions, rather than individual eﬀort and initiative, determine individual
fortunes; this belief is of course a basic tenet of the communist ideology. The more
one thinks that it is society’s “fault” if one is poor, unemployed or sick, the more one
is in favor of public intervention. We find evidence for both eﬀects.
Last, we analyze whether preferences of East Germans converge towards those of
West Germans, given that they now live under the same regime West Germans have
experienced since 1945. We calculate that, under the strict assumption of linearity, it
3

will take about 20 to 40 years to make the diﬀerence between East and West Germans
disappear almost completely, due to the combination of two forces. One is the dying
of the elderly and the coming of age of individuals born after reunification; the other
is the actual change of preferences of any given individual. We estimate the first
eﬀect to account for about one third of the convergence eﬀect and the second one to
account for the remaining two thirds of the convergence.
An implication of all of the above is that Germany in 1990 has been subject to a
major political shock, perhaps with deeper and longer lasting consequences than the
widely studied economic shock associated with the reunification.3
The question of preferences for redistribution and diﬀerent visions about the welfare state has recently received much attention. Alesina and Glaeser (2004) discuss
the origin of diﬀerent beliefs and preferences in the US and Continental Western Europe, and in fact place a lot of weight on the influence of Marxist ideology on the
preference for redistribution in Europe versus the US. Alesina and La Ferrara (2005)
and Fong (2003) investigate the connection between views about social mobility and
preferences for redistribution using US data. Ravallion and Lokshin (2000) consider
Russian data. In general, this literature finds that the more individuals perceive that
there is social mobility the less favorable they are to government redistribution.
The paper most closely related to ours is Corneo (2001). Building on Corneo and
Grüner (2002), he studies empirically what motivates individuals to favor redistribution, from purely individual to altruistic motives. In examining this issue, Corneo
(2001) compares preferences in the US, West Germany and East Germany. One of
his results is that East Germans are more favorable to redistribution than West Germans, who, in turn, are more favorable to it than Americans. More generally, in a
comparison of six Eastern European and six Western countries, Corneo and Grüner
(2002) find large country fixed eﬀects for Eastern European countries; i.e. they find
3

Giavazzi and McMahon (2005) have recently pointed out how the German reform process in
fact is lacking political support from the people.

4

that Eastern Europeans have stronger preferences for redistribution than individuals
from Western countries. Corneo (2001) as well as Corneo and Grüner (2002) use data
from the 1992 round of the International Social Survey Programme. We can expand
on their analyses since we use a panel data set that includes many more individual
controls. By using diﬀerent waves of our data, we can discuss more precisely timing issues and speed of convergence of preferences. By focusing on Germany, we can
distinguish more clearly the role of Communism in shaping preferences from other potential reasons why Eastern Europeans might favor redistribution. That is, it could be
that preferences in Eastern Europe are diﬀerent because of diﬀerent cultures, histories
etc. even before the advent of Communism. Moreover, a more uncertain environment
and absence of insurance markets could induce Eastern Europeans to favor redistribution.4 Last, we analyze preferences a decade after the transition started. At this
point, it is harder to argue that uncertainty about future economic conditions was
larger in East Germany than in the West. Ockenfels and Weimann (1999) conduct
public goods and solidarity experiments with East and West German subjects and
detect significantly diﬀerent behavior between both groups, which they attribute to
the eﬀects of Communism in East Germany versus Capitalism in the West on norms.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we describe the institutional background, and the data. In Section 3 we present our basic results concerning preferences
for state intervention in social policy. Section 4 investigates related attitudes about
the role of individual responsibility versus social conditions in determining success in
life. These attitudes can potentially explain diﬀerences in preferences regarding the
welfare state. The last section concludes.
4

These two reasons (in addition to language issues) make the interpretation of results from crosscountry studies especially hard. Other cross-country studies that analyze the legacy of Communism
on attitudes towards free markets and labor markets are Shiller, Boycko, and Korobov (1991, 1992),
and Blanchflower and Freeman (1997). The eﬀect of Communism on religious beliefs is studied
by McCleary and Barro (2003) and Barro and McCleary (2005). They find that Communism has
significant and potentially long lasting negative eﬀects on individual religiosity and on the adoption
of state religions.

5

2
2.1
2.1.1

Institutional background and data
Institutional background
German separation and reunification

Germany as a country was created in 1871 as a result of the political unification of
18 independent political units of various size, the largest and most powerful being
Prussia. Germany remained a single country until the end of the Second World War
when, as a losing power, it was split amongst the winning Allies. East Germany was
under the sphere of influence of the Soviets, while the West was occupied by the US,
France, and the UK. The borders between East and West Germany were the result of
bargaining between the Allies and the position of the occupying forces at the end of
hostilities. In 1949, both the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG) and the German
Democratic Republic (GDR) were oﬃcially founded. The East German regime developed as one of the most rigid of the former Communist regimes. Income inequality
in the GDR was low: in 1988, the average net income of individuals with a university degree was only 15% higher than that of blue collar workers, compared to 70%
in the FRG. Also, intersectoral diﬀerences in net incomes were minimal, on average
amounting only to 150 Mark per month with an average monthly income of around
1100 Mark in 1988 (Stephan and Wiedemann, 1990, Schäfgen, 1998). Reunification
occurred rather quickly and abruptly in October 1990, 11 months after the fall of the
Berlin Wall in November 1989. East Germany became part of the Federal Republic
of Germany, and the economic and political system of the West was transferred to
the East.
2.1.2

Germany before 1945

One important identifying assumption of our analysis is that East and West Germany
were indistinguishable until the exogenously imposed separation in 1945. Because of
this, if we observe diﬀerences in attitudes of East and West Germans after reunifi-

6

cation, we can attribute them to 45 years of Communism. How reasonable is the
assumption that East and West Germans were indistinguishable in terms of their
attitudes before 1945? Table A1 shows average per capita income levels of diﬀerent
German regions, as well as subregions of Prussia, in 1928, 1932, and 1936. We mark
a region by E or W, depending on whether it mainly belonged to the GDR or FRG
between 1949 and 1990. Unmarked regions do not belong to Germany after 1945.5
As the table shows, the level of income per capita in pre-World War II Germany does
not show any systematic diﬀerence between East and West; in fact, on average they
are almost identical.6 Moreover, destruction during World War II was major and
universal in both the later FRG and GDR.
However, income per capita aside, there might have been diﬀerences in attitudes
before 1945. One possible issue is that Prussians might have had a more militarist
“state-centric” view about the state than other Germans. Note however that part of
former Prussia belonged to the FRG and part to the GDR between 1949 and 1990,
and not all regions of the later GDR belonged to Prussia (see Table A1). We address
the issue of Prussia explicitly in section 3.
The period of the “Weimar Republic” (1918 to 1933) enhanced conformity between
the German regions. Yet, already before that at the turn of the last century, the later
East and West Germany were quite similar along many economic dimensions, e.g.
with regard to the percentage of the population working in industry, agriculture,
or commerce (Statistisches Jahrbuch für das Deutsche Reich, 1898, pp. 224-233).7
Moreover, in the elections of 1898, around the same number of constituencies in the
5

Note that some regions transcend the borders established after World War II, in which case we
assign the region to East, West or outside Germany depending on its largest share.
6
The non-population weighted average income in later East regions amounted to 1,203 Mark in
1928, 877 Mark in 1932, and 1,169 Mark in 1936, while the corresponding incomes for the later West
regions are 1,203, 913, and 1,200 Mark.
7
The perception that the territory of the GDR was diﬀerent (e.g. more agricultural) than the
West before 1945 seems to be caused by the fact that the far Eastern part of Germany in the borders
before 1945 was indeed much more rural. Yet, this refers to the regions that after 1945 belonged to
Poland, Russia, and Czechoslovakia, not to the GDR.

7

later East and West Germany voted primarily in favor of the Social Democrats. In the
West, the largest party was the Zentrum party, which was more in support of state
intervention than the Conservatives, which was the most prominent party beside the
Social Democrats in the East (Statistisches Jahrbuch für das Deutsche Reich, 1899,
pp. 246-247). Hence, it seems that, if anything, the West was at that time more in
favor of state intervention than the East.
2.1.3

East-West migration between 1945 and 1989

From a peak population of 19.1 million people living in 1947 in the Soviet zone that
oﬃcially became the GDR in 1949, around 3 million people emigrated into the FRG
before the Berlin Wall was built in August 1961 (Rytlewski and Opp de Hipt, 1987,
Storbeck, 1963, Heidemeyer, 1994).8 From August 1961 to December 1988, only
slightly more than 600,000 people emigrated from East to West (Schumann et al.,
1996). The large number of East-West migrants before 1961 is in contrast to only
around 30,000 people per year emigrating from West to East in the 1950s, and almost
no West-East emigration after 1961 (Münz and Ulrich, 1997). Migration poses a
challenge to our identification, since it raises the possibility of self-selection: if the
distributions of preferences for state intervention were identical in East and West
before 1945, but migration after 1945 was largely driven by these preferences, then
this could explain why we would observe stronger preferences for state intervention
in the East in the 1990s.
The sociological literature acknowledges six main reasons for East-West migration,
namely fleeing from the Soviet army (Hiergebliebene), returning after having been
displaced during the war, migration to the West via the East of emigrants from parts
of the former German Reich not belonging to Germany any more after 1945, political
reasons, migration of individuals who suﬀered from expropriation and other economic
discrimination, and general economic reasons. While extensive survey evidence on
8

The reported numbers are estimates based on diﬀerent data sources. Data of migration flows
before 1949 are especially unreliable.

8

the reasons of migration does not exist, it is widely believed that family reunions
and the economic prosperity of the West were the two main reasons for migration
(see e.g. Heidemeyer, 1994, and Storbeck, 1963). Although surely preferences for
state intervention played a role for migration, it is not clear that this motive is strong
enough to explain any observed diﬀerences in preferences between East and West
Germans after reunification. Moreover, the number of emigrants is probably not
large enough to explain large diﬀerences in preferences afterwards. Last, if stronger
preferences for state intervention in the East than in the West would be caused
exclusively by self-selection, then this diﬀerence should be persistent over time after
reunification; in fact it is not, as we shall see.

2.2

Data

The German Socioeconomic Panel (GSOEP) is an annual household panel, started
in West Germany in 1984. From 1990 on, it also covers the territory of the former
German Democratic Republic. We use the original sample established in 1984, and
the sub-sample covering the territory of the former GDR started in 1990. The original
West German sample leaves us with around 11,400 year-person observations, while
the East German sample covers around 7,000 year-person observations for 1997 and
2002.9
In 1997 and 2002, respondents were asked questions concerning their preferences
for the role of the state in diﬀerent areas of social security. The question reads: “At
present, a multitude of social services are provided not only by the state but also by
private free market enterprises, organizations, associations, or private citizens. What
is your opinion on this? Who should be responsible for the following areas?”. We use
the answers to all areas that concern financial security, namely “financial security in
case of unemployment”, “financial security in case of illness”, “financial security of
families”, “financial security for old-age”, and “financial security for persons needing
9

The numbers of observation vary slightly with the dependent variable.

9

care”.10 The answers are given on a scale of 1 to 5, which correspond to “only the
state”, “mostly the state”, “state and private forces”, “mostly private forces”, and
“only private forces”. We group the first 2 answer categories together to represent
individuals with preference for an active role of the state in providing for its citizens,
and group the last 3 answer categories together to represent individuals with preferences for private forces. Hence, we create 5 new dummy variables which take on
the value of 1 if the respondent answered “only the state” or “mostly the state” for
the respective area, and 0 otherwise. This is mainly done to ease the interpretation
of the coeﬃcients. As a robustness check, we run ordered probit regressions on the
original variables, and the results do not change significantly.11 Table A2 reports the
summary statistics of our newly created variables.12
Our explanatory variable of main interest is an East dummy that takes on the
value of 1 if the respondent lived in East Germany before reunification, regardless
of the current place of residence. Hence, this dummy captures people who lived
under Communism before 1990. The baseline controls include age, gender, marital
status, labor force status, education, and occupation of the respondent, the number of
children and the number of adults in the household, as well as the annual household
income. All monetary variables are in 2002 DM.
We analyze two additional questions that capture the belief of the respondent
regarding important driving forces of success in life. In 1996 and 1999, GSOEP asked
the following question: “The following statements express varying attitudes towards
life and the future. Please state whether you totally agree, agree slightly, disagree
slightly, or totally disagree”, followed by several statements that diﬀer between 1996
and 1999. The first statement we use refers to the role of luck in life. We create a
dummy variable “luck” that takes on the value of 1 if the respondent agreed totally or
10

The questions of interest hence capture diﬀerent areas of state intervention associated with
redistribution and insurance.
11
The basic results using ordered probits are shown in Table A5. All other results are available
from the authors upon request.
12
Table A3 reports summary statistics for the independent variables.

10

slightly with the statements “No one can escape their fate, everything in life happens
as it must happen” in 1996 and “What one achieves in life is mainly a question
of luck or fate” in 1999.13 Similarly, the dummy variable “social conditions” takes
on the value 1 if the respondent agreed totally or slightly with the statement “The
possibilities in my life are determined by the social conditions”.14 The answers to
these questions are also summarized in Table A2.
Table A4 shows income per capita and unemployment rates in German states
(Bundesländer) in 1997 and 2002, as well as transfers per capita that each state
receives from other states and the federal government in line with the German financial
transfer system (see the appendix for an overview of the German transfer system).
Average income per capita in the East is around 80% of the average West income,
and the unemployment rate is roughly twice as large. As we discussed above, before
WWII per capita income levels in East and West Germany were virtually identical.
The 20 percent diﬀerence in per capita income after reunification can be interpreted
as the eﬀect of 45 years of diﬀerent economic and political experiences on economic
development. The lower income levels as well as the higher unemployment rates lead
to the fact that all eastern German states are net recipients of transfers. Among the
western German states, five are net givers, while four are net recipients. Yet, with the
exception of the small state of Bremen, the average transfer received is much larger
in the East than among the net recipients in the West.

3

Basic results

Table 1 reports results from our basic specification, in which we include as explanatory
variables many individual characteristics and our variable of interest, being from the
East. As we discussed above, the left hand side variable is defined as a 0/1 variable
with 1 meaning support for an active state role. We also rerun all these regressions
13
14

We take the average of both questions to alleviate potential measurement error.
This question was asked in 1999. There is no equivalent statement in 1996.

11

using the entire five point scale, and the results are consistent. Table A5 in the
appendix is the same as Table 1, but the left hand side variable has the five point
scale, and an ordered probit estimation is conducted. In the main text, we report the
results from probit regressions for ease of interpretation.15
The first three explanatory variables are the critical ones; and for all five questions
they behave similarly. Consider column 1, which concerns unemployment. An East
German is significantly more likely to have preferences for state provision of financial
security for the unemployed than a West German. Over time, however, the East
Germans are becoming less pro state, since the interaction between being from the
East and the 2002 dummy (the third variable) is negative and statistically significant. The dummy variable of being an East German and the interaction of that with
2002 have similar coeﬃcients on all questions. The coeﬃcients on the East indicator
variable vary from 0.37 to 0.43, and are hence rather uniform. The interaction of
East with 2002 (a rough measure of convergence) varies from -0.06 to -0.18. The
economic meaning of these numbers is as follows. Being from the East increases the
probability of favoring state intervention by between 14.5 and 17 percentage points
in 1997, compared to being from the West. Between 1997 and 2002, the probability
of favoring state intervention for an East German declines by between 2.3 and 6.9
percentage points. Given that these questions are reported at a 5 year interval (1997
and 2002), a very rough measure of convergence would imply full uniformity of views
from a minimum of about 11 years (column 5) to a maximum of 35 years in column 3.
Given that the first survey was taken 7 years after reunification, the complete cycle
of convergence (assuming that it is linear) would be between roughly 20 and 40 years,
depending on the question; roughly one to two generations.16
15

The coeﬃcients reported in the tables are the total coeﬃcients. We report the corresponding
marginal coeﬃcients in the text when we are interpreting the size of the coeﬃcients. The marginal coeﬃcients of interaction variables are calculated as the cross partial derivatives (Ai and Norton, 2003).
The marginal eﬀect on y of a dummy variable x has been calculated as E [y|x = 1] − E [y|x = 0].
16
Our results are based on unweighted observations. If we use the sample weights provided by
GSOEP, the results are very similar. The only diﬀerence worth mentioning is that the convergence
results become on average weaker, indicating an even longer process of convergence. However, when

12

The dummy for 2002 captures the change in preferences of a West German between 1997 and 2002. Note that it is significantly positive, indicating that westerners
are becoming more pro government, for 3 of the 5 regressions. In none of the five
regressions is there significant evidence that West Germans are becoming less pro
government.
The estimates on individual controls yield reasonable results. Men are generally
less pro government (although not consistently on all questions). Larger families,
both in terms of number of children and number of adults, are more favorable to
government intervention, not surprisingly, since they get more benefits. Interestingly,
civil servants have weaker preferences than others for government intervention for the
unemployed, probably because they have very high job security. On the contrary,
those who are unemployed strongly prefer government intervention for unemployed.
Income enters negatively and is statistically significant on all questions; the wealthy
benefit less from government intervention and pay more for it. Similarly, college
educated individuals favor private forces over the state. Self employed are less pro
government either because they benefit less from redistribution, or because being self
employed is correlated with a more individualistic vision of the world and/or with
less risk aversion (Fuchs-Schündeln and Schündeln, 2005).17 All these variables are
always included as controls in all the regressions, and the coeﬃcients are quite stable.
From now on, we do not report them to avoid cluttering the tables.
The data set also includes two variables which proxy for wealth. One is the amount
of interest and dividend income obtained by the household of the respondent; the
second is whether or not the household owns the house it lives in. The inclusion
of these controls might be important, since preferences regarding insurance provided
by the state might be influenced by the possibilities to self-insure through private
we include wealth variables as controls (as described at the end of this section), the convergence
results are again very similar to the unweighted results.
17
All these results on individual controls are qualitatively similar to those obtained for the US by
Alesina and La Ferrara (2005).

13

wealth holdings. When we add these variables in the regressions, the results on the
East-West diﬀerences remain however almost unchanged. The coeﬃcients on the
two wealth variables have the expected signs and are statistically significant. These
results are reported in Table 2. We do not include these two wealth controls in our
basic regressions because of data availability. After the inclusion of these variables,
we lose around 2,200 observations because of non respondence. We checked all our
results including these two variables, in addition to those of Table 1, and the results
are robust.18
To make sure that we capture the eﬀect of having lived in the East, and not the
eﬀect of being “Prussian”, we also include a “Prussia-dummy” as a control into our
regressions. This dummy takes on the value of 1 if in the spring of 1990 the individual
lived in a region that historically belonged to Prussia.19 The definition of a region
here is the Raumordnungsregion of residence. There are 97 Raumordnungsregionen
in Germany in 1990, of which 23 are in the East, and 42 have assigned the value of
1 for the “Prussia-dummy”.20 The estimates of the “Prussia-dummy” are sometimes
positive and sometimes negative, but never significant.21 Moreover, its inclusion does
not change any of the results. Hence, we conclude that we do not capture the eﬀect
of being “Prussian”, but rather the eﬀect of having lived under Communism.

3.1

Age and cohort eﬀects

Let us now consider more closely the eﬀects of the number of years under Communism
on individual preferences. Table 3 shows some striking results.22 Consider column
1. The variable “age” corresponds to the age of the respondent. The East indicator
18

These results are available upon request.
We use Prussia in its borders from 1871 to 1914.
20
We assign the value of 1 to a Raumordnungsregion, if the major part of its territory belonged
to Prussia. As explained in section 2.1.2, not all Raumordnungsregionen of the East belonged to
Prussia, and some Raumordnungsregionen of the West did belong to Prussia.
21
Results are available from the authors upon request.
22
In the regressions of this table we do not include the variables age squared and age cubed to
facilitate the comparison of the age eﬀect.
19

14

variable interacted with age is positive, meaning that older former East Germans
are more favorable to state intervention. Note how age not interacted with East
is negative, meaning that West Germans are becoming less pro government as they
become older, the same result found for the US by Alesina and La Ferrara (2005).
The eﬀect of age on preferences is exactly opposite in East and West. The same
pattern applies to all other questions. The obvious interpretation of these strikingly
diﬀerent age patterns between East Germans and West Germans is that while age
tends to make individuals less pro government in West Germany, this eﬀect is more
than compensated by the fact that elderly East Germans have lived longer under
Communism.
Table 4 pushes this age analysis further by looking at five diﬀerent groups of birth
cohort. The five groups are defined as follows: born after 1975, born between 1961
and 1975, born between 1946 and 1960, born between 1931 and 1945, and born on or
before 1930. Note that the youngest group did only spend their childhood and early
adolescence under Communism; this is the omitted group in the regressions. This
table shows that the older are progressively more pro government than the younger
in the East, a pattern not observed in the West, in which in fact the older tend to be
less pro government than the younger. Interestingly, for some of the questions the old
rather than the oldest group in the East shows the maximum support of government.
Note that the individuals born on or before 1930 lived a significant part of their life
before Communism was introduced.
The quantitative implications of the birth cohort eﬀects are large. Figure 1 represents the results from Table 4 in a diﬀerent way; it shows by how many percentage
points an East German of a certain cohort group is more likely to favor state intervention than a West German of the same cohort group. While an East German from
the youngest group is only between 3 (column 4) and 11 (column 1) percentage points
more likely to be in favor of government redistribution than a West German of the
same group, an East German born on or before 1930 is between 21 percentage points
15

(column 1) and 49 percentage points (column 4) more likely than a West German of
the same cohort group to believe in government redistribution.

3.2

Decomposition of change over time

Given that we observe that older East Germans are more in favor of redistribution
than younger ones, the question arises whether the observed decline in East Germans’
preferences for redistribution between 1997 and 2002 is simply a result of a shift in
the cohort composition, or whether it is caused by changing personal preferences of
East Germans. Even if personal preferences were constant over time, we would expect
that East German preferences converge on average to West German preferences as
older East Germans die and East Germany becomes populated by relatively younger
households who have spent less time of their life under Communism.
To investigate the relative importance of both eﬀects, in Table 5 we report results
from the baseline regressions in which we include only individuals who answer the
relevant questions in both 1997 and 2002.23 Hence, all changes in preferences between
1997 and 2002 are due to changing personal preferences, and not due to changes in
the cohort composition. The interaction eﬀect between East and year 2002 is still
negative in all 5 regressions, and significant in all cases except financial security of
families (column 3). However, the East time eﬀect is now on average substantially
smaller than in the baseline regressions; in absolute terms, it is increasing by 1% in
column 1, up to declining by 63% in column 3. On average, the East time eﬀect is
35% smaller than the eﬀect reported in the baseline results in Table 1. Hence, we
conclude that around two thirds of the convergence arises from actual convergence of
preferences, while around one third arises from changes in the cohort composition.24
The fact that we find significant actual convergence of preferences points against the
23

Note that we use an unbalanced sample for the general results.
The number of observations drops by around 24% if we restrict the sample to those individuals
who answer in both 1997 and 2002. Note that the cohort results from Table 4 are consistent with
the conclusion from this section that one third of the convergence over time can be attributed to
the shifting cohort composition.
24

16

hypothesis that the East eﬀect is only due to self-selection of individuals into the
West before 1961, and that individual preferences are stable over time.

3.3
3.3.1

The eﬀect of Communism: Poverty or preferences?
Individual economic eﬀects

The poor tend to favor government intervention more than the rich. In our regressions,
we always include the logarithmic household income of the respondent as a control,
and the coeﬃcient on this variable is always negative and statistically significant.
Hence, we are measuring the eﬀects of having been in the East controlling for the fact
that the respondent’s income might be lower precisely because he or she lived in the
East. In order to allow for further non-linearities between income and preferences, we
also include a fourth order polynomial of household income instead of the logarithm
of household income, and our estimates remain virtually unchanged.25
In order to capture the extent to which a household currently benefits from redistribution, in Table 6 we split household income up by its sources and include the
logarithms of diﬀerent income components as explanatory variables.26 The first eight
sources of income reported in Table 6 are based on government support (e.g. pension
income, unemployment benefit, maternity benefit), while the last four listed sources
of income are private (e.g. wage income, and income from self-employment). One
would expect a negative eﬀect of income on preferences for state intervention mostly
for this last group. Indeed, the coeﬃcients for this group are almost always negative, and often significant. This is especially true for wage income and income from
self-employment. On the other hand, the coeﬃcients on government income sources
are mostly positive, and sometimes significant. Hence, we find that individuals who
currently benefit from government interventions favor these interventions or are at
25

Results are available from the authors upon request.
Since almost all of the respondents report zero income for at least one of the categories, we
add DM 10 of annual income to every category for every observation before we take the logarithm.
Results are unchanged if we instead add DM 1 or DM 100, or if we include the incomes from diﬀerent
sources in levels and squared.
26

17

least indiﬀerent to them, while income from private sources has a negative eﬀect on
preferences for state intervention. Most importantly, the inclusion of these variables
leaves the estimated East eﬀects almost unchanged, and makes them even slightly
stronger.
In addition to current income, expected future income may explain preferences
for redistribution; individuals who expect to rise in the social ladder may oppose
redistributive policies which might remain in place for several years.27 As a rough
measure of the eﬀects of expected future income, assuming perfect forecasts, we check
whether the growth in income of a respondent between 1997 and 2002 aﬀects his/her
preferences in 1997. The future growth rate of income between 1997 and 2002 has a
negative eﬀect on preferences in 1997, but again its inclusion leaves the estimates of
the East dummy almost unchanged (Table 7).
3.3.2

Aggregate economic eﬀects

In addition to personal income, however, there might be an aggregate income eﬀect;
individuals living in regions poorer than average may prefer government intervention
because of the active redistribution from richer to poorer regions, which in fact takes
place in Germany.
In Table 8 we include as additional controls the average per capita income and
unemployment rate of the state of residence, as well as transfers received or paid by the
state; note that we continue to include as always the income of the respondent. The
level of per capita income turns out never to have a significant eﬀect.28 The regional
unemployment rate has a weak positive influence on preferences for state intervention;
it is only significant in the question regarding the unemployed. Financial transfers
have significant positive predictive power for preferences for state intervention for
the unemployed, as well as for people requiring care. After including these three
27

On this point see Benabou and Ok (2001) and Alesina and La Ferrara (2005).
Results are almost unchanged if we include the logarithm of the average per capita income,
instead of the level.
28

18

regional controls, in the regression regarding the unemployed the coeﬃcient on the
East indicator variable drops from 0.43 to 0.29. This suggests that part of the East
eﬀect estimated above had to do with East German states benefitting financially from
redistribution. A similar pattern occurs with all the other questions. Thus, up to one
third of the ”East eﬀect” can be explained by the fact that the East became poorer
during Communism and is now a net beneficiary of redistribution within Germany,
rather than to an eﬀect of Communism on preferences. The respondents’ preferences
for public intervention are influenced by economic eﬀects in the region where they
live, but even after controlling for that, we still find a large eﬀect of being from the
East.

3.4

Migration and preferences

So far, we have treated all East Germans as one homogeneous group. Yet, 7 percent
of East Germans in our sample have migrated to the West. In Table 9, we add
the dummy variable “East living in East”, which takes on the value of 1 if an East
German lives in the territory of the former East Germany in the observation year,
and 0 otherwise.29
The coeﬃcient on the East-dummy now captures the preferences of an East German living in the West. As the table shows, East Germans living in the West are more
in favor of government intervention than West Germans. However, East Germans living in the East are at least twice as much in favor of government intervention than
East Germans who moved to the West. This result can be interpreted in two ways.
First, it could be that, having lived among West Germans for some time, preferences
29

We also estimated a model in which we include instead a dummy variable “East residence” that
takes on the value of 1 if the respondent lives in the East in the observation year, regardless of
whether the respondent is from the former East or the former West, as well as interactions of this
variable with the East dummy, the year 2002 dummy, and their interaction (results are available
from the authors upon request). While this is a better modeling approach, the interpretation of the
results is more complicated. Since only 0.6% of the West Germans in our sample live in the East, we
hence decided to refrain from splitting the West Germans according to current residence. Results
do not change significantly.

19

of East Germans who moved to the West have converged faster than preferences of
East Germans who stayed in the East. Second, those who migrated to the West
could be a self-selected group that had lower preferences for state intervention to
begin with.30
With regard to convergence, one can observe that all the convergence in preferences between 1997 and 2002 is driven by East Germans who stayed in the East. The
preferences of East Germans who moved to the West do not change in a statistically
significant way between 1997 and 2002. Again, there are several possible explanations
for this phenomenon. It could be that preferences of East Germans who moved to
the West converged initially, but that they have reached their new steady-state level
by 2002. In this case, we should not necessarily expect full convergence either for
East Germans staying in the East. On the other hand, it could be that those East
Germans who moved to the West not only had diﬀerent preferences at the time of
migration, but that their preferences also exhibit diﬀerent convergence patterns. In
the case of preferences regarding financial security when unemployed and financial
security of old individuals and families, East Germans who moved to the West even
become more pro state over time, although this eﬀect is not statistically significant;31
this might be interpreted as a backlash of preferences after experiencing life in the
West.

3.5

Diﬀerences across regions and along other attributes

In order to gain further insides whether the measured eﬀect really captures the eﬀect of
Communism, we analyze the homogeneity of the eﬀect along diﬀerent attributes. We
would expect the eﬀect of Communism to be relatively homogeneous across eastern
states, as well as across diﬀerent groups of the population (e.g. male vs. female
individuals). Hence, we would be worried if the “East” eﬀect on preferences were
30
Note e.g. that the average age of East respondents who moved to the West is 34, while the
average age of East respondents who stayed in the East is 45.
31
The associated p-values are 0.17, 0.38 and 0.95.

20

very heterogeneous, and especially if we only detected it in one or two single states,
or in specific groups of the population.
First, we rerun our baseline regression including separate dummies for all 5 eastern
states plus East Berlin instead of one single East dummy. Note that, consistent
with the East dummy, these dummies refer to the state of residence at the time of
reunification. As the results in Table 10 show, the coeﬃcients on the eastern state
dummies are positive and significant in all states. Moreover, they are of similar size
across the states. The only slight outlier that emerges is the state of MecklenburgVorpommern, which is in 4 out of 5 cases more pro private forces than the other eastern
states, although it is still relatively pro-government compared with West Germany.
With regard to convergence, the results are a little bit more heterogeneous. However,
only 5 out of 30 coeﬃcients on the interaction term between an East German state
and the year 2002 turn out not to be negative, while 15 of the 30 coeﬃcients are
significantly negative. Every state shows significant convergence in at least 1 of the
5 questions.
We redo this exercise on the even smaller units of Raumordnungsregionen (see
section 3).32 While many of the coeﬃcients are not significant, which is not surprising
given the smaller number of observations per unit, the results are quite homogeneous
across the regions.33
To analyze the homogeneity of the eﬀect of Communism on preferences across
diﬀerent groups, we create interactions of all the independent variables with the Eastdummy, and include all interaction terms as further controls.34 Thus, we can test
whether the eﬀect of a certain characteristic on preferences for state intervention is
significantly diﬀerent in the East from the eﬀect in the West. Strikingly, the only
characteristic for which this is consistently the case is age, as we would expect and
32

Results are available from the authors upon request.
The only outlier that emerges is the region Prignitz, which always has an insignificantly negative
coeﬃcient on its dummy variable, and shows convergence only in 2 out of the 5 categories.
34
Results are available from the authors upon request.
33

21

detected before (see the analysis in section 3.1). Only 8 out of the other 105 coeﬃcients
on interaction terms (21 interaction terms in 5 regressions) are statistically significant,
but never consistently across the five diﬀerent regressions.35
Thus, we conclude that the eﬀect of Communism on preferences is homogeneous
across eastern states, and across diﬀerent groups of the East German population
(with the exception of age groups). This makes it even more likely that we capture
the eﬀect of Communism, rather than some aggregate or individual economic eﬀects,
given that the experience of transition has not been uniform across eastern regions
and diﬀerent population groups.

4

Social conditions, individual eﬀort and luck

Why do former East Germans favor state intervention? One possibility is that they
are used to think (partly because of the influence of Communist ideology) that it is
“society’s fault” if people are poor, unemployed or in need of help. If the individual is
not responsible, but society is, then society (i.e. the state) should take care of these
problems.
In Table 11 we report a regression in which the left hand side is a variable that takes
the value of 1 if the respondent believes that social conditions determine individual
possibilities in life. In column 1, we find a strong eﬀect of being from the East. The
probability of believing in the influence of social conditions is 11 percentage points
higher for an East German than a West German. In the next column we interact the
East indicator variable with the age of the respondent and find, once again, a strong
age eﬀect.36 Older East Germans are more likely to believe in social conditions as
major determinants of individual fortunes than younger East Germans. We interpret
35

Being married has a statistically significantly diﬀerent eﬀect in East and West in two out of the
five regressions, as has belonging to the group of "other nonworking". For being male, self-employed,
retired, or having intermediate or technical school as highest education, this is the case in only one
out of the five regressions. The results are unchanged whether we include higher order terms of age
(and their interactions) or not.
36
As in table 3, we omit higher order terms of age as controls in this regression.

22

this as the eﬀect of having lived longer under a Communist regime. In the West, the
age eﬀect is not significant.
Table 12 however shows that the eﬀect of having lived in the East goes well beyond
these beliefs about social conditions. In this table (where as always we control for
all individual characteristics), we repeat the baseline regression including the dummy
variable capturing beliefs in an important role of social conditions as control. While
the variable capturing the beliefs about social conditions has a significantly positive
influence on preferences for an active state role, the East indicator variables are still
significant and only slightly smaller than in the baseline results in Table 1. Thus,
even after controlling for beliefs regarding social conditions, former East Germans
believe in state intervention more than former West Germans.
Alesina and La Ferrara (2005) and Alesina and Glaeser (2004) find that those who
believe that luck determines wealth and success in life are more pro redistribution
than those who belief that mostly individual eﬀort is responsible for success.37 We
pursue this line here as well. Table 13 shows a regression in which the left hand
side variable is defined as 1 if the respondent believes that luck determines individual
fortunes. The East indicator variable is now negative. If we put this result together
with that of Table 11, it appears that East Germans believe more than West Germans
that individuals (being their eﬀort or their luck) matter less than social conditions in
determining success or failure in life. Column 2 shows no age eﬀect for East Germans
beyond the positive age eﬀect also observed for West Germans.38 Table 14 shows that
those who belief that luck matters a lot in determining individual success are more
favorable to government intervention. Not surprisingly, given the lower belief in the
role of luck by East Germans, the inclusion of this variable has no significant eﬀect
on the east indicator variable.
37

Alesina and Angeletos (2005) and Benabou and Tirole (2005) present models seeking to explain
the equilibrium redistributive policies as a function of individual beliefs about luck and eﬀort as
determinants of success.
38
Again, we omit higher order terms of age as controls in this regression.

23

5

Final remarks

We find that East Germans are much more pro-state than West Germans. According
to our results, it will take about one to two generations (20 to 40 years) for an
average East German to have the same views on state intervention as an average
West German. The diﬀerence in preferences between former East and West Germans
is due in large part to the direct eﬀect of Communism. This eﬀect could arise due to
indoctrination, e.g. in public schools, or simply due to becoming used to an intrusive
public sector. A second, indirect eﬀect of Communism is that by making former East
Germany poorer than West Germany, it has made the former more dependent on
redistribution and therefore more favorable to it.
Former West Germany has then received a major “political shock”, in the sense
that the new members of the unified Germany are much more favorable to state intervention. This shock has potentially long-lasting eﬀects, since we find that preferences
need one to two generations to converge.
In evaluating these results, one always has to wonder whether or not survey answers are meaningful, namely whether they reflect what individuals truly believe
(Bertrand and Mullainathan, 2001). We are quite confident that they truly reflect
preferences for two reasons. First, the basic correlations of the answers with variables
like income, wealth, and labor force status are consistent with obvious individual
cost/benefit analyses. Second, evidence on voting behavior in East and West over the
observation period is consistent with the picture emerging from this survey. Table
A6 shows the share of votes obtained by various parties in the diﬀerent states in the
elections for the federal parliament (Bundestagswahlen) in 1998 and 2002. In this
table, the parties are ordered from left to right to coincide with their position in the
political spectrum. Thus, the first column shows the vote share per state of the most
leftist party, the PDS (Partei des Demokratischen Sozialismus), which is in eﬀect the
successor party of the SED (Sozialistische Einheitspartei Deutschlands), the ruling

24

party in the GDR. In 1998, the percentage of votes received by this party was about
20 per cent in the East, but only around 1 to 2 per cent in the West; it was around
10 per cent in Berlin, which includes both former East and former West Berlin. This
is consistent with our finding of a much more pro state, left leaning population in the
East, as captured by the survey. Also, comparing the 2002 and 1998 elections, we see
how the percentage of the PDS votes in the East shrinks substantially, presumably
in favor of the SPD, the main center left party, whose share increases almost identically to the reduction in votes for the PDS. This indicates a movement away from
the communist leaning left toward the center of the political spectrum, and shows
a convergence of the East to the West. This voting behavior is therefore consistent
with the preferences regarding state intervention expressed by the respondents of the
survey.
In summary, we provide evidence that individuals’ preferences are rather deeply
shaped by the political regime in which they live.

References
[1] Ai, Chunrong and Edward C. Norton (2003): Interaction Terms in Logit and
Probit Models, Economics Letters, 80, 123-129.
[2] Alesina, Alberto and George-Marios Angeletos (2005): Fairness and Redistribution, American Economic Review, forthcoming.
[3] Alesina, Alberto and Edward L. Glaeser (2004): Fighting Poverty in the U.S.
and Europe: A World of Diﬀerence, Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.
[4] Alesina, Alberto and Eliana La Ferrara (2005): Preferences for Redistribution in
the Land of Opportunities, Journal of Public Economics, 89, 897-931.
[5] Barro, Robert J. and Rachel M. McCleary (2005): Which Countries have State
Religions?, mimeo, Harvard University.
[6] Benabou, Roland and Efe A. Ok (2001): Social Mobility and the Demand for Redistribution: The POUM Hypothesis, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(2),
447-487.

25

[7] Benabou, Roland and Jean Tirole (2005): Belief in a Just World and Redistributive Policies, mimeo, Princeton University.
[8] Bertrand, Marianne, and Sendhil Mullainathan (2001): Do People Mean What
They Say? Implications for Subjective Survey Data, American Economic Review
Papers & Proceedings, 91(2), 67-72.
[9] Blanchflower, David G. and Richard B. Freeman (1997): The Attitudinal Legacy
of Communist Labor Relations, Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 50(3),
438-459.
[10] Corneo, Giacomo (2001): Inequality and the State: Comparing US and German
Preferences, Annales d’Economie et de Statistique, 63-64, 283-296.
[11] Corneo, Giacomo and Hans Peter Grüner (2002): Individual Preferences for
Political Redistribution, Journal of Public Economics, 83, 83-107.
[12] Fong, Christina (2003): The Tunnel Eﬀect Conjecture, the POUM Hypothesis,
and the Behavioral Assumptions of Economics, mimeo, Carnegie Mellon University.
[13] Fuchs-Schündeln, Nicola and Matthias Schündeln (2005): Precautionary Savings and Self-Selection: Evidence from the German Reunification “Experiment”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3), 1085-1120.
[14] Giavazzi, Francesco and Michael McMahon (2005): All Talk, No Action: The
Eﬀects of Reforms that are Long Discussed but Never Implemented, mimeo,
Bocconi University.
[15] Heidemeyer, Helge (1994): Flucht und Zuwanderung aus der SBZ/DDR
1945/1949-1961, Droste Verlag, Düsseldorf.
[16] McCleary, Rachel M. and Robert J. Barro (2003): Religion and Political Economy in an International Panel, mimeo, Harvard University.
[17] Münz, Rainer, and Ralf Ulrich (1997): Changing Patterns of Immigration to
Germany, 1945-1995: Ethnic Origins, Demographic Structure, Future Prospects,
in: Bade, Klaus J. and Myron Weiner (eds.): Migration Past, Migration Future:
Germany and the United States, Volume 1, Berghahn Books, Providence, Oxford.
[18] Ockenfels, Axel and Joachim Weimann (1999): Types and Patterns: An Experimental East-West-German Comparison of Cooperation and Solidarity, Journal
of Public Economics, 71, 275-287.
[19] Piketty, Thomas (1995): Social Mobility and Redistributive Politics, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 110, 551-584.
26

[20] Ravallion, Martin and Michael Lokshin (2000): Who Wants to Redistribute?
The Tunnel Eﬀect in 1990 Russia, Journal of Public Economics, 76, 87-104.
[21] Rytlewski, Ralf and Manfred Opp de Hipt (1987): Die Deutsche Demokratische
Republik in Zahlen, 1945/49-1980, Verlag H.C. Beck, München.
[22] Schäfgen, Katrin (1998): Die Verdoppelung der Ungleichheit. Sozialstruktur und
Geschlechterverhältnisse in der Bundesrepublik und in der DDR, Dissertation,
Humboldt-Universität.
[23] Schumann, Karl F., Gerhard-Uhland Dietz, Manfred Gehrmann, Heidi Kaspras
and Olaf Struck-Möbbeck (1996): Private Wege der Wiedervereinigung. Die
deutsche Ost-West-Migration vor der Wende, Deutscher Studienverlag, Weinheim.
[24] Shiller, Robert J., Maxim Boycko, and Vladimir Korobov (1992): Hunting for
Homo Sovieticus: Situational versus Attitudinal Factors in Economic Behavior,
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1992/1, 127-194.
[25] Shiller, Robert J., Maxim Boycko, and Vladimir Korobov (1991): Popular Attitudes Toward Free Markets: The Soviet Union and the United States Compared,
American Economic Review, 81(3), 385-400.
[26] Statistisches Jahrbuch für das Deutsche Reich, various issues.
[27] Stephan, Helga and Eberhard Wiedemann (1990): Lohnstruktur und Lohndifferenzierung in der DDR: Ergebnisse der Lohndatenerfassung vom September
1988, Mitteilungen aus der Arbeitsmarkt- und Berufsforschung, 23, 550-562.
[28] Storbeck, Dietrich (1963): Flucht oder Wanderung, Soziale Welt, 14, 153-171.

27

Appendix
A

German regional transfer system

German federalism is a complicated structure, with many legislative areas and taxes
shared between the federal government and the states. Realizing the diﬀerent economic powers of the states, the need for an equalization scheme was written down
in the West German constitution in 1949. In 1993, federal and state governments
reformed the system to administer massive monetary flows into the new eastern German states. The new system (Solidarpakt I ) was established in 1995, and scheduled
to expire at the end of 2004. In response to the still significant economic needs of the
eastern German states, the federal and state governments negotiated an extension of
the system (Solidarpakt II ) in 2001, which started to become eﬀective in 2005 and is
scheduled to expire at the end of 2019. Through the new system, the eastern German
states will receive a total of 306 billion DM (i.e. 156 billion Euro) over a period of 15
years.
The financial equalization scheme between the federal government and the states
(Länderfinanzausgleich) comprises a horizontal and a vertical component. In the horizontal component, the financial needs and financial resources of any given state are
determined via specific formulas. Based on these calculations, it is decided whether
a given state should receive extra financial resources, or should share its resources
with other states. The financial flows between the states in this step sum up to
zero.39 In the subsequent vertical component, certain states receive additional financial resources from the federal government (Bundesergänzungszuweisungen). On top
of that, since 1995 the eastern German states have received special support from the
federal government based on the “law for the promotion of investment in eastern Germany” (Investitionsförderungsgesetz Aufbau Ost). Last, the debt of the East German
government was taken over by the western German states. This led to annual interest
and amortization payments by only the western states (Fonds Deutsche Einheit). In
Table A4, we report the transfers per capita in DM for every state in 1997 and 2002,
adding the vertical and the horizontal component of the Länderfinanzausgleich, as
well as the flows based on the Investitionsförderungsgesetz 40 and the Fonds Deutsche
Einheit.41
39

In a preceding step, the receipts from value added taxes are divided between the states. 75% of
the receipts are divided based on the number of inhabitants, while 25% of the receipts are divided
according to a formula that takes the financial needs of the states into account. Hence, this procedure
leads to some implicit flows between states. Unfortunately, we were not able to obtain the amounts
of these implicit transfers.
40
Since 2002, these flows have become part of the Bundesergänzungszuweisungen, and hence they
have only been added in 1997.
41
Note that results are unchanged when we omit the Fonds Deutsche Einheit in calculating the
transfers.

28

Table 1: Basic regression
Dependent variable

Responsibility for the
financial security when
unemployed (state=1)

Responsibility for the
financial security when
sick (state=1)

Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

east

0.432

0.030

0.434

year02

0.064

0.023

0.165

east*year02

-0.123

0.039

age

-0.026

age squared

0.001

age cubed

0.000

college

-0.203

vocational training
secondary schooling
intermediate schooling

-0.103

male
number of children

Responsibility for the
financial security of the
family (state=1)

Coeff.

Std. Err.

0.028

0.420

0.023

-0.012

-0.161

0.036

0.015

-0.005

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.064

-0.258

-0.096

0.057

-0.101

0.059

Responsibility for the
financial security when
old (state=1)

Responsibility for the
financial security when
requiring care (state=1)

Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

0.028

0.426

0.028

0.371

0.028

0.024

-0.033

0.023

0.103

0.023

-0.060

0.036

-0.143

0.036

-0.176

0.036

0.015

-0.009

0.015

-0.019

0.014

-0.003

0.014

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

-0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.061

-0.141

0.062

-0.277

0.061

-0.122

0.060

-0.140

0.054

-0.136

0.055

-0.163

0.054

-0.087

0.054

-0.071

0.056

-0.023

0.057

-0.103

0.056

-0.068

0.056

0.069

-0.152

0.066

-0.147

0.068

-0.155

0.065

-0.052

0.065

-0.083

0.023

-0.072

0.022

-0.003

0.022

-0.020

0.022

0.020

0.021

0.034

0.014

0.034

0.012

0.064

0.012

0.038

0.012

0.010

0.012

number of adults

0.022

0.013

0.043

0.012

0.022

0.011

0.037

0.011

0.007

0.012

married

0.069

0.039

0.106

0.037

0.026

0.037

0.045

0.036

0.109

0.036

divorced

0.089

0.052

0.048

0.051

0.042

0.050

0.047

0.050

0.107

0.049

married but separated

0.011

0.087

-0.028

0.083

-0.042

0.083

0.082

0.084

0.161

0.084

widowed

-0.050

0.060

0.027

0.058

-0.043

0.059

-0.038

0.057

0.075

0.057

log(household income)

-0.156

0.027

-0.264

0.025

-0.135

0.025

-0.224

0.025

-0.148

0.025

civil servant

-0.122

0.057

-0.222

0.059

0.085

0.059

-0.060

0.059

-0.113

0.055

self-employed

-0.317

0.052

-0.403

0.053

-0.332

0.053

-0.450

0.053

-0.306

0.051

white-collar worker

-0.030

0.033

-0.044

0.032

0.011

0.032

-0.089

0.031

-0.101

0.031

unemployed

0.161

0.051

0.005

0.047

0.142

0.047

0.005

0.046

-0.034

0.046

retired

-0.075

0.059

-0.090

0.057

0.149

0.058

0.019

0.056

0.011

0.056

maternity

0.015

0.080

-0.051

0.077

0.119

0.075

-0.197

0.077

-0.081

0.075

nonworking

-0.027

0.043

-0.022

0.042

0.158

0.042

-0.012

0.041

0.021

0.041

training

-0.049

0.066

-0.021

0.063

-0.115

0.065

-0.086

0.063

-0.021

0.063

other nonworking

-0.000

0.052

-0.093

0.049

0.062

0.049

-0.046

0.049

-0.097

0.049

constant

1.994

0.303

1.852

0.293

0.728

0.293

1.859

0.291

1.178

0.287

obs

18,489

18,487

18,485

18,516

18,514

log likelihood

-11,060

-12,192

-11,954

-12,250

-12,568

Note: Probit regressions. Omitted categories are less than 9 years of schooling, female, single, blue-collar worker, and employed.

Table 2: Basic regression with asset controls
Dependent variable

Responsibility for Responsibility for the Responsibility for the Responsibility for the Responsibility for the
the financial security financial security
financial security of
financial security
financial security
when unemployed when sick (state=1) the family (state=1) when old (state=1) when requiring care
(state=1)
(state=1)
Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

east

0.412

0.032

0.404

year02

0.088

0.025

0.180

0.030

0.399

0.025

-0.009

0.030

0.406

0.030

0.357

0.030

0.026

-0.005

0.025

0.125

east*year02

-0.129

0.041

-0.155

0.039

0.025

-0.067

0.039

-0.146

0.038

-0.195

0.039

log(household asset income)

-0.029

own house

-0.080

0.009

-0.030

0.023

-0.062

0.009

-0.017

0.009

-0.049

0.039

-0.028

0.009

0.023

-0.153

0.023

-0.119

0.023

-0.113

0.023

age
age squared (*103)

-0.028

0.016

0.681

0.328

-0.023

0.016

-0.018

0.016

-0.035

0.016

-0.021

0.016

0.510

0.317

0.433

0.321

0.750

0.316

0.331

age cubed (*103)

0.004

0.002

0.314

-0.003

0.002

-0.003

0.002

-0.005

0.002

-0.002

0.002

college

-0.208

0.071

-0.225

0.067

-0.135

0.068

-0.264

0.067

-0.080

0.066

vocational training

-0.115

0.064

-0.129

0.061

-0.140

0.062

-0.160

0.060

-0.047

0.060

secondary schooling

-0.143

0.066

-0.072

0.062

-0.045

0.064

-0.104

0.062

-0.051

0.062

intermediate schooling

-0.091

0.076

-0.125

0.072

-0.150

0.075

-0.139

0.072

-0.021

0.072

male

-0.102

0.024

-0.076

0.023

-0.008

0.023

-0.023

0.023

0.014

0.023

number of children

0.035

0.015

0.039

0.013

0.077

0.013

0.050

0.013

0.018

0.013

number of adults

0.024

0.014

0.044

0.012

0.037

0.012

0.045

0.012

0.013

0.012

married

0.062

0.041

0.117

0.039

0.028

0.039

0.050

0.039

0.126

0.038

divorced

0.058

0.058

0.045

0.057

0.037

0.057

0.005

0.057

0.093

0.055

married but separated

-0.096

0.102

-0.112

0.098

-0.002

0.097

0.030

0.098

0.184

0.097

widowed

-0.056

0.065

0.020

0.062

-0.062

0.064

-0.055

0.062

0.098

0.061

log(household income)

-0.129

0.030

-0.244

0.029

-0.092

0.029

-0.169

0.028

-0.103

0.028

civil servant

-0.094

0.059

-0.198

0.061

0.084

0.061

-0.020

0.061

-0.082

0.057

self-employed

-0.260

0.055

-0.356

0.056

-0.322

0.058

-0.431

0.057

-0.254

0.054

white-collar worker

-0.016

0.035

-0.028

0.034

0.013

0.034

-0.072

0.033

-0.091

0.033

unemployed

0.181

0.057

0.028

0.053

0.150

0.053

0.047

0.053

-0.035

0.052

retired

-0.072

0.063

-0.119

0.061

0.130

0.062

0.028

0.060

0.005

0.060

maternity

-0.008

0.087

-0.010

0.065

0.105

0.082

-0.207

0.086

-0.033

0.084

nonworking

-0.015

0.047

-0.008

0.045

0.155

0.045

0.012

0.045

0.023

0.044

training

-0.008

0.072

-0.003

0.069

-0.093

0.071

-0.063

0.069

0.043

0.068

other nonworking

0.027

0.055

-0.065

0.053

0.064

0.053

-0.005

0.053

-0.061

0.053

constant

2.010

0.334

2.128

0.325

0.626

0.324

1.928

0.320

1.198

0.317

obs

16,260

16,257

16,255

16,282

16,278

log likelihood

-9,762

-10,683

-10,458

-10,693

-11,020

Note: Probit regressions. Omitted categories are less than 9 years of schooling, female, single, blue-collar worker, and employed.

Table 3: Regressions with east*age interaction
Dependent variable

Responsibility for the
Responsibility for the
Responsibility for the
Responsibility for the
Responsibility for the
financial security when financial security when financial security of the financial security when financial security when
unemployed (state=1)
sick (state=1)
family (state=1)
old (state=1)
requiring care (state=1)

Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

east
year02
east*year02

0.029
0.070
-0.139

0.064
0.023
0.039

-0.034
0.172
-0.176

0.060
0.023
0.036

-0.032
-0.006
-0.074

0.060
0.024
0.037

-0.226
-0.024
-0.168

0.060
0.023
0.036

0.002
0.108
-0.189

0.059
0.023
0.036

age
east*age

-0.000
0.009

0.001
0.001

-0.002
0.011

0.001
0.001

-0.003
0.010

0.001
0.001

-0.003
0.015

0.001
0.001

-0.005
0.008

0.001
0.001

obs
18,489
18,487
18,485
18,516
18,514
log likelihood
-11,034
-12,148
-11,914
-12,165
-12,541
Note: Probit regressions. Included as controls are number of children and number of adults in household, logarithm of household income, and dummies for education,
sex, marital status, employment status, and occupation.

Table 4: Regressions with cohorts interacted with east
Dependent variable

Responsibility for the Responsibility for the Responsibility for the Responsibility for the Responsibility for the
financial security when financial security when financial security of the financial security when financial security when
sick (state=1)
family (state=1)
old (state=1)
requiring care (state=1)
unemployed (state=1)
Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

east
year02
east*year02

0.318
0.066
-0.111

0.068
0.026
0.039

0.246
0.162
-0.137

0.063
0.026
0.037

0.147
-0.045
-0.033

0.064
0.027
0.037

0.081
-0.066
-0.107

0.064
0.026
0.036

0.205
0.105
-0.156

0.064
0.025
0.036

born 1961-1975
born 1946-1960
born 1931-1945
born before 1931
born 1961-1975*east
born 1946-1960*east
born 1931-1945*east
born before 1931*east

0.014
-0.092
-0.064
-0.008
-0.106
0.169
0.356
0.303

0.074
0.100
0.127
0.155
0.075
0.077
0.081
0.099

0.018
-0.061
-0.105
-0.104
-0.007
0.180
0.392
0.458

0.070
0.095
0.122
0.149
0.071
0.072
0.075
0.091

-0.204
-0.431
-0.488
-0.420
0.120
0.286
0.501
0.454

0.072
0.097
0.124
0.151
0.071
0.073
0.076
0.090

-0.215
-0.391
-0.517
-0.467
0.128
0.314
0.643
0.754

0.072
0.096
0.123
0.151
0.072
0.073
0.076
0.091

-0.027
-0.086
-0.092
-0.006
0.012
0.152
0.365
0.391

0.070
0.094
0.120
0.146
0.071
0.073
0.076
0.090

obs
18,489
18,487
18,485
18,516
18,514
log likelihood
-11,021
-12,152
-11,905
-12,162
-12,534
Note: Probit regressions. Included as controls are cubic function in age, number of children and number of adults in household, logarithm of household income, and
dummies for education, sex, marital status, employment status, and occupation.

Table 5: Regressions with individuals who answer in 1997 and 2002
Dependent variable

Responsibility for the
financial security when
unemployed (state=1)

Responsibility for the
financial security when
sick (state=1)

Responsibility for the
financial security of the
family (state=1)

Responsibility for the
Responsibility for the
financial security when financial security when
old (state=1)
requiring care (state=1)

Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

east

0.446

0.035

0.394

0.033

0.407

0.033

0.391

0.033

0.333

0.033

year02

0.052

0.026

0.164

0.026

-0.032

0.027

-0.048

0.026

0.095

0.025

east*year02

-0.124

0.043

-0.109

0.040

-0.022

0.040

-0.067

0.039

-0.130

0.040

obs

14,110

14,110

14,110

14,110

14,110

log likelihood
-8,414
-9,321
-9,131
-9,323
-9,576
Note: Probit regressions. Included as controls are cubic function in age, number of children and number of adults in household, logarithm of household income, and
dummies for education, sex, marital status, employment status, and occupation.

Table 6: Regressions with income sources
Dependent variable

Responsibility for
Responsibility for
Responsibility for
Responsibility for
Responsibility for
the financial security the financial security the financial security the financial security the financial security
when unemployed when sick (state=1)
of the family
when old (state=1) when requiring care
(state=1)
(state=1)
(state=1)
Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

east

0.448

0.030

0.468

0.028

0.437

0.028

0.459

0.028

0.396

0.028

year02

0.050

0.023

0.146

0.023

-0.023

0.024

-0.055

0.024

0.089

0.023

east*year02

-0.128

0.039

-0.176

0.037

-0.069

0.037

-0.145

0.036

-0.184

0.036

pension income

0.007

0.006

0.002

0.005

-0.001

0.005

0.001

0.005

0.002

0.005

widow/orphan pension

-0.011

0.009

-0.012

0.009

-0.011

0.009

-0.006

0.008

0.009

0.008

short-term unemployment benefit

0.012

0.006

0.018

0.006

0.006

0.006

0.001

0.006

-0.007

0.006

long-term unemployment benefit

0.006

0.010

0.004

0.009

-0.002

0.009

-0.009

0.009

-0.006

0.009

support for training/education

0.000

0.011

0.015

0.010

0.009

0.010

0.026

0.010

0.020

0.010

maternity benefit

0.000

0.010

0.012

0.010

-0.010

0.010

-0.001

0.010

0.001

0.010

student grant

0.022

0.014

0.021

0.013

0.003

0.012

-0.000

0.013

0.031

0.013

military compensation

0.009

0.014

0.000

0.013

-0.007

0.013

-0.003

0.013

0.022

0.013

wage income

-0.010

0.005

-0.006

0.005

-0.017

0.004

-0.009

0.004

-0.009

0.005

income from self-employment

-0.022

0.006

-0.026

0.006

-0.024

0.006

-0.026

0.006

-0.014

0.006

income from additional employment

-0.002

0.006

-0.003

0.006

-0.010

0.006

-0.006

0.006

-0.017

0.006

payments from persons not in household

-0.010

0.010

-0.003

0.010

0.014

0.010

-0.014

0.010

-0.002

0.010

obs

18,122

18,122

18,122

18,149

18,147

log likelihood
-10,832
-11,993
-11,708
-12,029
-12,320
Note: Probit regressions. Included as controls are cubic function in age, number of children and number of adults in household, and dummies for education, sex, marital
status, employment status, and occupation. Income source variables are in logs.

Table 7: Regressions with future income
Responsibility for the Responsibility for the Responsibility for the Responsibility for the Responsibility for the
financial security when financial security when financial security of the financial security when financial security when
unemployed (state=1)
sick (state=1)
family (state=1)
old (state=1)
requiring care
(state=1)

Dependent variable

east
future log(income) change

Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

0.429
0.012

0.036
0.041

0.380
-0.123

0.034
0.040

0.407
-0.032

0.034
0.040

0.381
-0.062

0.034
0.040

0.319
-0.065

0.034
0.040

obs
7,404
7,402
7,399
7,412
7,411
log likelihood
-4,390
-4,814
-4,802
-4,895
-4,990
Note: Probit regressions. Included as controls are cubic function in age, number of children and number of adults in household, logarithm of household income, and
dummies for education, sex, marital status, employment status, and occupation.

Table 8: Regressions with aggregate regional variables
Dependent variable

Responsibility for the
Responsibility for the
Responsibility for the
Responsibility for the
Responsibility for the
financial security when financial security when financial security of the financial security when financial security when
unemployed (state=1)
sick (state=1)
family (state=1)
old (state=1)
requiring care (state=1)

Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

east

0.293

0.050

0.330

0.047

0.367

0.047

0.313

0.047

0.235

0.046

year02

0.091

0.031

0.209

0.030

-0.001

0.031

-0.004

0.030

0.115

0.030

east*year02

-0.138

0.041

-0.164

0.038

-0.070

0.038

-0.143

0.038

-0.173

0.038

state income

0.009

0.009

-0.013

0.009

0.007

0.009

-0.009

0.009

-0.002

0.009

state unemployment

0.014

0.007

0.007

0.007

0.008

0.007

0.004

0.007

0.003

0.007

transfers (*103)

0.042

0.022

-0.010

0.021

0.015

0.021

0.016

0.021

0.054

0.021

obs

18,488

18,486

18,484

18,515

18,513

log likelihood
-11,046
-12,186
-11,950
-12,244
-12,555
Note: Probit regressions. Included as controls are cubic function in age, number of children and number of adults in household, logarithm of household income, and
dummies for education, sex, marital status, employment status, and occupation.

Table 9: Regressions with residence
Dependent variable

Responsibility for the Responsibility for the Responsibility for the Responsibility for the Responsibility for the
financial security
financial security
financial security of
financial security
financial security
when unemployed
when sick (state=1)
the family (state=1)
when old (state=1)
when requiring care
(state=1)
(state=1)
Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

east

0.076

0.090

0.204

0.089

0.221

0.089

0.202

0.088

0.130

0.088

east living in East

0.383

0.092

0.246

0.090

0.212

0.090

0.239

0.089

0.258

0.089

year02

0.064

0.023

0.165

0.023

-0.013

0.024

-0.033

0.023

0.103

0.023

east*year02

0.160

0.117

-0.070

0.111

0.100

0.114

0.007

0.107

-0.085

0.113

(east living in East)*year02

-0.302

0.119

-0.092

0.113

-0.169

0.114

-0.157

0.108

-0.092

0.114

obs

18,489

18,487

18,485

18,516

18,514

log likelihood
-11,052
-12,187
-11,951
-12,246
-12,562
Note: Probit regressions. Included as controls are cubic function in age, number of children and number of adults in household, logarithm of household income, and
dummies for education, sex, marital status, employment status, and occupation.

Table 10: Regressions with east states interacted with year02
Dependent variable

Responsibility for the Responsibility for the Responsibility for the Responsibility for the Responsibility for the
financial security
financial security
financial security of
financial security
financial security
when unemployed when sick (state=1) the family (state=1) when old (state=1) when requiring care
(state=1)
(state=1)

Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

East Berlin

0.442

0.091

0.537

0.083

0.477

0.082

0.375

0.082

0.449

0.083

Mecklenburg-Vorpommern

0.265

0.068

0.290

0.064

0.253

0.064

0.300

0.063

0.390

0.064

Brandenburg

0.399

0.062

0.341

0.057

0.416

0.057

0.457

0.057

0.371

0.057

Sachsen-Anhalt

0.503

0.059

0.519

0.052

0.452

0.052

0.520

0.052

0.446

0.052

Thüringen

0.553

0.060

0.407

0.053

0.405

0.052

0.416

0.052

0.311

0.052

Sachsen

0.416

0.047

0.475

0.043

0.465

0.042

0.428

0.042

0.347

0.042

year02

0.067

0.023

0.162

0.023

-0.015

0.024

-0.037

0.023

0.097

0.023

East Berlin * year02

-0.048

0.127

-0.376

0.107

0.020

0.109

-0.026

0.109

-0.137

0.110

Mecklenburg-Vorpommern * year02

0.086

0.099

-0.005

0.092

0.066

0.089

0.010

0.088

-0.178

0.090

Brandenburg * year02

-0.023

0.085

-0.029

0.075

0.025

0.072

-0.134

0.075

-0.229

0.075

Sachsen-Anhalt * year02

-0.130

0.079

-0.226

0.069

-0.110

0.071

-0.213

0.068

-0.220

0.070

Thüringen * year02

-0.457

0.075

-0.138

0.070

-0.096

0.068

-0.123

0.070

-0.010

0.067

Sachsen * year02

-0.063

0.061

-0.200

0.056

-0.106

0.055

-0.185

0.054

-0.207

0.056

obs

18,286

18,283

18,283

18,312

18,311

log likelihood
-10,919
-12,042
-11,812
-12,098
-12,414
Note: Probit regressions. Included as controls are cubic function in age, number of children and number of adults in household, logarithm of household income, and
dummies for education, sex, marital status, employment status, and occupation.

Table 11: Regressions with social conditions as the dependent variable
Dependent variable:
Social conditions define possibilities
(agree=1)

east

BASIC REGRESSION

REGRESSION INCLUDING
AGE*EAST INTERACTION

Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

0.292

0.032

-0.186

0.085

0.011

0.002

0.002

0.002

age*east
age

0.008

0.022

age squared

-0.000

0.000

age cubed

-0.000

0.000

college

-0.097

0.097

-0.116

0.093

vocational training

-0.073

0.089

-0.077

0.085

secondary schooling

-0.030

0.091

-0.024

0.089

intermediate schooling

-0.033

0.104

-0.038

0.103

male

-0.145

0.031

-0.145

0.031

number of children

0.018

0.017

0.022

0.017

number of adults

0.047

0.015

0.048

0.015

married

-0.035

0.051

-0.039

0.047

divorced

0.037

0.072

0.036

0.069

married but separated

0.009

0.125

0.014

0.124

widowed

0.127

0.084

0.128

0.083

log(household income)

-0.140

0.037

-0.135

0.037

civil servant

-0.181

0.076

-0.178

0.076

self-employed

-0.266

0.070

-0.267

0.069

white-collar worker

-0.027

0.044

-0.032

0.044

unemployed

0.159

0.068

0.152

0.068

retired

-0.121

0.086

-0.126

0.073

maternity

0.028

0.112

0.018

0.112

nonworking

0064

0.059

0.051

0.059

training

0.049

0.095

0.049

0.093

other nonworking

-0.161

0.071

-0.169

0.070

constant

1.201

0.439

1.390

0.322

obs

8,580

8,580

log likelihood

-5,412

-5,394

Note: Probit regressions. Omitted categories are less than 9 years of schooling, female, single, blue-collar worker, and employed.

Table 12: Regressions with social conditions as a control variable
Dependent variable

Responsibility for the Responsibility for the Responsibility for the Responsibility for the Responsibility for the
financial security
financial security when financial security of the financial security when financial security when
when unemployed
sick (state=1)
family (state=1)
old (state=1)
requiring care (state=1)
(state=1)
Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

east
year02
east*year02

0.421
0.050
-0.131

0.032
0.025
0.041

0.423
0.154
-0.145

0.030
0.024
0.038

0.412
-0.026
-0.051

0.030
0.026
0.038

0.406
-0.041
-0.108

0.030
0.025
0.038

0.334
0.093
-0.136

0.030
0.024
0.038

social conditions

0.075

0.024

0.087

0.023

0.089

0.023

0.087

0.023

0.073

0.023

obs
16,197
16,202
16,199
16,224
16,222
log likelihood
-9,659
-10,682
-10,484
-10,727
-11,010
Note: Probit regressions. Included as controls are cubic function in age, number of children and number of adults in household, logarithm of household income, and
dummies for education, sex, marital status, employment status, and occupation.

Table 13: Regressions with luck as the dependent variable
Dependent variable:
Life achievements determined by luck (agree=1)

BASIC REGRESSION
Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

east

-0.273

0.031

-0.402

0.081

0.003

0.002

age

-0.109

0.020

0.011

0.002

age squared

0.002

0.000

age cubed

-0.000

0.000

college

-0.864

0.094

-1.009

0.091

vocational training

-0.223

0.084

-0.359

0.080

secondary schooling

-0.134

0.086

-0.230

0.084

intermediate schooling

-0.186

0.097

-0.227

0.097

male

-0.149

0.030

-0.143

0.030

number of children

0.032

0.016

0.015

0.016

number of adults

0.068

0.014

0.074

0.014

married

0.037

0.050

-0.045

0.046

divorced

0.075

0.069

-0.016

0.066

married but separated

0.182

0.117

0.103

0.115

widowed

0.195

0.078

0.103

0.076

log(household income)

-0.406

0.036

-0.403

0.036

civil servant

-0.357

0.085

-0.374

0.085

self-employed

-0.145

0.070

-0.166

0.070

white-collar worker

-0.173

0.043

-0.197

0.043

unemployed

-0.015

0.062

-0.019

0.062

retired

-0.079

0.080

-0.035

0.068

maternity

-0.287

0.112

-0.278

0.112

nonworking

-0.056

0.055

-0.016

0.054

training

-0.370

0.092

-0.263

0.090

other nonworking

-0.374

0.070

-0.314

0.069

constant

4.586

0.419

2.972

0.311

obs

9,753

REGRESSION INCLUDING
AGE*EAST INTERACTION

age*east

9,753

log likelihood
-5,700
-5,717
Note: Probit regressions. Omitted categories are less than 9 years of schooling, female, single, blue-collar worker, and
employed.

Table 14: Regressions with luck as a control variable
Dependent variable

Responsibility for the Responsibility for the Responsibility for the Responsibility for the Responsibility for the
financial security when financial security when financial security of the financial security when financial security when
unemployed (state=1)
sick (state=1)
family (state=1)
old (state=1)
requiring care (state=1)
Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

east
year02
east*year02

0.432
0.061
-0.134

0.030
0.023
0.040

0.442
0.160
-0.142

0.029
0.024
0.037

0.430
-0.022
-0.046

0.028
0.025
0.037

0.435
-0.039
-0.119

0.028
0.024
0.037

0.375
0.102
-0.157

0.028
0.023
0.037

luck

0.038

0.024

0.135

0.023

0.077

0.023

0.114

0.023

0.067

0.023

obs
17,532
17,535
17,530
17,559
17,558
log likelihood
-10.510
-11,540
-11,331
-11,600
-11,906
Note: Probit regressions. Included as controls are cubic function in age, number of children and number of adults in household, logarithm of household income, and
dummies for education, sex, marital status, employment status, and occupation.

Figure 1: By how many percentage points is an East German of a certain birth
cohort group more likely to favor state intervention than a West German of the
same birth cohort group?

0.6

born after 1975
born 1961-1975
born1946-1960
born 1931-1945
born before 1931

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

em

re
ca

d
ol

ily

si
ck

m
fa

pl

oy

ed

0

un

percentage points

0.5

Table A1: Average per capita income 1928, 1932, and 1936 by region

Prussia
Provinz East-Prussia

1928
(in 1928 Mark)

1932
(in 1928 Mark)

1936
(in 1928 Mark)

1,174

869

1,161

814

673

849

Stadt Berlin (E/W)

1,822

1311

1,895

Provinz Brandenburg (E)

1,140

917

1,158

Provinz Pommern

921

721

967

Grenzmark Posen/West-Prussia

837

649

781

1,057

804

953

Niederschlesien
Oberschlesien
Sachsen (E)

850

599

758

1,155

844

1,161

Schleswig-Holstein (W)

1,164

938

1,192

Hannover (W)

1,069

859

1,156

Westfalen (W)

1,080

755

1,045

Hessen-Nassau (W)

1,226

963

1,140

Rheinprovinz (W)

1,218

857

1,171
1,049

Bayern (W)

1,041

785

Sachsen (E)

1,423

964

1,270

Württemberg (W)

1,183

1015

1,348

Baden (W)

1,135

859

1,117

Thüringen (E)

1,095

784

1,087

Hessen (W)

1,158

797

1,039

Hamburg (W)

1,754

1304

1,746

Other Länder

1,155

913

1,314

Deutsches Reich

1,185

875

1,173

Source: Statistisches Jahrbuch für das Deutsche Reich, various issues.

Table A2: Summary statistics
year

variable

West sample
Obs.

1997 Responsibility for the financial
security when unemployed
(state=1)
Responsibility for the financial
security when sick (state=1)
Responsibility for the financial
security of the family (state=1)
Responsibility for the financial
security when old (state=1)

Per cent

East Sample
Obs.

Per cent

6,104

63.24%

3,735

78.85%

6,105

34.50%

3,728

52.76%

6,095

32.78%

3,732

49.06%

6,110

38.46%

3,737

56.09%

Responsibility for the financial
security when requiring care
(state=1)

6,110

40.77%

3,737

56.44%

2002 Responsibility for the financial
security when unemployed
(state=1)

5,307

65.33%

3,343

76.64%

Responsibility for the financial
security when sick (state=1)

5,309

40.01%

3,345

51.81%

Responsibility for the financial
security of the family (state=1)

5,311

32.10%

3,347

45.65%

Responsibility for the financial
security when old (state=1)

5,319

36.70%

3,350

48.51%

Responsibility for the financial
security when requiring care
(state=1)

5,313

44.27%

3,354

53.04%

year

variable

West sample
Obs.

Per cent

East Sample
Obs.

Per cent

1997 Life achievements determined
by luck or effort (luck=1)

6,555

40.23%

4,070

31.40%

Social conditions define
possibilities (agree=1)

5,523

60.44%

3,465

72.41%

Table A3: Summary statistics for the independent variables
year

variable

1997 age
college
vocational training
secondary schooling
intermediate schooling
male
number of children
number of adults
married
divorced
married but separated
widowed
household income
civil servant
self-employed
white-collar worker
unemployed
retired
maternity
nonworking
training
other nonworking

2002 age
college
vocational training
secondary schooling
intermediate schooling
male
number of children
number of adults
married
divorced
married but separated
widowed
household income
civil servant
self-employed
white-collar worker
unemployed
retired
maternity
nonworking
training
other nonworking

West sample

East Sample

Mean

Std. Dev.

Mean

Std. Dev.

43.7
10.4%
52.9%
15.7%
17.6%
47.9%
0.823
2.411
60.8%
6.5%
1.6%
7.6%
4,914
4.8%
4.8%
24.7%
3.6%
15.9%
1.8%
12.7%
3.1%
5.2%

18.5

41.3
19.5%
51.5%
7.6%
17.7%
48.4%
0.712
2.521
61.9%
6.6%
1.2%
6.2%
4,069
1.6%
3.8%
22.4%
10.5%
11.9%
1.6%
9.4%
4.0%
4.9%

18.2

46.9
11.5%
52.8%
15.2%
15.2%
47.7%
0.788
2.193
61.3%
6.8%
1.5%
7.4%
5,179
4.2%
5.4%
27.8%
2.9%
18.3%
2.2%
10.6%
3.0%
5.0%

1.040
1.107

2,431

17.8

0.988
0.939

2,813

44.5
20.6%
54.5%
7.1%
13.4%
48.8%
0.576
2.286
56.7%
7.5%
1.9%
6.4%
4,258
1.8%
3.8%
23.6%
9.0%
14.9%
1.8%
8.3%
4.2%
5.9%

Note: Omitted categories are less than 9 years of schooling, female, single, blue-collar worker, and employed.

0.903
1.121

1,897

17.3

0.818
0.898

2,011

Table A4: Average income per capita, unemployment rates, and transfers by states
Average income per
capita (in DM)

Unemployment
rates (in %)

1997*

2002

1997

2002

1997*

2002

Berlin

28,830

28,528

17.3

16.9

2,922

3,020

WEST
Baden-Württemberg
Bayern
Bremen
Hamburg
Hessen
Niedersachsen
Nordrhein-Westfalen
Rheinland-Pfalz, Saarland
Schleswig-Holstein

32,621
32,011
35,588
35,056
30,683
30,149
32,198
29,625
31,178

34,843
33,895
37,231
36,709
32,803
31,473
34,168
31,329
31,655

8.7
8.7
16.8
13.0
10.4
12.9
12.2
11.0
11.2

5.4
6.0
12.6
9.0
6.9
9.2
9.2
7.6
8.7

-249
-276
3,912
-172
-559
285
-182
720
132

-305
-325
3,458
-223
-614
319
-176
649
278

EAST
Brandenburg
Mecklenburg-Vorpommern
Sachsen
Sachsen-Anhalt
Thüringen

26,288
24,878
25,867
25,227
25,338

28,047
26,834
28,099
27,313
27,941

18.9
20.3
18.4
21.7
19.1

17.5
18.6
17.8
19.6
15.9

1,889
2,067
1,912
1,998
2,015

1,793
2,016
1,893
1,985
1,954

* Values adjusted for inflation.

Transfers per capita
(in DM)

Table A5: Basic regression - ordered probit
Dependent variable

Responsibility for the Responsibility for the Responsibility for the Responsibility for the Responsibility for the
financial security when financial security when financial security of financial security when financial security when
unemployed (state=1,
sick (state=1,
the family (state=1,
old (state=1,
requiring care
private=5)
private=5)
private=5)
private=5)
(state=1, private=5)
Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

Coeff.

Std. Err.

east

-0.378

0.024

-0.376

0.024

-0.349

0.024

-0.342

0.024

-0.307

0.024

year02

-0.038

0.019

-0.151

0.020

-0.014

0.020

0.001

0.019

-0.090

0.020

east*year02

0.102

0.030

0.137

0.030

0.031

0.029

0.122

0.030

0.157

0.031

age

0.016

0.013

-0.002

0.013

0.004

0.013

0.006

0.013

0.007

0.013

age squared (*103)

-0.367

0.253

-0.030

0.261

-0.133

0.258

-0.195

0.251

-0.063

0.259

age cubed (*103)

0.002

0.002

0.000

0.002

0.001

0.002

0.001

0.002

-0.000

0.002

college

0.278

0.055

0.339

0.056

0.200

0.056

0.294

0.057

0.240

0.055

vocational training

0.193

0.050

0.213

0.050

0.176

0.051

0.195

0.051

0.183

0.050

secondary schooling

0.183

0.051

0.160

0.052

0.076

0.052

0.175

0.053

0.167

0.052

intermediate schooling

0.171

0.058

0.146

0.059

0.155

0.059

0.131

0.060

0.144

0.060

male

0.057

0.019

0.098

0.019

0.022

0.018

0.072

0.019

0.022

0.019

number of children

-0.018

0.011

-0.027

0.010

-0.045

0.010

-0.027

0.010

-0.008

0.010

number of adults

-0.016

0.010

-0.047

0.010

-0.029

0.010

-0.038

0.009

-0.008

0.010

married

-0.036

0.031

-0.061

0.032

-0.006

0.031

-0.012

0.031

-0.084

0.032

divorced

-0.084

0.043

-0.003

0.044

-0.055

0.043

-0.030

0.044

-0.083

0.045

married but separated

0.065

0.067

0.026

0.068

0.034

0.066

-0.055

0.069

-0.139

0.069

widowed

0.009

0.050

-0.032

0.049

0.018

0.049

0.047

0.048

-0.051

0.050

log(household income)

0.129

0.022

0.234

0.022

0.135

0.021

0.217

0.022

0.144

0.022

civil servant

0.114

0.048

0.203

0.049

-0.093

0.049

0.121

0.047

0.105

0.046

self-employed

0.302

0.044

0.381

0.044

0.317

0.044

0.441

0.043

0.319

0.043

white-collar worker

0.056

0.027

0.062

0.027

0.012

0.026

0.130

0.027

0.123

0.027

unemployed

-0.113

0.037

-0.009

0.039

-0.119

0.037

0.008

0.039

0.024

0.040

retired

0.027

0.047

0.090

0.050

-0.098

0.048

0.085

0.048

0.040

0.049

maternity

-0.034

0.061

0.030

0.062

-0.099

0.056

0.162

0.060

0.116

0.062

nonworking

-0.009

0.034

0.018

0.035

-0.147

0.034

0.026

0.034

0.000

0.035

training

0.018

0.054

0.008

0.056

0.059

0.056

-0.002

0.054

0.022

0.056

other nonworking

0.008

0.041

0.186

0.042

-0.048

0.043

0.058

0.043

0.088

0.043

obs

18,688

18,688

18,688

18,688

18,688

log likelihood

-22,278

-21,857

-23,366

-22,695

-21,306

Note: Ordered probit regressions. Omitted categories are less than 9 years of schooling, female, single, blue-collar worker, and employed.

Table A6: Results of elections for the Bundestag, 1998 and 2002
State

year

PDS

GRÜNE

SPD

CDU/CSU

FDP

others

1998

13.4

11.3

37.8

23.7

4.9

8.8

2002

11.4

14.6

36.6

25.9

6.6

4.9

1998

1.0

9.2

35.6

37.8

8.8

7.6

2002

0.9

11.4

33.5

42.8

7.8

3.6

Berlin

WEST
Baden-Württemberg

Bayern
1998

0.7

5.9

34.4

47.7

5.1

6.2

2002

0.7

7.6

26.1

58.6

4.5

2.4

Bremen
1998

2.4

11.3

50.2

25.4

5.9

4.7

2002

2.2

15.0

48.6

24.6

6.7

2.9

Hamburg
1998

2.3

10.8

45.7

30.0

6.5

4.7

2002

2.1

16.2

42.0

28.1

6.8

4.8

Hessen
1998

1.5

8.2

41.6

34.7

7.9

6.2

2002

1.3

10.7

39.7

37.1

8.2

2.9

Niedersachsen
1998

1.0

5.9

49.4

34.1

6.4

3.2

2002

1.0

7.3

47.8

34.5

7.1

2.2

Nordrhein-Westfalen
1998

1.2

6.9

46.9

33.8

7.3

4.0

2002

1.2

8.9

43.0

35.1

9.3

2.5

1998

1.0

6.1

41.3

39.1

7.1

5.4

2002

1.0

7.9

38.2

40.2

9.3

3.3

Rheinland-Pfalz

Saarland
1998

1.0

5.5

52.4

31.8

4.7

4.5

2002

1.4

7.6

46.0

35.0

6.4

3.7

1998

1.5

6.5

45.4

35.7

7.6

3.3

2002

1.3

9.4

42.9

36.0

8.0

2.4

1998

20.3

3.6

43.5

20.8

2.8

8.9

2002

17.2

4.5

46.4

22.3

5.8

3.8

Schleswig-Holstein

EAST
Brandenburg

Mecklenburg-Vorpommern
1998

23.6

2.9

35.3

29.3

2.2

6.6

2002

16.3

3.5

41.7

30.3

5.4

2.8

Sachsen
1998

20.0

4.4

29.1

32.7

3.6

10.2

2002

16.2

4.6

33.3

33.6

7.3

5.1

Sachsen-Anhalt
1998

20.7

3.3

38.1

27.2

4.1

6.6

2002

14.4

3.4

43.2

29.0

7.6

2.4

Thüringen
1998

21.2

3.9

34.5

28.9

3.4

8.1

2002

17.0

4.3

39.9

29.4

5.9

3.6

Source: Statistisches Bundesamt, Wirtschaft und Statistik 10/2002, p.827, Table 4.

