                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                INCOME RISK AND THE BENEFITS OF SOCIAL INSURANCE:
                 EVIDENCE FROM INDONESIA AND THE UNITED STATES

                                               Raj Chetty
                                              Adam Looney

                                          Working Paper 11708
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11708


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2005




This paper was prepared for the 2005 NBER East Asian Seminar on Economics. We have benefited from
comments by Pranab Bardhan, Roger Gordon, Mario Lamberte, Ted Miguel, and conference participants.
James Sly and Bhuvan Jain provided excellent research assistance. The analysis and conclusions set forth
are those of the authors and do not indicate concurrence by other members of the research staff or the Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Raj Chetty and Adam Looney. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Income Risk and the Benefits of Social Insurance: Evidence from Indonesia and the United
States
Raj Chetty and Adam Looney
NBER Working Paper No. 11708
October 2005, Revised September 2006
JEL No. H0

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper examines the welfare consequences of social safety nets in developing economies relative
to developed economies. Using panel surveys of households in Indonesia and the United States, we
find that food consumption falls by approximately ten percent when individuals become unemployed
in both countries. This finding suggests that introducing a formal social insurance program would
have small benefits in terms of reducing consumption fluctuations in Indonesia. However, in contrast
with households in the U.S., Indonesians use costly methods such as reducing human capital
investment to smooth consumption. The primary benefit of social insurance in developing countries
may therefore come not from consumption smoothing itself but from reducing the use of inefficient

smoothing methods.


Raj Chetty
Department of Economics
UC- Berkeley
521 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
chetty@econ.berkeley.edu

Adam Looney
Federal Reserve Board
20th Street and Constitution Ave.
Washington, DC 20551
adam.looney@frb.gov
1         Introduction
Social safety nets in developing countries are far smaller than in developed economies. In
1996, the average expenditure on social insurance as a fraction of GDP in countries with
below-median per capita income was 6.8 percent; the corresponding …gure in above-median
countries was 18.5 percent.1            In the rapidly growing developing economies of South and
East Asia, social insurance may be viewed as an unnecessary precaution that could poten-
tially hamper growth without yielding substantial welfare gains. However, income shocks
are prevalent in these economies.             For example, at least 15 percent of households in the
Indonesian Family Life Survey report some type of income shock in a given year. Recent
large-scale shocks in this region such as the …nancial crises and the Asian tsunami further
underscore the point that rapidly growing economies are not immune to large ‡uctuations.
Hence, studying the welfare consequences of social insurance in developing economies is an
important issue from a public …nance perspective.
        This paper takes a step in this direction by comparing the e¤ects of shocks on consump-
tion and other behaviors in developing and developed countries. The goal of this analysis
is to provide empirical estimates of elasticities that are relevant in assessing the welfare
consequences of social insurance in low-income economies.
        Social insurance can only be bene…cial if private insurance markets are inadequate. A
straightforward and intuitive method of testing for full private market insurance frequently
implemented in the development literature is to examine consumption ‡uctuations associ-
ated with shocks (Townsend 1994).                 We begin our analysis by comparing the e¤ects of
unemployment on consumption in the U.S. and Indonesia. We use two large panel datasets
that contain consumption and labor force data for each of these countries –the Panel Study
of Income Dynamics (PSID) and the Indonesian Family Life Survey (IFLS). We compare
the growth rate of food consumption for agents who remain employed and agents who re-
port job loss in the two panels. The mean and median consumption drop associated with
unemployment in both economies is roughly 10 percent. The similarity in the consumption
drop is remarkable given that Indonesia has no formal UI system whereas the United States

    1
        Source: International Labour Organization (2000). See section 2 for further details on this data.


                                                         1
insures nearly 50 percent of the pre-unemployment wage for most individuals.       It follows
that the introduction of a social safety net in Indonesia would have a relatively small e¤ect
in terms of smoothing consumption, since consumption ‡uctuations are not very large to
begin with.
   While this …nding might suggest that unemployment insurance cannot have large bene…ts
in developing economies, it is important to examine the e¢ ciency costs of the behaviors used
by households to smooth consumption before drawing normative conclusions. If individuals
mitigate consumption falls by resorting to costly measures – e.g. removing children from
school – publicly provided insurance could increase welfare by obviating the need for such
measures (Morduch 1999; Holzmann and Jørgensen 2001; Dercon 2002).            It is plausible
that low-income households resort to very costly measures to maintain consumption because
their pre-unemployment consumption appears close to subsistence levels. In the Indonesian
sample, the average household devotes nearly 70 percent of its budget on food, compared
to 20 percent in the United States.      Moreover, many households consume signi…cantly
fewer staples (such as rice) when the household head becomes unemployed, suggesting that
subsistence constraints are likely to be a concern.
   We make inferences about the cost of income smoothing in Indonesia by examining the
methods households use to mitigate the income loss associated with unemployment. Strik-
ingly, parents appear to sharply reduce expenditures on children’s education substantially
during idiosyncratic unemployment spells (see also Thomas et. al. 1999, who document
similar patterns during the Asian …nancial crisis).    To the extent that these reductions
permanently diminish children’s educational attainment, the welfare costs of transitory un-
employment shocks could be particularly large and long-lived. In addition, more than 30
percent of households report raising labor supply to maintain their income stream. This high
degree of responsiveness is further evidence that consumption-smoothing requires substan-
tial changes in economic behavior for many Indonesian households. In contrast, households
in the U.S. typically accomplish consumption smoothing by much less costly methods: De-
pleting bu¤er stocks, borrowing, and using social insurance bene…ts (Dynarski and Gruber,
1997).
   In summary, the empirical evidence suggests that social insurance against transitory


                                              2
shocks in developing countries could have substantial welfare bene…ts by reducing the use of
ine¢ cient smoothing techniques even though consumption volatility may not fall much. In
a companion paper (Chetty and Looney, 2007), we establish this point formally in a simple
model of risk and insurance by showing that the marginal bene…t of insurance can be large
when consumption drops are small because a high level of risk aversion leads to use of costly
smoothing methods.
    Of course, since we focus only on the bene…ts of social insurance in this paper, one cannot
conclude from the results here that introducing a large safety net will raise aggregate welfare.
The e¢ ciency costs of social safety nets –e.g., reduced employment or opportunity costs such
as forgone infrastructure or health investments – may also be large.       On the other hand,
the provision of unemployment insurance could also have e¢ ciency-enhancing e¤ects such
as improved job matches and increased productivity (Acemoglu and Shimer 1999). Hence,
the most important lesson of this study is perhaps that further research on social insurance
programs in developing economies would be useful given their potential bene…ts.
    The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows.        The next section brie‡y describes
existing social safety nets around the world. Section 3 compares the e¤ects of unemployment
on consumption in the United States and Indonesia empirically. Section 4 presents evidence
on the cost of consumption smoothing methods used in Indonesia. Section 5 o¤ers concluding
remarks.



2     Social Safety Nets in Developing Countries
The size of the formal government-provided social safety net is substantially smaller in
developing countries than in developed economies. According to statistics collected by the
International Labour Organization (2000) for 91 countries in 1996, the average GDP share
of social insurance – de…ned as total expenditures on social security, disability insurance,
unemployment insurance, insurance against work-related injuries, and government provided
health insurance – was 12.5 percent, with a range spanning 0.7 percent to 34.7 percent.
Figure 1a plots the fraction of GDP devoted to social insurance programs against PPP-
adjusted GDP per capita for these countries (with log scales). There is a striking positive


                                               3
correlation between these two variables. As shown speci…cation 1 of Table 1, a 1 percent
increase in GDP per capita is associated with a 0.7 percent increase in the GDP share
of social insurance in this cross-section.   Perhaps more interestingly, the share of social
insurance in government expenditure is also signi…cantly higher in richer countries (Figure
1b and speci…cation 2 in Table 1).    Wealthier countries not only have higher government
expenditure but also devote a larger fraction of that expenditure to social insurance.
   Notably, the rapidly growing East Asian economies are on average 1.3 log units below the
trend line plotted in Figure 1. In other words, they devote about 10 percentage points less
of GDP to social insurance than other countries of similar income. East Asian economies
devote on average 4.9 percent of their GDP to social insurance, compared with 16.5 percent
in the U.S. and 22 percent in Europe. The positive relationship between GDP per capita
and social safety nets is evident even among the small subsample of East Asian economies,
with Indonesia having the lowest income and expenditure on social insurance and Japan
having the highest of both.
   These statistics understate the size of the social safety net in developing countries because
they ignore other forms of in-kind and charity assistance, such as minimum food grants and
NGO aid.     However, these types of programs are generally quite limited in size (Gough
et. al. 2004) and have two features that considerably limit their scope relative to western
social safety nets. First, they are often means-tested and so may not provide consumption
smoothing bene…ts to a majority of the population. Second, aid tends to ‡ow toward large-
scale catastrophes (such as the recent tsunami), with signi…cantly fewer funds available for
the smaller but more numerous idiosyncratic shocks like unemployment or disability.
   There are many reasons that developing countries might choose not to implement such
social safety nets. The most plausible reason is that …nancing such systems is infeasible given
limitations on the government’s ability to raise revenue (Gordon and Li 2005). While it is
important to understand the political economy of social insurance in developing countries,
the purpose of this study is to assess the normative value of such a program if it could be
implemented. As illustrated by the recent introduction of a formal unemployment insurance
system in Korea, some of these countries are reaching a point where such systems are feasible,
making this normative question of practical relevance.


                                               4
3     Consumption Fluctuations in Indonesia and the U.S.
The …rst step in determining whether there is a role for social insurance is to determine
whether private insurance markets are adequate for agents to smooth consumption over
shocks. The standard method of testing for full consumption insurance, originally imple-
mented by Cochrane (1991) using U.S. data and Townsend (1994) using data on Indian
farmers, is to directly examine the e¤ect of idiosyncratic shocks such as job loss, health
changes, or weather shocks on consumption.         Under the assumption that utility is addi-
tively separable over consumption and leisure, a drop in consumption associated with these
shocks is evidence that insurance markets are incomplete.        More recently, in the public
…nance literature, Gruber (1997) and Browning and Crossley (2001) have implemented tests
of full insurance that do not rely on additive separability by examining whether the size
of consumption drops during unemployment spells is related to the amount of government-
provided unemployment insurance.        Their estimates show that with full unemployment
insurance, consumption would not fall at all during job loss, implying that most or all of the
consumption ‡uctuations identi…ed in prior studies are indeed attributable to incomplete
insurance rather than complementarity between consumption and leisure.
    Following this literature, we begin our comparison of the welfare gains of social insurance
in developing versus developed economies by examining consumption ‡uctuations. We …rst
establish consistent measures of consumption drops for a speci…c shock in two economies.
The shock we focus on is unemployment, since it is a well-de…ned and common event in both
types of economies.    We focus on the United States as the developed economy, primarily
because of our familiarity with the institutions and the availability of the longitudinal PSID
data there. We focus on Indonesia as the developing economy because it has high-quality
panel data with a design very similar to the PSID. Indonesia also has minimal social in-
surance, making it an ideal laboratory in which to investigate the response of families to
idiosyncratic shocks in a low-income economy without any social safety net. In this paper,
we report results on the e¤ects of unemployment on food consumption; as we discuss below,
other analysis using broader measures of consumption from di¤erent datsets yields results
similar to those we report here for food.


                                               5
       Our methods and empirical results are borrowed from and consistent with a large body
of prior work. Most relevant are studies that examine responses of Indonesian households
to shocks.      The general consensus of these papers on Indonesia and of the literature on
developing countries more generally is that transitory shocks seldom translate into signi…cant
‡uctuations in consumption. This is because households have developed a variety of coping
mechanisms, such as depleting household wealth and assets or borrowing (Frankenberg,
Smith, and Thomas, 2003), increasing family labor supply (Beegle, Frankenberg, and Thomas
2000; Cameron and Worswick 2003), and reducing investments in children’s health and
education (Frankenberg, Thomas, and Beegle 1999; Thomas et. al. 2004). The smoothness
of consumption has been taken to imply that economic shocks are not costly and that the
scope for publicly provided social insurance for transitory shocks is small (Morduch 1995;
Cameron and Worswick 2003).2 Our goal here is to examine the validity of this normative
conclusion by comparing behavioral responses to risk in Indonesia and the United States.


3.1       Data

We use two household-level panel datasets in this study.              The …rst is the Panel Study of
Income Dynamics (PSID), which tracks approximately 8,000 households and their children
over more than 30 years in the United States. We use an extract of the PSID that contains
consistently de…ned annual data between 1980 and 1993.                  The second is the Indonesian
Family Life Survey (IFLS), which follows roughly 7,500 households over a span of 7 years,
with interviews in 1993, 1997, and 2000.
       To examine the impact of unemployment shocks, we focus on households for which lon-
gitudinal data exists and with household heads who were employed at the time of the im-
mediately preceding interview.          Hence, we include only households where the head was
employed one year before the current interview in the PSID, and three or four years before
in the IFLS.3 We discuss below how the lack of annual data in the IFLS could a¤ect the

   2
     Studies which examine large, persistent health shocks in Indonesia (Gertler and Gruber (2002), Gertler,
Levine, and Moretti (2001)) do …nd large consumption drops. However, Gruber and Gertler observe that
their results o¤er “little insight into consumption smoothing of more likely and less costly risks” that are
our primary focus here.
   3
     We include all unemployed PSID households, and not just those who report receiving unemployment



                                                     6
comparison between the datasets.
   Table 2 provides summary statistics on these households.       In‡ation in Indonesia was
high over this time period, largely due to the 1998 …nancial crisis. The price level rose an
average of 91 percent in the 3-4 year periods between interviews. In comparison, average
annual in‡ation in the U.S. was 5 percent over our sample. The IFLS statistics reported in
Table 2 are de‡ated using an aggregate CPI series from the Asian Development Bank and
are converted to year 2000 dollars using the US/Rupiah exchange rate as of January 2000.
The PSID statistics are de‡ated using the standard CPI series from the BLS. Note that real
food consumption growth rates are small in both samples. In our empirical analysis, we use
nominal growth rates for transparency, since in‡ation rates are thought to di¤er signi…cantly
across goods and regions in Indonesia around the …nancial crisis. Not surprisingly, nominal
growth rates are much higher in the IFLS sample than in the PSID.
   The most striking di¤erences between the samples are in economic characteristics. PSID
household heads earn on average $31,828 per year and PSID households consume $7,255 of
food per year ($2,687 per person). In contrast, IFLS households report average total incomes
of $1,484, and consume approximately $926 in food each year ($162 per person). Note that
this …gure includes food purchased and food produced (important given the large number
of farmers in the data). Unemployment shocks appear more frequently in the IFLS data:
approximately 8 percent of heads of household become unemployed between interview waves
while 4 percent become unemployed between years in the PSID.
   An important summary statistic in assessing households ability to smooth consumption
is asset holdings.   In Indonesia, the median household holds total assets of $2,692, which
is substantially larger than annual income for many households.       However, most of this
wealth in held in farm and housing. Median liquid wealth (savings, stocks, and jewelry) is
only $21, indicating that consumption-smoothing using liquid assets would be infeasible for
many households. Frankenberg et al. (2003) report that few households move when they
face shocks, suggesting that homes and farms are not directly used to smooth consumption
either. Individuals could in principle take secured loans against their farm and housing
collateral when shocks occur. Studying the extent to which individuals are able to use such

bene…ts.

                                             7
secured loans to smooth consumption is an interesting direction for further research.
   Because of data constraints, we de…ne unemployment spells slightly di¤erently in the
two samples.      In the PSID, a household head is de…ned to be unemployed if he or she is
not working and searching for a job at the time of the interview. Replicating this measure
in the IFLS is not always possible because weekly employment data (module TK) for the
1997 interview has not yet been publicly released. Instead, we use a question corresponding
to employment status during the last 12 months.           In 1993 and 2000, when both weekly
and annual employment statistics are available, these measures are highly correlated and we
…nd that the e¤ects of unemployment on consumption are very similar regardless of which
variable is used. We use the annual employment variable to maximize the sample size and
to avoid focusing only on changes in outcomes over seven years, as required if we dropped
1997 interview information.
   A concern with our de…nition of unemployment in the IFLS data is that the IFLS annual
employment variable provides little detail on employment status, so that we cannot always
di¤erentiate involuntary unemployment from endogenous transitions out of the labor force
such as retirement.     The work by Frankenberg, Thomas, and Beegle (199) addresses this
issue better by using additional unpublished data.        The results we report below are very
similar to their results. In addition, when we restrict the sample to cases where we do know
whether the individual is still in the labor force, we obtain similar point estimates. These
…ndings suggest that this limitation of our data is not a signi…cant source of bias.


3.2    Results

We begin our analysis with a simple comparison of growth rates of food consumption in the
U.S. and Indonesia. De…ne the growth rate of food consumption for household i from year
t to year t0 as
                                     git = log cit   log cit0

where cit denotes household i’s food consumption in period t. Ideally, the gap between t
and t0 would be small, but in Indonesia data is available only every 3-4 years while in the
U.S. data is annual. In the baseline analysis, we attempt to get as close a measure to the


                                                8
true drop as possible in each dataset, by examining the growth rate from t to t + 1 in the
U.S. and t to t + 3 or t + 4 (as data permits) in Indonesia.
   Our basic identi…cation strategy is to divide our sample of employed heads-of-household
in the pre-period year t0 into two groups: Job losers, who reported being unemployed at
the time of the survey in year t, and job keepers, who reported still having a job.        We
then compare the distribution of growth rates for these two groups to estimate the e¤ect of
unemployment on consumption. The key identi…cation assumption that must hold for this
method to give a consistent estimate of the causal e¤ect of unemployment on consumption
growth is that the “treatment” group of job losers and the “control” group of job-keepers
have identical consumption growth rates absent the shock. This identi…cation assumption
may be questionable given that individuals prone to job loss are generally lower skill types,
and therefore may have relatively lower rates of trend wage and consumption growth in a
society with increasing income inequality.    In this case, the simple di¤erences below will
overstate the true consumption drop caused by unemployment. We implement some tests
to address this concern below.
   We …rst demonstrate the e¤ect of unemployment on food consumption using the long
time series available in the PSID data with an “event study” in Figure 2.        This …gure is
constructed by rede…ning as year 0 the year of job loss for the set of household heads who
lost their jobs once during the PSID sample. We then plot real average annual consumption
growth rates (more precisely, change in real log household consumption) against year relative
to year of job loss (e.g. -3 is 3 years before job loss). The …gure shows that food consumption
grows at a real rate of roughly 2-4 percent per year before time 0, and then drops by nearly
10 percent in the year of job loss. Consumption then recovers gradually over the next few
years back to its original level.   This graph con…rms that unemployment causes a sharp,
temporary decline in consumption for the typical household in the United States, consistent
with the results of Cochrane (1991) and Gruber (1997).         Unfortunately, a similar graph
showing a long pre-event and post-event period cannot be drawn for Indonesia because there
are at most three observations per household in the IFLS. We are therefore forced to compare
single observations on growth rates in consumption from time      1 to time 0 across job losers
and job keepers to identify the e¤ect of unemployment in the IFLS. We adopt a similar


                                              9
strategy in the PSID for purposes of comparability.
       We begin our comparison of Indonesia and the U.S. with a nonparametric, graphical
analysis of the e¤ect of job loss on food consumption. We estimate kernel densities for the
distribution of nominal growth rates by employment status in each country. Following the
convention in the consumption growth literature (see e.g. Zeldes 1989 or Gruber 1997), we
trim outliers (the lower and upper 2 percent of the reported distribution), though our results
are insensitive to this restriction.     The kernel densities are estimated using an “optimal”
bandwith chosen to minimize the asymptotic mean squared error of the …tted distribution.
       Figure 3a plots the density of growth rates for job losers (red) and keepers (blue) in
Indonesia. It is clear that unemployment leads to a left-shift in the distribution, indicating
that households are unable to fully smooth consumption over this transitory shock.                   The
medians of each distribution are depicted by vertical lines of corresponding color.                  The
median nominal growth rate of food consumption for job keepers in the sample is 67 percent
(due to the high rate of in‡ation in Indonesia over this period), in comparison with a growth
rate of 56 percent for job losers. Hence, at the median, unemployment appears to reduce
food consumption by approximately 11 percent.
       Figure 3b plots analogous densities for the United States. Again, it is clear that agents are
not fully insured, consistent with the results of Gruber (1997). Of greater interest here is the
comparison of these distributions to their analogs in Indonesia. The distribution of growth
rates reported by Indonesian households has variance twice as high as that in the U.S., which
could be either because of measurement error or because outcomes in developing countries
tend to be more stochastic. Despite this general di¤erence in the distributions, the within-
sample di¤erence between job losers and job keepers is strikingly similar. In the U.S., the
median nominal growth rate for job keepers is approximately 8.5 percent, compared to -1.5
percent for job losers. Hence, job loss appears to reduce food consumption by approximately
10 percent in the United States, only 1 percent di¤erent from the Indonesian value. Other
quantiles of the distribution shifts are also quite similar across the two economies.4

   4
    The estimated consumption drops become larger in the PSID if we use changes from t to t + 3 (as in the
IFLS). Hence, using a comparable strategy across the two datasets only further reinforces the point that
consumption is as smooth during shocks in Indonesia as it is in the U.S.



                                                   10
   We now examine the robustness of this conclusion to controls using a more structured
regression analysis. We estimate speci…cations of the following form:


                               gi =   + unempi + Xi + "i                                   (1)


where unempi = 1 if the agent reports unemployment at time t0 , unempi = 0 if the agent is
employed at time t0 , and Xi denotes a vector of covariates. The key coe¢ cient   equals the
e¤ect of job loss on the consumption growth rate.
   Table 3 reports several estimates of (1) for Indonesia and the U.S. The …rst speci…cation
is estimated with OLS using no controls except year dummies. Consistent with the graphical
results, unemployment is estimated to reduce consumption by about 9 percent in the U.S. and
10 percent in Indonesia. The second speci…cation introduces several controls: age, gender,
marital status, education, and region dummies (to control for di¤erential in‡ation patterns).
The coe¢ cient estimates on the unemployment dummy are essentially unchanged. These
results show that after controlling for observable heterogeneity in trend growth rates across
job losers and job keepers, consumption drops remain quite similar in the two countries.
   The third speci…cation tests the “common trends”identi…cation assumption more directly
by restricting the sample to individuals who lost jobs at some point within the panel. In
this speci…cation, the counterfactual for the job losers in year t0 are individuals who lost
their jobs at some other point in the dataset. The advantage of this speci…cation in terms
of identi…cation is that growth rates in consumption for job losers are compared to what is
arguably a better “control” group.    The problem of unobservable di¤erences between job
losers and keepers is mitigated in the restricted sample by identifying purely from variation
in the date of job loss rather than whether or not job loss occurred. As shown in the last
two columns of the table, this smaller sample yields estimates that are generally similar to
the original results, supporting the claim that the causal e¤ect of the unemployment shock
on consumption is being identi…ed.
   One concern with these results is that unemployment shocks induce changes in consump-
tion because of changes in expectations about permanent income rather than a transitory
shock.   To test this alternative hypothesis, we compared consumption growth rates from


                                             11
period t to t + 1 for individuals who became unemployed in period t vs. those who kept
their job in period t.   We …nd that consumption grows 8-10% more from t to t + 1 for
the job losers, indicating that food consumption recovers to pre-unemployment levels within
three years after the shock for the average household. This result supports the view that
unemployment is a transitory shock that a¤ects consumption because of inability to smooth.
   We also conducted a series of other robustness checks and sensitivity analyses that are
not reported in the table. Quantile regressions generally yield estimates very similar to the
OLS results. Di¤erent trimming criteria for outliers, such as 1 percent or 5 percent also yield
similar results.   Broader measures of consumption also follow a similar pattern.      Gruber
(1998) augments the results from the PSID with broader measures of consumption from the
Consumer Expenditure Survey and …nds that the decline in total consumption mirrors that
of food consumption. We …nd a similar decline in total consumption in the IFLS sample as
well (not reported).
   An additional concern speci…c to the Indonesian sample is that all households, including
job-keepers, may have reduced consumption during the Asian Financial Crisis in 1997-98.
This could bias our estimates of the consumption drop associated with unemployment down-
ward in this sample. To address this concern, we split the sample in two and repeated the
analysis using the job losers/keepers in 2000 and job losers/keepers in 1997 separately. The
estimates of the consumption drop associated with unemployment are similar in both subsam-
ples. This suggests that the …nancial crisis does not create signi…cant bias: If consumption
was unusually low throughout the economy in 1997, job keepers should have experienced ex-
cess growth in consumption between 1997 and 2000, biasing the estimate of the consumption
drop upward in the 2000 sample.
   To summarize, the evidence from the IFLS and the PSID suggests that idiosyncratic
unemployment shocks lead to temporary consumption ‡uctuations of similar magnitude in
the U.S. and Indonesia. This similarity is surprising given that the U.S. has a large UI system
that replaces approximately 50 percent of pre-unemployment wages for most individuals,
whereas Indonesia has very little formal social insurance (Figure 1).
   These results may appear to suggest that families in Indonesia (and perhaps other devel-
oping economies) have “adequate”insurance because they are able to maintain a reasonably


                                              12
smooth consumption path when faced with shocks, as originally suggested by Townsend’s
(1994) classic study of Indian farmers.     In this case, social insurance would o¤er rela-
tively modest welfare gains in these economies.     However, the smoothness of household
consumption may belie signi…cant costs of income risk if households resort to costly smooth-
ing methods. Intuitively, social insurance may provide welfare gains if it crowds out the use
of more costly smoothing techniques. The next section explores how households maintain
consumption while unemployed in Indonesia.



4        The Costs of Consumption Smoothing
Households would resort to costly consumption smoothing techniques only if the welfare costs
of reductions in consumption are large. We therefore …rst evaluate the nature of consumption
reductions in Indonesia to determine whether such reductions are likely to have large welfare
costs.
    The average household in the IFLS devotes nearly 70 percent of its total expenditure
to food (in contrast with 20 percent in the PSID). This suggests that Indonesians may
have to reduce consumption of basic necessities much more than households in the US when
shocks occur.   To provide direct evidence on this hypothesis, we study the e¤ect of un-
employment shocks on the consumption of staple foods (including rice, corn, cassava, and
‡our) in Indonesia.   Consumption of these goods would presumably fall only in the most
dire circumstances, when agents are unable to reduce consumption on “luxuries” which
have lower marginal utility. We implement empirical speci…cations analogous to (1) to test
whether staples consumption falls in households experiencing unemployment shocks relative
to households that do not experience such shocks. The sample speci…cations and trimming
procedures are analogous to those described above for total food consumption.
    We begin with an OLS regression on the full sample.      The estimate in column (1) of
Table 4 indicates that mean consumption of staple foods falls by 6 percent during unem-
ployment spells; however the estimate is not statistically signi…cant. As one might expect,
the magnitude of this decline is smaller than the drop in total food consumption (see Table
3) and total consumption (not shown) because households are presumably more willing to


                                             13
cut back on “luxuries” than “necessities.” A kernel density plot (not shown) for growth in
staples consumption by job status analogous to Figure 3a reveals a clear downward shift in
consumption of staples for job losers who experience the most negative growth rates, but
little shift for those who fared better. This is consistent with the claim that only the worst
o¤ reduce consumption of staples. This suggests that even though the change in the mean
growth rate may not be statistically signi…cant, other moments could reveal a more robust
response. Column (2) of Table 4 con…rms this point by showing that median staples growth
rate is 10 percent lower for job losers relative to keepers. This estimate is highly statisti-
cally signi…cant. Column (3) shows that the mean drop in staple consumption is 12 percent
among households without any farmers, who might have less capacity to store crops.                In
sum, these results indicate that many households reduce consumption of the most basic and
important sources of nutrition when the household head loses his job. These …ndings are
consistent with those of Beegle, Frankenberg, and Thomas (2000) and Frankenberg, Smith,
and Thomas (2003), who study the e¤ects of the 1998 Asian Financial Crisis on consumption
using an augmented IFLS sample.
   The fact that income shocks force households to reduce consumption of basic necessities
makes it plausible that they would use very costly methods to smooth consumption. We
now document some of these methods directly.5 One particularly costly method is reducing
educational expenditures on children. The …rst three speci…cations in Table 5 report the ef-
fect of unemployment shocks on educational investment. In these regressions, we restrict the
sample to households with children under 24 years of age who reported educational expenses
at the time of the previous interview. Speci…cations (1) and (2) examine extensive-margin
(participation) e¤ects by using a dummy for positive household educational expenditure as
the dependent variable. The results reported in column (1) imply that families experiencing
unemployment were 13 percentage points more likely to stop spending on education entirely
(presumably by withdrawing their children from school). This is a large reduction relative
to the sample mean of 77 percent participation in education in this group.              Controlling
for household characteristics reduces the estimated magnitude of this response slightly, but

   5
     The behavioral responses examined here are only two examples among many possibilities. Examining
the costs of other consumption smoothing methods used by households would be very useful.


                                                 14
does not alter the conclusion that unemployment shocks signi…cantly reduce the likelihood a
household will spend on education. Column (3) examines the intensive margin by changing
the dependent variable to the log change in education expenditures (with 2 percent trimming
as above). Median educational expenditure falls by 12 percent in households experiencing
unemployment.     Average educational spending (not shown) falls by less than 12 percent,
largely because richer households do not appear to reduce expenditures as much as poorer
households, for reasons similar to the staples results. Figure 4 shows the distributional shift
on the intensive margin, con…rming the regression results visually.
   These results indicate that many households reduce spending on education to mitigate
the income loss during an unemployment shock. A concern with the interpretation of these
results is reverse causality. One might worry that families with children who …nish school
are those where the parent stops working, generating the observed correlation.       However,
Frankenberg, Thomas, Beegle (1999) and Thomas et. al. (2004) have documented similar
patterns in educational expenditure among households a¤ected by the Asian Financial Crisis.
These studies take advantage of this large exogenous shock to address the identi…cation
concerns more carefully, suggesting that shocks do indeed cause reductions in education.
   A second behavioral response, which perhaps has a lower cost than reducing human
capital accumulation but is nonetheless more costly than depleting savings, is augmenting
labor supply by other members of the household.         Columns (4)-(6) of Table 5 examine
labor supply responses. On the extensive margin, Column (4) shows that other household
members are 17 percentage points more likely to work for wages when the head of household
becomes unemployed. Controlling for other household characteristics does not signi…cantly
a¤ect this conclusion. Column (6) examines the income earned by other family members on
the intensive margin with a speci…cation analogous to (3) for educational expenditures. The
point estimate suggests that income earned by other household members increases by between
11 percent in households where the head becomes unemployed. Figure 5 corroborates this
result visually. These results suggest that unemployment shocks increase the labor supply
of other family members along a variety of margins. Part of these e¤ects may again be due
to reverse causality. But other studies (e.g. Beegle, Frankenberg, Thomas (2000), Cameron
and Worswick (2003), Frankenberg, Smith, and Thomas (2003)) report similar responses


                                              15
in terms of labor market participation, second jobs, and additional hours of work among
household members using better identi…cation of exogenous shocks.
    The methods used to smooth consumption in Indonesia contrast sharply with correspond-
ing patterns in the United States. Dynarski and Gruber (1997) examine how households
smooth variable earnings in the U.S. They …nd that (1) transfer income (e.g. unemploy-
ment insurance) replaces 15 cents of every dollar of lost income, (2) changes in tax burdens
replace 26-35 cents per dollar lost, and 3) savings are used to replace the remaining 25-40
cents. In addition, Cullen and Gruber (2000) observe that there is no change in labor supply
of secondary earners at the mean when household heads lose their jobs in the U.S. On the
human capital margin, there is some anecdotal evidence that investment in human capital
(e.g. graduate school applications) rises during recessions in the United States, as people
substitute timing of education intertemporally to periods when the opportunity cost of going
to school is low. These points suggest that households in lower income countries use much
more costly smoothing mechanisms than those in developed economies.



5     Conclusion
Unemployment shocks induce remarkably similar reductions in food consumption in the
United States and Indonesia. However, households in Indonesia use much more costly meth-
ods to smooth consumption than households in the U.S. Even though they may have little
e¤ect on consumption volatility, social insurance programs could yield substantial welfare
gains in developing economies by reducing the need for these costly behaviors. These gains
would arise because households would not be forced to pull children out of school or send
additional members into the workforce to maintain consumption in the short run.
    The results of this paper indicate that programs such as unemployment insurance could be
bene…cial in certain domains. Additional empirical work is required to determine whether
increases in social insurance bene…ts actually do reduce ine¢ cient behavior in developing
economies. Another important caveat is that we have not examined the types of social in-
surance programs that would be feasible in developing countries. If these programs were to
o¤er only limited or unequal coverage (e.g. to public sector employees), then they could in-


                                             16
duce additional behavioral distortions (such as a preference for public sector work) that could
exacerbate economic ine¢ ciency.        Further research is required to determine whether the
constraints imposed by the political economy of developing countries would permit welfare-
enhancing social insurance programs. This research agenda is especially relevant for South
and East Asian economies as they reach a phase of development where implementation of a
formal social safety net is feasible.




                                                17
   References
    Acemoglu, Daron and Robert Shimer. 1999. E¢ cient Unemployment Insurance, Journal
of Political Economy 107: 893-928.
    Beegle, Kathleen, Elizabeth Frankenberg, and Duncan Thomas. 2000. Labor Market
Transitions of Men and Women During an Economic Crisis: Evidence from Indonesia, Rand
Labor and Population Working Paper 00-11.
    Browning, Martin, and Thomas Crossley. 2001. Unemployment Insurance Levels and
Consumption Changes, Journal of Public Economics 80: 1-23.
    Cameron, Lisa, and Christopher Worswick. 2003. The Labor Market as a Smoothing
Device: Labor Supply Responses to Crop Loss, Review of Development Economics 7(2):
327-341.
    Chetty, Raj and Adam Looney, “Consumption Smoothing and the Welfare Consequences
of Social Insurance in Developing Economies,” forthcoming, Journal of Public Economics,
2007.
    Cochrane, John H. 1991. A Simple Test of Consumption Insurance, Journal of Political
Economy 99: 957-76.
    Cullen, Julie, and Jonathan Gruber. 2000. Does Unemployment Insurance Crowd Out
Spousal Labor Supply? Journal of Labor Economics 18: 546-572.
    Dercon, S. “Income Risk, Coping Strategies, and Safety Nets,”The World Bank Research
Observer, vol. 17, no. 2 (Fall 2002), pp. 141-166.
    Frankenberg, Elizabeth, Duncan Thomas, and Kathleen Beegle. 1999. The Real Costs of
Indonesia’s Economic Crisis: Preliminary Findings from the Indonesia Family Life Surveys,
DRU-2064-NIA/NICHD. Santa Monica, CA: RAND.
    Frankenberg, Elizabeth, James Smith, and Duncan Thomas. 2003. Economic shocks,
wealth and welfare, Journal of Human Resources 38(2): 280-321.
    Dynarski, Susan, and Jonathan Gruber, 1997. “Can Families Smooth Variable Earn-
ings?,”Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1: 229-305.
    Gertler, Paul, Enrico Moretti, and David Levine. 2001. Do Micro…nance Programs
Help Families Insure Consumption Against Illness? mimeo.
    Gertler, Paul, and Jonathan Gruber. 2002. Insuring Consumption Against Illness,
American Economic Review 92 (1): 51-70.
    Gough, Ian, et. al. 2004. Insecurity and Welfare Regimes in Asia, Africa and Latin
America: Social Policy in Development Contexts, Cambridge University Press.
    Gordon, Roger, and Wei Li. 2005. Tax Structures in Developing Countries: Many
Puzzles and a Possible Explanation, UC San Diego mimeo.
    Gruber, Jonathan. 1997. The Consumption Smoothing Bene…ts of Unemployment
Insurance, American Economic Review 87: 192-205.
    Gruber, Jonathan. 1998. Unemployment Insurance, Consumption Smoothing, and
Private Insurance: Evidence from the PSID and CEX, Research in Employment Policy 1:
3-31.
    Holzmann, Robert and Steen Jørgensen. “Social Risk Management: A New Conceptual
Framework for Social Protection, and Beyond,”International Tax and Public Finance, 8(4),
August, 2001, 529-556.


                                           18
    International Labour Organization. 2000. World Labour Report 2000: Income Security
and Social Protection in a Changing World.
    Morduch, Jonathan. 1995. Income Smoothing and Consumption Smoothing, Journal
of Economic Perspectives 9(3): 103–114.
    Thomas, Duncan, K. Beegle, E. Frankenberg, B. Sikoki, J. Strauss, and G. Teruel. 2004.
Education in a Crisis, Journal of Development Economics 74(1): 53-85.
    Townsend, Robert. 1994. Risk and Insurance in Village India, Econometrica 62(3):
539-591.
    Zeldes, Stephen. 1989. Consumption and Liquidity Constraints: An Empirical Investi-
gation, Journal of Political Economy 97(2): 305-46.




                                           19
                                           Table 1
                  RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN SOCIAL INSURANCE AND PER CAPITA GDP


                                    (1)                       (2)                       (3)                  (4)
                           SI as % of GDP vs GDP   SI as % of Gov't Exp vs GDP   Continent dummies   East Asian Countries

     Dependent Variable:      log SI % of GDP        log SI % of Gov't Exp       log SI % of GDP      log SI % of GDP

log GDP Per Capita                 0.630                     0.351                    0.357                0.674
                                 (0.070)**                 (0.064)**                (0.069)**            (0.062)**
Constant                          -3.376                     0.267                                        -3.673
                                 (0.626)**                  (0.589)                                      (0.550)**

East asia indicator                                                                                       -1.318
                                                                                                         (0.250)**

Continent dummies                  No                         No                       Yes                   No

Observations                        89                         64                       89                   89


NOTE--Social Insurance statistics are from ILO (2000); GDP statistics are from the Penn World tables.
Social insurance is defined as sum of expenditures on ocial security, disability insurance, unemployment
insurance, insurance against work-related injuries, and government provided health insurance.
East Asian countries in the sample are Indonesia, Japan, Korea, Malaysia,Thailand, and Singapore.
GDP is measures in 1996 US dollars.
                                          Table 2
                            SUMMARY STATISTICS FOR IFLS AND PSID


                                                                                 Standard
                                                  Mean               Median      Deviation


IFLS (Indonesia)
Currently Unemployed                                  8%                    0        27%
Age of Head                                            48                  46          25
Married                                              83%                    1        37%
College                                               6%                    0        24%
Number of people in household                         5.7                 5.0         2.5
Food consumption                                    $926                 $703      $1,065
Real food consumption growth rate                     4%                  3%         61%
Inflation rate                                       91%                132%         42%
Staples consumption                                 $191                 $144       $247
Total consumption                                  $1,604              $1,073      $2,047
Wage income of head                                 $580                 $308      $1,056
Other family members earn income                     58%                    1        49%
Total household income                             $1,484                $811      $3,569
Total household assets                             $7,525              $2,692     $17,189
  Home and Land                                    $5,625              $1,999     $12,054
  Equipment, livestock, vehicles, and other.       $1,587                $352      $8,057
  Liquid Assets (Cash, Stock, Jewelry)              $313                  $21      $2,295
No household member is a farmer                      58%                    1        49%
Education expenditure                               $144                  $49       $344
Positive education expenditure                       77%                    1        42%

Number of obs: 12,236; Number of households: 7,197


PSID (United States)
Currently Unemployed                                 4%                    0         21%
Age of Head                                           38                  36           12
Married                                             65%                    1         48%
College                                             40%                    0         49%
Number of people in household                        2.7                 3.0          1.4
Food consumption                                  $7,255              $6,303       $4,646
Real food consumption growth rate                    2%                  3%          56%
Inflation rate                                       5%                  4%           2%
Wage Income of Head                              $31,828             $27,285      $30,267

Number of obs: 70,889; Number of households: 11,685


All monetary values are annual figures in real 2000 US dollars.
Education expenditure data are for households with children under 24 years old
                               Table 3
EFFECT OF UNEMPLOYMENT ON FOOD CONSUMPTION: INDONESIA VS UNITED STATES



   Dependent variable: Food cons. growth rate (change in log household food consumption)

                                          (1)                      (2)                        (3)
                                                                                   Only Those Unemployed
                                      No controls            With controls              Exactly Once


                                   US       Indonesia      US        Indonesia        US        Indonesia

Unemployed dummy                  -0.087     -0.097     -0.106     -0.078     -0.095    -0.098
                                (0.006)*** (0.027)*** (0.010)*** (0.022)*** (0.017)*** (0.038)**
People in household                                        0.01     -0.005     0.012                 -0.004
                                                        (0.002)*** (0.002)** (0.005)**              (0.007)
Age                                                       -0.001          0.000     0.000            0.001
                                                        (0.000)***       (0.000)   (0.001)          (0.000)
Married                                                   0.033      0.057          0.032            0.02
                                                        (0.007)*** (0.027)**       (0.018)*         (0.06)
Sex                                                      -0.012           -0.007    0.006           -0.035
                                                        (0.007)*         (0.014)   (0.017)          (0.03)
School                                                    0.000           -0.005    0.000            0.005
                                                         (0.000)         (0.008)   (0.001)          (0.025)

Year dummies                       Yes          Yes       Yes             Yes        Yes             Yes

Province/state dummies              No           No       Yes             Yes        Yes             Yes

Observations                      50769         11284    50763           11284       7894            1231
NOTE-Sample includes all households who remain in panel for two or more years where head is
employed in previous observation. Observations with nominal food consumption growth rates in
bottom 2% and top 2% of distribution are discarded to trim outliers. Dependent variable in all
specifications is log(ct)-log(ct-1) where t-1 refers to the previous observation (1 year lag in PSID, 3 or 4
years in IFLS. Unemployed dummy is 1 if head of household is not working at time of interview; else 0.
                                      Table 4
                 EFFECT OF UNEMPLOYMENT ON CONSUMPTION OF STAPLES



          Dependent variable: Staples cons. growth rate (change in log staples consumption)

                                      (1)                     (2)                        (3)
                                     OLS                  Median Reg.              OLS, No Farmers


Unemployed dummy                    -0.060                   -0.100                    -0.119
                                   (0.039)                 (0.035)***                 (0.048)**
People in household                -0.009                   -0.005                     -0.013
                                  (0.004)**                 -0.004                    (0.006)**
Age                                 0.000                    0.000                      0.001
                                   (0.000)                  (0.000)                    (0.001)
Married                             0.129                    0.147                      0.060
                                  (0.047)***               (0.043)***                  (0.068)
Sex                                 0.042                    0.048                      0.037
                                   (0.024)*                (0.022)**                   (0.033)
School                              0.052                    0.042                     0.080
                                  (0.014)***               (0.013)***                (0.020)***

Year dummies                         Yes                      Yes                       Yes

Province dummies                     Yes                      Yes                       Yes

Observations                        9,466                    9,466                     5,205
NOTE-Sample includes all IFLS households who remain in panel for two or more years
where head is employed in previous observation. Observations with nominal staples
consumption growth rates in bottom 2% and top 2% of distribution are discarded to trim outliers.
Dependent variable in all specifications is log(ct)-log(ct-1) where t-1 refers to the previous obs.
Unemployed dummy is 1 if head of household is not working at time of interview; 0 otherwise.
Median regression is a quantile regression at the 50th percentile. No farmers specification
excludes all households with one or more individual working on a farm.
                                      Table 5
             OTHER RESPONSES TO UNEMPLOYMENT: EVIDENCE OF RISK AVERSION



                                  Educational Expenditures                     Other family members' labor supply

                               (1)            (2)               (3)             (4)            (5)                (6)

                                Extensive margin          Intensive margin       Extensive margin           Intensive margin
                            No controls   With controls     Median Reg       No controls   With controls      Median Reg

      Dependent Variable:       Education dummy             log ∆ ed exp        Participation dummy        log ∆ other fam inc


Unemployed dummy              -0.13          -0.09             -0.12           0.17           0.15               0.11
                            (0.02)***      (0.02)***          (0.07)         (0.02)***      (0.02)***           (0.07)*
People Per Household                         0.01             -0.03                           0.06               0.02
                                           (0.00)***        (0.01)***                       (0.00)***          (0.01)***
Age                                          0.00             -0.01                           0.00               0.00
                                           (0.00)***        (0.00)***                       (0.00)***           (0.00)
Married                                      0.13              -0.03                          0.07               0.28
                                           (0.02)***          (0.09)                        (0.03)***          (0.09)***
Sex                                          0.01              -0.05                          0.04               0.21
                                            (0.01)            (0.04)                        (0.01)***          (0.04)***
School                                       0.06              0.05                           0.00               -0.04
                                           (0.01)***         (0.02)**                        (0.01)             (0.02)*
Year dummies                   Yes            Yes              Yes              Yes            Yes                Yes

Province dummies               No             Yes              Yes              No             Yes                Yes

Observations                  7,700          7,457            6,156            6,778          6,407             3,478


NOTE-Sample includes all IFLS households who remain in panel for two or more years where head is
employed in previous observation. Dependent variable in (1) and (2) is an indicator for whether household
reported positive education expenditures. Only households with positive education expenditures in
previous year are included in (1) and (2). Dependent variable in (3) is log change in education
expenditures; sample includes all households reporting positive education expenditures in both previous
year and current year. In (3), outliers are trimmed at upper and lower 2% as in Table 3. Dependent
variable in (4) and (5) is an indicator for whether any household member besides the head is earning
income in current year. Only households where no other member besides head was working in prior
year included in (4) and (5). Dependent variable in (6) is log change in other family members' income,
with 2% trimming analogous to that in Table 3.
Sample in (6) includes households reporting positive non-head income in both previous year and current
year. Unemployed dummy is 1 if head of household is not working at time of interview; 0 otherwise.
Median regression is a quantile regression at the 50th percentile.
                                                                                                 Figure 1a
                                                                             Social Insurance vs. GDP Per Capita in 1996


            Total Social Insurance Exp % of GDP (log scale)
                                                              54.6
                                                                                                                           Germany
                                                              20.1

                                                                                                                                            United States
                                                                                                                                         Japan
                                                              7.4




                                                                                                                                Korea
                                                              2.7




                                                                                                China
                                                                                                                                         Singapore
                                                                                                                        Malaysia

                                                                                             India                  Thailand
                                                                                                        Indonesia
                                                              1.0




                                                                     $403       $1,097        $2,981           $8,103               $22,026         $59,874
                                                                                         GDP Per Capita (log scale)




                                                                                                 Figure 1b
                                                                      Govt. Budget Share of Social Insurance vs. GDP Per Capita
            Social Insurance Exp % of Govt Exp (log scale)
                                                              54.6




                                                                                                                           Germany
                                                                                                                                              United States
                                                              33.1




                                                                                                                                         Japan
                                                              20.1




                                                                                               China
                                                                                                                                Korea
                                                              12.2




                                                                                                                         Malaysia
                                                                                                                    Thailand
                                                                                                        Indonesia
                                                              7.4




                                                                     $403       $1,097        $2,981           $8,103               $22,026         $59,874
                                                                                         GDP Per Capita (log scale)



NOTE–Social Insurance statistics are from ILO (2000); GDP statistics are from the
Penn World tables. GDP is measured in 1996 US dollars. Panel A shows relationship
between social insurance share of GDP and GDP per capita. Panel B shows
relationship between social insurance share of government budget and GDP per
capita.
                                                                                    Figure 2
                                                            Effect of Unemployment on Consumption Growth in the US



              Annual Growth Rate of Household Consumption
                -.1      -.05       0       .05     .1




                                                             -5                         0                            5

                        Source: PSID 1980-1993
                                                                             Year Relative to Job Loss




NOTE–Sample consists of all household heads who experienced exactly one
unemployment spell between 1980 and 1993 in the PSID. Annual growth rates of
food consumption are computed as change in log of real (CPI deflated) food
consumption from year t  1 to year t. Year of job loss is normalized at 0 and all other
years are defined as difference relative to that year.
                                                                             Figure 3a
                                             Effect of Unemployment on Food Consumption in Indonesia




                            .6
                            .5
                            .4
                  Density
                            .3
                            .2
                            .1
                            0




                                      -1          -.5         0         .5       1       1.5                 2   2.5
                                                        Growth Rate of Household Food Consumption

                                                          Stayed Employed                Became Unemployed

                   Source: IFLS 1993-2000




                                                                         Figure 3b
                                               Effect of Unemployment on Food Consumption in the US
                            1.2 1.4
                            1
                Density
                            .8
                            .6
                            .4
                            .2
                            0




                                      -1.5          -1        -.5         0          .5         1                1.5
                                                      Growth Rate of Household Food Consumption
                                                           Stayed Employed               Became Unemployed

                          Source: PSID 1980-1993




NOTE-In each figure, vertical lines denote median for density of corresponding color.
Sample consists of all household heads in IFLS or PSID who reported being employed
at the time of previous interview. “Stayed Employed” group includes household heads
who remain employed in interview t. “Became Unemployed” group includes household
heads who are not working at time of inteview t. Growth rate of household food
consumption is defined as nominal difference in log food consumption in inteview t and
interview t  1. Gap between interviews is one year in PSID and 3 or 4 years in IFLS.
Observations with growth rates in top 2% or bottom 2% of unconditional food growth
distribution in each dataset are discarded to trim outliers. Kernel densities are
estimated using an optimal bandwith procedure.
                                                      Figure 4
                             Effect of Unemployment on Education (Intensive Margin)




                 .4
                 .3
              Density
                .2
                 .1
                 0




                        -3        -2       -1        0        1         2        3    4
                                   Growth Rate of Household Education Expenditures

                                        Stayed Employed          Became Unemployed

               Source: IFLS 1993-2000



NOTE-Vertical lines denote median for density of corresponding color. Sample
consists of all household heads in IFLS who reported being employed at the time of
previous interview and who report positive educational expenditures in both previous
interview and current interview. “Stayed Employed” group includes household heads
who remain employed in interview t. “Became Unemployed” group includes household
heads who are not working at time of inteview t. Growth rate of is defined as nominal
difference in log educational expenditure in inteview t and interview t  1. Gap
between interviews is 3 or 4 years in IFLS. Observations with growth rates in top 2%
or bottom 2% of unconditional educational expenditure growth distribution are
discarded to trim outliers. Kernel densities are estimated using an optimal bandwith
procedure. See Table 5 for corresponding results on extensive margin.
                                                         Figure 5
                         Effect of Unemployment on Others’ Labor Supply (Intensive Margin)




                 .4
                 .3
              Density
                .2
                 .1
                 0




                        -3        -2          -1        0         1        2        3   4
                                        Growth Rate of Other Family Members' Income

                                           Stayed Employed          Became Unemployed

               Source: IFLS 1993-2000



NOTE-Vertical lines denote median for density of corresponding color. Sample
consists of all household heads in IFLS who reported being employed at the time of
previous interview and who report positive income from other family members in both
previous interview and current interview. “Stayed Employed” group includes
household heads who remain employed in interview t. “Became Unemployed” group
includes household heads who are not working at time of inteview t. Growth rate of is
defined as nominal difference in log of other family members’ income in inteview t and
interview t  1. Gap between interviews is 3 or 4 years in IFLS. Observations with
growth rates in top 2% or bottom 2% of unconditional other-income growth distribution
are discarded to trim outliers. Kernel densities are estimated using an optimal
bandwith procedure. See Table 5 for corresponding results on extensive margin.
