                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           MACRO FACTORS IN BOND RISK PREMIA

                                          Sydney C. Ludvigson
                                              Serena Ng

                                          Working Paper 11703
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11703


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2005




Ludvigson acknowledges financial support from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation and the CV Starr Center at
NYU. We thank Greg Du¤ee and Monika Piazzesi for helpful comments. We are also grateful to Monika
Piazzesi for help with the bond data, to Mark Watson for help with the macro data, and to Bernadino Palazzo
for excellent research assistance. Any errors or omissions are the responsibility of the authors. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

©2005 by Sydney C. Ludvigson and Serena Ng. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Macro Factors in Bond Risk Premia
Sydney C. Ludvigson and Serena Ng
NBER Working Paper No. 11703
October 2005, Revised September 2006
JEL No. G10, G12, E0, E4

                                           ABSTRACT

Empirical evidence suggests that excess bond returns are forecastable by financial indicators such
as forward spreads and yield spreads, a violation of the expectations hypothesis based on constant
risk premia. But existing evidence does not tie the forecastable variation in excess bond returns to
underlying macroeconomic fundamentals, as would be expected if the forecastability were
attributable to time variation in risk premia. We use the methodology of dynamic factor analysis for
large datasets to investigate possible empirical linkages between forecastable variation in excess
bond returns and macroeconomic fundamentals. We find that several common factors estimated from
a large dataset on U.S. economic activity have important forecasting power for future excess returns
on U.S. government bonds. Following Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005), we also construct single
predictor state variables by forming linear combinations of either five or six estimated common
factors. The single state variables forecast excess bond returns at maturities from two to five years,
and do so virtually as well as an unrestricted regression model that includes each common factor as
a separate predictor variable. The linear combinations we form are driven by both "real" and
"inflation" macro factors, in addition to financial factors, and contain important information about
one year ahead excess bond returns that is not captured by forward spreads, yield spreads, or the
principal components of the yield covariance matrix.

Sydney C. Ludvigson                                   Department of Economics
Department of Economics                               University of Michigan
New York University                                   317 Lorcha Hall
269 Mercer Street                                     Ann Arbor, MI 48109
7th Floor                                             serena.ng@umich.edu
New York, NY 10003
and NBER
sydney.ludvigson@nyu.edu



Serena Ng
1   Introduction

Recent empirical research in …nancial economics has uncovered signi…cant forecastable varia-
tion in the excess returns of U.S. government bonds, a violation of the expectations hypothesis.
Fama and Bliss (1987) report that n-year excess bond returns are forecastable by the spread
between the n-year forward rate and the one-year yield. Campbell and Shiller (1991) …nd
that excess bond returns are forecastable by Treasury yield spreads. Cochrane and Piazzesi
(2005) …nd that a linear combination of …ve forward spreads explains between 30 and 35
percent of the variation in next year’s excess returns on bonds with maturities ranging from
two to …ve years. These …ndings imply that risk premia in bond returns and bond yields vary
over time and are a quantitatively important source of ‡uctuations in the bond market.
   An unanswered question is whether such movements in bond market risk premia bear
any relation to the macroeconomy. Are there important cyclical ‡uctuations in bond market
premia and, if so, with what macroeconomic aggregates do these premia vary? Economic
theories that rationalize time-varying risk premia almost always posit that such premia vary
with macroeconomic variables. For example, Campbell and Cochrane (1999) posit that risk
premia on equity vary with a slow-moving habit driven by shocks to aggregate consumption.
Wachter (2006) adapts the Campbell-Cochrane habit model to examine the nominal term
structure of interest rates, and shows that bond risk premia (as well as equity premia) should
vary with the slow-moving consumption habit. Brandt and Wang (2003) argue that risk
premia are driven by shocks to in‡ation, as well as shocks to aggregate consumption. Such
theories imply that rational variation in bond risk premia should be evident from forecasting
regressions of excess bond returns on macroeconomic fundamentals.
   Despite these theoretical insights, there is little direct evidence of a link between the
macroeconomy and bond risk premia. The empirical evidence cited above, for example, …nds
that excess bond returns are forecastable not by macroeconomic variables such as aggregate
consumption or in‡ation, but rather by pure …nancial indicators such as forward spreads and
yield spreads.
    There are several possible reasons why it may be di¢ cult to uncover a direct link between
macroeconomic activity and bond market risk premia. First, some macroeconomic driving
variables may be latent and impossible to summarize with a few observable series. The
Campbell-Cochrane habit may fall into this category. Second, macro variables are more likely
than …nancial series to be imperfectly measured and less likely to correspond to the precise
economic concepts provided by theoretical models. As one example, aggregate consumption is


                                               1
often measured as nondurables and services expenditure, but this measure omits an important
component of theoretical consumption, namely the service ‡ow from the stock of durables.
Third, the models themselves are imperfect descriptions of reality and may restrict attention
to a small set of variables that fail to span the information sets of …nancial market participants.
   This paper considers one way around these di¢ culties using the methodology of dynamic
factor analysis for large datasets. Recent research on dynamic factor analysis …nds that
the information in a large number of economic time series can be e¤ectively summarized
by a relatively small number of estimated factors, a¤ording the opportunity to exploit a
much richer information base than what has been possible in prior empirical study of bond
risk premia. In this methodology, “a large number” can mean hundreds or, perhaps, even
more than one thousand economic time series. By summarizing the information from a large
number of series in a few estimated factors, we eliminate the arbitrary reliance on a small
number of imperfectly measured indicators to proxy for macroeconomic fundamentals, and
make feasible the use of a vast set of economic variables that are more likely to span the
unobservable information sets of …nancial market participants.
   We use dynamic factor analysis to revisit the question of whether there are important
macro factors in bond risk premia. We begin with a comprehensive analysis of whether
excess bond returns are predictable by macroeconomic fundamentals, and then move on to
investigate whether risk premia in long-term bond yields (sometimes called term premia),
vary with macroeconomic fundamentals.
   Our results indicate bond premia are indeed forecastable by macroeconomic fundamen-
tals, and we …nd marked countercyclical variation in bond risk premia. To implement the
dynamic factor analysis methodology, we estimate common factors from a monthly panel of
132 measures of economic activity using the method of principal components. We …nd that
several estimated common factors have important forecasting power for future excess returns
on U.S. government bonds. Following Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005), we also construct single
predictor state variables from these factors by forming linear combinations of the either …ve
or six estimated common factors (denoted F 5t and F 6t , respectively). We …nd that such state
variables forecast excess bond returns at all maturities (two to …ve years), and do so virtually
as well as a regression model that includes each common factor in the linear combination as
a separate predictor variable.
   The magnitude of the forecastability we …nd associated with macroeconomic activity is
economically signi…cant. The estimated factors have their strongest predictive power for two-
year bonds, explaining 26 percent of the one year ahead variation in their excess returns.


                                                2
But they also display strong forecasting power for excess returns on three-, four-, and …ve-
year government bonds. Although this is slightly less than that found by Cochrane and
Piazzesi (their single forward-rate factor, which we denote CPt , explains 31 percent of next
year’s variation in the two-year bond), it is typically more than that found by Fama and
Bliss (1987) and Campbell and Shiller (1991). We also …nd that our estimated factors have
strong out-of-sample forecasting power for excess bond returns that is stable over time and
statistically signi…cant. The factors continue to exhibit signi…cant predictive power for excess
bond returns when the small sample properties of the data are taken into account.
   Perhaps more signi…cantly, the estimated factors contain substantial information about
future bond returns that is not contained in CPt , a variable that Cochrane and Piazzesi show
subsumes the predictive content of forward spreads, yield spreads, and yield factors. For
example, when both CPt and either F 5t or F 6t are included together as predictor variables,
each variable is strongly marginally signi…cant and the regression model can explain as much
as 44 percent of next year’s two-year excess bond return. This is an improvement of 13
percent over what is possible using CPt alone.
   Of all the estimated factors we study, the single most important in the linear combinations
we form is a “real” factor, highly correlated with measures of real output and employment
but not highly correlated with prices or …nancial variables. “In‡ation” factors, those highly
correlated with measures of the aggregate price-level, also have predictive power for excess
bond returns. (We discuss the interpretation of the factors further below.) Moreover, the
predictable dynamics we …nd reveal signi…cant countercyclical variation in bond risk premia:
excess bond returns are forecast to be high in recessions, when economic growth is slow or
negative, and are forecast to be low in expansions, when the economy is growing quickly.
   We emphasize two aspects of these results. First, in contrast to the existing empirical
literature, (which has focused on predictive regressions using …nancial indicators), we …nd
strong predictable variation in excess bond returns that is associated with macroeconomic
activity. Second, the estimated factors that load heavily on macroeconomic variables have
substantial predictive power for excess bond returns above and beyond that contained in the
in forward spreads, yield spreads, or even yield factors estimated as the principal components
of the yield covariance matrix. This behavior is ruled out by a¢ ne term structure models
where the forecastability of bond returns and bond yields is completely summarized by yields
or forward rates.
   The …nal part of this paper investigates long-term bond yields using a simple bivariate
vectorautoregression for yield spreads and the federal funds rate. The VAR errors are or-


                                               3
thgonalized so that the federal funds rate does not respond contemporaneously to the yield
spread innovation. We argue that movements in the term structure that are orthogonal to
contemporaneous and lagged values of the federal funds rate may be interpreted as movements
risk premia on long-term yields. We …nd that shocks to the yield spread holding …xed the
federal funds rate have become an economically important source of variation in the short-
run forecast error of the term structure over the last 20 years, but were less important in
earlier periods. In the Greenspan era, these shocks are found to have a strong countercyclical
component, and are forecastable by the same real factor that we …nd forecasts excess bond
returns. This reinforces the conclusion from our investigation of bond returns that investors
must be compensated for risks related to recessions.
  When the economy is growing, these forces contribute to a ‡attening of the yield curve
even in periods when the Federal Reserve has been raising interest rates. Conventional wisdom
maintains that a ‡at yield curve portends a slowing of economic activity. But we …nd that
shocks to the yield spread holding …xed the funds rate display no forecasting power for real
activity. Accordingly, a ‡at term structure–when attributable to this component–does not
portend a period of slow or negative economic growth. We show that the unusually ‡at term
structure in 2004 and 2005 provides a case in point.
    The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In the next section we brie‡y review related
literature not discussed above. We begin with the investigation of risk premia in bond returns.
Section 3 lays out the econometric framework and discusses the use of principal components
analysis to estimate common factors. Here we present the results of one-year-ahead predictive
regressions for excess bond returns. We also discuss an out-of-sample forecasting analysis, and
a bootstrap analysis for small-sample inference. Next we explore the potential implications
of our …ndings for the term structure, by studying a simple decomposition of …ve-year yield
spreads. This analysis is conducted in Section 4, using a bivariate vectorautoregression.
Section 5 concludes.

2   Related Literature

Our use of dynamic factor analysis is an application of statistical procedures developed else-
where for the case where both the number of economic time series used to construct common
factors, N , and the number of time periods, T , are large and converge to in…nity (Stock and
Watson 2002a, 2002b; Bai and Ng 2002, 2005). Dynamic factor analysis with large N and
large T is preceded by a literature studying classical factor analysis for the case where N is
relatively small and …xed but T ! 1. See for example, Sargent and Sims (1977); Sargent

                                               4
(1989), and Stock and Watson (1989, 1991). By contrast, Connor and Korajczyk (1986, 1988)
pioneered techniques for undertaking dynamic factor analysis when T is …xed and N ! 1.
   The presumption of the dynamic factor model is that the covariation among economic time
series is captured by a few unobserved common factors. Stock and Watson (2002b) show that
consistent estimates of the space spanned by the common factors may be constructed by
principal components analysis. A large and growing body of literature has applied dynamic
factor analysis in a variety of empirical settings. Stock and Watson (2002b) and Stock
and Watson (2004) …nd that predictions of real economic activity and in‡ation are greatly
improved relative to low-dimensional forecasting regressions when the forecasts are based
on the estimated factors of large datasets. An added bene…t of this approach is that the
use of common factors can provide robustness against the structural instability that plagues
low-dimensional forecasting regressions (Stock and Watson (2002a)). The reason is that such
instabilities may “average out” in the construction of common factors if the instability is
su¢ ciently dissimilar from one series to the next. Several authors have combined dynamic
factor analysis with a vector autoregressive framework to study the macroeconomic e¤ects of
policy interventions or patterns of comovement in economic activity (Bernanke and Boivin
(2003); Bernanke, Boivin, and Eliasz (2005), Giannone, Reichlin and Sala (2004, 2005);
Stock and Watson (2005) ). Boivin and Giannoni (2005) use dynamic factor analysis of
large datasets to form empirical inputs into dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models.
Ludvigson and Ng (2006) use dynamic factor analysis to model the conditional mean and
conditional volatility of excess stock market returns.
   Our work is also related to research in asset pricing that looks for connections between
bond prices and macroeconomic fundamentals. In data spanning the period 1988-2003, Pi-
azzesi and Swanson (2004) …nd that the growth of nonfarm payroll employment is a strong
predictor of excess returns on federal funds futures contracts. Ang and Piazzesi (2003) in-
vestigate possible empirical linkages between macroeconomic variables and bond prices in a
no-arbitrage factor model of the term structure of interest rates. Building o¤ of earlier work
by Du¤ee (2002) and Dai and Singleton (2002), Ang and Piazzesi present a multifactor a¢ ne
bond pricing model that allows for time-varying risk premia, but they allow the pricing kernel
to be driven by shocks to both observed macro variables and unobserved yield factors. They
…nd empirical support for this model.1 The investigation of this paper di¤ers because we
   1
    A closely related approach is taken in recent work by Bikbov and Chernov (2005) in which the joint
dynamics of yield factors, real activity, and in‡ation are explicitly modeled as part of an a¢ ne term structure
model. Others, such as Kozicki and Tinsley (2001) and Kozicki and Tinsley (2005) use a¢ ne models to link
the term structure to perceptions of monetary policy.


                                                       5
form factors from a large dataset of 132 macroeconomic indicators to conduct a model-free
empirical investigation of reduced-form forecasting relations suitable for assessing more gen-
erally whether bond premia are forecastable by macroeconomic fundamentals. We view our
investigation as complimentary to that of Ang and Piazzesi.

3       Econometric Framework: Bond Returns

In this section we describe our econometric framework, which involves estimating common
factors from a large dataset of economic activity. Such estimation is carried out using principal
components analysis, a procedure that has been described and implemented elsewhere for
forecasting measures of macroeconomic activity and in‡ation (e.g., Stock and Watson (2002b),
Stock and Watson (2002a), Stock and Watson (2004)). Our notation for excess bond returns
and yields closely follows that in Cochrane (2005). We refer the reader to those papers for a
detailed description of this procedure; here we only outline how the implementation relates
to our application.
        Although any predictability in excess bond returns is a violation of the expectations
hypothesis (where risk-premia are presumed constant), the objective of this paper is to assess
whether there is palpable forecastable variation in excess bond returns speci…cally related to
macroeconomic fundamentals. In addition, we ask whether macroeconomic variables have
predictive power for excess bond returns above and beyond that contained in the in forward
spreads, yield spreads, or yield factors estimated as the principal components of the yield
covariance matrix. To examine this latter issue, we use the Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005)
forward rate factor as a forecasting benchmark. Cochrane and Piazzesi have already shown
that, in our sample, the predictive power of forward spreads, yield spreads, and yield factors
is subsumed by their single forward-spread factor:
                             (n)
   For t = 1; : : : T , let rxt+1 denote the continuously compounded (log) excess return on an
                                                                       (n)    (n)    (1)
n-year discount bond in period t + 1. Excess returns are de…ned rxt+1 rt+1 yt , where
 (n)
rt+1 is the log holding period return from buying an n-year bond at time t and selling it as
                                             (1)
an n       1 year bond at time t + 1, and yt       is the log yield on the one-year bond.2
    A standard approach to assessing whether excess bond returns are predictable is to select
a set of K predetermined conditioning variables at time t, given by the K 1 vector Zt , and
    2       (n)                                                                (n)            (n)
    Let pt =log price of n-year discount bond at time t. Then the log yield is yt       (1=n) pt ; and the
                              (n)t  (n 1)   (n)
log holding period return is rt+1  pt+1    pt : The log forward rate at time t for loans between t + n 1
              (n)    (n 1)    (n)
and t + n is gt     pt       pt :



                                                     6
then estimate
                                                 (n)           0
                                            rxt+1 =                Zt +    t+1                                      (1)
by least squares. For example, Zt could include the individual forward rates studied in Fama
and Bliss (1987), the single forward factor studied in Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005), (a lin-
                         (1)
ear combination of yt and four forward rates), or other predictor variables based on a few
macroeconomic series. For reasons discussed above, such a procedure may be restrictive,
especially when investigating potential links between bond premia and macroeconomic fun-
damentals. In particular, suppose we observe a T                              N panel of macroeconomic data with
elements xit ; i = 1; : : : N , t = 1; :::; T , where the cross-sectional dimension, N , is large, and
possibly larger than the number of time periods, T . With standard econometric tools, it is
not obvious how a researcher could use the information contained in the panel because, unless
we have a way of ordering the importance of the N series in forming conditional expectations
(as in an autoregression), there are potentially 2N possible combinations to consider. Fur-
thermore, letting xt denote the N 1 vector of panel observations at time t, estimates from
the regression
                                           (n)         0             0
                                      rxt+1 =              xt +          Zt +    t+1                                (2)
quickly run into degrees-of-freedom problems as the dimension of xt increases, and estimation
is not even feasible when N + K > T .
       The approach we consider is to posit that xit has a factor structure taking the form
                                                             0
                                                 xit =       i ft   + eit ;                                         (3)

where ft is a r      1 vector of latent common factors,                          i   is a corresponding r   1 vector of
latent factor loadings, and eit is a vector of idiosyncratic errors.3 The crucial point here is
that r << N , so that substantial dimension reduction can be achieved by considering the
regression
                                         (n)           0             0
                                      rxt+1 =              Ft +          Zt +    t+1 ;                              (4)
where Ft    ft . Equation (1) is nested within the factor-augmented regression, making (4)
a convenient framework to assess the importance of xit via Ft , even in the presence of Zt .
   3
    We consider an approximate dynamic factor structure, in which the idiosyncratic errors eit are permitted
to have a limited amount of cross-sectional correlation. The approximate factor speci…cation limits the
contribution of the idiosyncratic covariances to the total variance of x as N gets large:
                                                 N X
                                                 X N
                                            1
                                       N                    jE (eit ejt )j       M;
                                                 i=1 j=1

where M is a constant.

                                                             7
But the distinction between Ft and ft is important, because factors that are pervasive for the
                                                                                (n)
panel of data xit need not be important for predicting rxt+1 .
   As common factors are not observed, we replace ft by fbt , estimates that, when N; T ! 1,
span the same space as ft . (Since ft and         i   cannot be separately identi…ed, the factors are only
identi…able up to an r         r matrix.) In practice, ft are estimated by principal components
                                                                                               0
                   4
analysis (PCA). Let the be the N r matrix de…ned as                  ( 01 ; :::; 0N ) : Intuitively,
the estimated time t factors fbt are linear combinations of each element of the N 1 vector
xt = (x1t ; :::; xN t )0 , where the linear combination is chosen optimally to minimize the sum of
squared residuals xt      ft . Throughout the paper, we use “hats”to denote estimated values.
   To determine the composition of Fbt , we form di¤erent subsets of fbt , and/or functions of fbt
(such as fb2 ). For each candidate set of factors, Fbt , we regress rxt+1 on Fbt and Zt and evaluate
                                                                      (n)
             1t
the corresponding BIC and R2 . Following Stock and Watson (2002b), minimizing the BIC
yields the preferred set of factors Fbt , but we explicitly limit the number of speci…cations we
search over.5 The vector Zt contains additional (non-factor) regressors that are thought to
be related to future bond returns. The …nal regression model for excess returns is based on
Zt plus this optimal Fbt . That is,

                                                          Fbt +
                                          (n)         0            0
                                       rxt+1 =                         Zt +    t+1 :                        (5)

       Although we have written (5) so that Fbt and Zt enter as separate regressors, there is no
theoretical reason why factors that load heavily on macro variables should contain information
that is entirely orthogonal to that in …nancial indicators: For this reason we are also interested
in whether macro factors Fbt have unconditional predictive power for future returns. This
amounts to asking whether the coe¢ cients                   from a restricted version of (5) given by

                                                                 Fbt +
                                                (n)          0
                                            rxt+1 =                      t+1                                (6)

are di¤erent from zero. At the same time, an interesting empirical question is whether the
information contained in the estimated factors Fbt overlaps substantially with that contained
                                         p
   4
      To be precise, the T r matrix fb is T times the r eigenvectors corresponding to the r largest eigenvalues
                                                                                                              0
of the T T matrix xx0 =(T N ) in decreasing order. Let be the N r matrix of factor loadings 01 ; :::; 0N :
                                                                   0
   and f are not separately identi…able, so the normalization f f =T = Ir is imposed, where Ir is the r-
                                                                                                            0
dimensional identity matrix. With this normalization, we can additionally obtain b = x0 fb=T , and b it = bi fbt
denotes the estimated common component in series i at time t. The number of common factors, r, is
determined by the panel information criteria developed in Bai and Ng (2002).
    5
      We …rst evaluate r univariate regressions of returns on each of the r factors. Then, for only those
factors that contribute signi…cantly to minimizing the BIC criterion of the r univariate regressions, we
evaluate whether squared and cubed terms help reduce the BIC criterion further. We do not consider other
polynomial terms, or polynomial terms of factors not important in the regressions on linear terms.

                                                            8
in …nancial predictor variables. Therefore we also evaluate multiple regressions of the form
(5), in which Zt includes the Cochrane-Piazzesi factor CPt as a benchmark. As discussed
above, we use this variable as a single summary statistic because it subsumes the information
contained in a large number of popular …nancial indicators known to forecast excess bond
returns. Such multiple regressions allow us to assess whether Fbt has predictive power for
excess bond returns, conditional on the information in Zt : In each case, the null hypothesis
is that excess bond returns are unpredictable.
                                                  p
    Under the assumption that N; T ! 1 with T =N ! 0, Bai and Ng (2005) showed that
                                                             p
(i) (b ; b) obtained from least squares estimation of (5) are T consistent and asymptotically
normal, and the asymptotic variance is such that inference can proceed as though ft is
observed (i.e., that pre-estimation of the factors does not a¤ect the consistency of the second-
stage parameter estimates or the regression standard errors), (ii) the estimated conditional
                          p p
mean, Fb0 b +Z 0 b is min[ N ; T ] consistent and asymptotically normal, and (iii) the h period
          t     t
forecast error from (5) is dominated in large samples by the variance of the error term, just
as if ft is observed. The importance of a large N must be stressed, however, as without it,
the factor space cannot be consistently estimated however large T becomes.
      Although our estimates of the predictable dynamics in excess bond returns will clearly de-
pend on the extracted factors and conditioning variables we use, the combination of dynamic
factor analysis applied to very large datasets, along with a statistical criterion for choosing
parsimonious models of relevant factors, makes our analysis less dependent than previous
applications on a handful of predetermined conditioning variables. The use of dynamic factor
analysis allows us to entertain a much larger set of predictor variables than what has been
entertained previously, while the BIC criterion provides a means of choosing among summary
factors by indicating whether these variables have important additional forecasting power for
excess bond returns.

3.1     Empirical Implementation and Data

A detailed description of the data and our sources is given in the Data Appendix. We study
monthly data spanning the period 1964:1 to 2003:12, the same sample studied by Cochrane
and Piazzesi (2005).
    The bond return data are taken from the Fama-Bliss dataset available from the Center
for Research in Securities Prices (CRSP), and contain observations on one- through …ve-year
zero coupon U.S. Treasury bond prices. These are used to construct data on excess bond
returns, yields and forward rates, as described above. Annual returns are constructed by

                                                9
continuously compounding monthly return observations.
   We estimate factors from a balanced panel of 132 monthly economic series, each spanning
the period 1964:1 to 2003:12. Following Stock and Watson (2002b, 2004, 2005), the series
were selected to represent broad categories of macroeconomic time series: real output and
income, employment and hours, real retail, manufacturing and sales data, international trade,
consumer spending, housing starts, inventories and inventory sales ratios, orders and un…lled
orders, compensation and labor costs, capacity utilization measures, price indexes, interest
rates and interest rate spreads, stock market indicators and foreign exchange measures. The
complete list of series is given in the Appendix, where a coding system indicates how the
data were transformed so as to insure stationarity. All of the raw data in xt are standardized
prior to estimation.
   Notice that the estimated factors we study will not be pure macro variables, since the
panel of economic indicators from which they are estimated contain …nancial variables as
well as macro variables. Theoretically speaking, there is no reason why …nancial and macro
variables shouldn’t be informative, since the two classes of variables must be endogenously
determined by a common set of primitives. The important point, made below, is that several
of the estimated factors that are highly correlated with macroeconomic activity (but little
correlated with …nancial indicators) contain economically important predictive power for bond
returns that is not contained in …nancial indicators with known forecasting power for bond
returns, e.g., bond yields and forward rates.
   For the speci…cations in which we include additional predictor variables in Zt ; we report
results in which Zt contains the single variable CPt . We do so because the Cochrane-Piazzesi
factor summarizes virtually all the information in individual yield spreads and forward spread
that had been the focus of prior work on predictability in bond returns. We also experimented
with including the dividend yield on the Standard and Poor composite stock market index
in Zt , since Fama and French (1989) …nd that this variable has modest forecasting power for
bond returns. We do not report those results, however, since the dividend yield has little
forecasting power for future bond returns in our sample and has even less once the estimated
factors Fbt or the Cochrane and Piazzesi factor are included in the forecasting regression.
    In estimating the time-t common factors, we face a decision over how much of the time-
series dimension of the panel to use. We take two approaches. First, we run in-sample
regressions in which the full sample of time-series information is used to estimate the common
factors at each date t. This approach can be thought of as providing smoothed estimates of
the latent factors, ft . Smoothed estimates of the latent factors are the most e¢ cient means of


                                                10
summarizing the covariation in the data x because the estimates do not discard information
in the sample. Second, we conduct an out-of-sample forecasting investigation in which the
predictor factors are reestimated recursively each period using data only up to time t. A
description of this procedure is given below.

3.2      Empirical Results

Table 1 presents summary statistics for our estimated factors fbt : The number of factors, r, is
determined by the information criteria developed in Bai and Ng (2002). The criteria indicate
that the factor structure is well described by eight common factors. The …rst factor explains
the largest fraction of the total variation in the panel of data x, where total variation is
measured as the sum of the variances of the individual xit . The second factor explains the
largest fraction of variation in x, controlling for the …rst factor, and so on. The estimated
factors are mutually orthogonal by construction. Table 1 reports the fraction of variation in
the data explained by factors 1 to i.6 Table 1 shows that a small number of factors account for
a large fraction of the variance in the panel dataset we explore. The …rst …ve common factors
of the macro dataset account for about 40 percent of the variation in the macroeconomic
series.
       To get an idea of the persistence of the estimated factors, Table 1 also displays the
…rst-order autoregressive, AR(1), coe¢ cient for each factor. None of the factors have a
persistence greater than 0.77, but there is considerable heterogeneity across estimated factors,
with coe¢ cients ranging from -0.17, to 0.77.
       As mentioned, we formally choose among a range of possible speci…cations for the forecast-
ing regressions of excess bond returns based on the estimated common factors (and possibly
nonlinear functions of those factors such as fb1t
                                               3
                                                  ) using the BIC criterion, (though we restrict
our speci…cation search as described above.) We report results only for the speci…cations
analyzed that have the lowest BIC criterion.7 Results not reported indicate that, when the
Cochrane-Piazzesi factor is excluded as a predictor, the six-factor subset Ft               ft given by
     !                                               0
Ft = F 6t = Fb1t ; Fb1t3 ; Fb2t ; Fb3t ; Fb4t ; Fb8t minimizes the BIC criterion across a range of pos-
sible speci…cations based on the …rst eight common factors of our panel dataset, as well as
nonlinear functions of these factors. Fb1t3 ; above, denotes the cubic function in the …rst esti-
   6
     This is given as the the sum of the …rst i largest eigenvalues of the matrix xx0 divided by the sum of all
eigenvalues.
   7
     Speci…cations that include lagged values of the factors beyond the …rst were also examined, but additional
lags were found to contain little information for future returns that was not already contained in the one-period
lag speci…cations.


                                                       11
mated factor. The estimated factors Fb5t and Fb6t exhibit little forecasting power for excess
bond returns. When CPt is included, by contrast, the …ve-factor subset Ft               ft given by
      !                                       0
Ft = F 5t = Fb1t ; Fb1t3 ; Fb3t ; Fb4t ; Fb8t minimizes the BIC criterion. As we shall see, the sec-
ond estimated factor Fb2t is highly correlated with interest rates spreads. As a result, the
information it contains about future bond premia is subsumed in CPt .
    The subsets Ft contain …ve or six factors. To assess whether a single linear combination of
these factors forecasts excess bond returns at all maturities, we follow Cochrane and Piazzesi
(2005) and form single predictor factors as the …tted values from a regression of average
(across maturity) excess returns on the set of six and …ve factors, respectively. We denote
these single factors F 6t and F 5t , respectively:
            1 X (n)
               5
                 rx   =          0   +       b +
                                           1 F1t
                                                     b3
                                                   2 F1t   +        b +
                                                                   3 F2t
                                                                              b +
                                                                            4 F3t
                                                                                       b +
                                                                                     5 F4t
                                                                                              b + ut+1 ;
                                                                                             6 F8t         (7)
            4 n=2 t+1
                                  !
                    F 6t       b0 F 6t ;
            1 X (n)
               5
                 rx   =          0   +      b +
                                           1 F1t
                                                     b3
                                                   2 F1t   +       b +
                                                               3 F3t
                                                                            b +
                                                                           4 F4t
                                                                                     b + vt+1 ;
                                                                                    5 F8t                  (8)
            4 n=2 t+1
                    F 5t       b0 F!5t ;

where b and b denote the 6               1 and 5     1 vectors of estimated coe¢ cients from (7) and (8),
respectively. With these factors in hand, we now turn to an empirical investigation of their
forecasting properties for excess bond returns.

3.2.1      In-Sample Analysis

Tables 2a-2d present results from in-sample forecasting regressions of the general form (5),
for two-year, three-, four-, and …ve-year log excess bond returns.8 In this section, we in-
vestigate the two hypotheses discussed above. First we ask whether the estimated factors
have unconditional predictive power for excess bond returns; this amounts to estimating the
                                                               0
restricted version of (5) given in (6), where                      is restricted to zero. Next we ask whether
the estimated factors have predictive power for excess bond returns conditional on Zt . This
amounts to estimating the unrestricted regression (5) with 0 freely estimated. The statistical
signi…cance of the factors is assessed using asymptotic standard errors. Section 5.3, below,
investigates the …nite sample properties of the data.
   For each regression, the regression coe¢ cients, heteroskedasticity and serial-correlation
robust t-statistics, and adjusted R2 statistic are reported. The asymptotic standard errors
  8
      The results reported below for log returns are nearly identical for raw excess returns.

                                                           12
use the Newey and West (1987) correction for serial correlation with 18 lags. The correction is
needed because the continuously compounded annual return has an MA(12) error structure
under the null hypothesis that one-period returns are unpredictable. Because the Newey-
West correction down-weights higher order autocorrelations, we follow Cochrane and Piazzesi
(2005) and use an 18 lag correction to better insure that the procedure fully corrects for the
MA(12) error structure.
  We begin with the results in Table 2a, predictive regressions for excess returns on two-
               (2)
year bonds rxt+1 . As a benchmark, column a reports the results from a speci…cation that
includes only the Cochrane-Piazzesi factor CPt as a predictor variable. This variable, a linear
                     (1)                      (2)   (3)    (5)
combination of yt and four forward rates, gt ; gt ; :::; gt , is strongly statistically signi…cant
and explains 31 percent of next year’s two-year excess bond return. By comparison, column
                                                          !
b shows that the six factors contained in the vector F 6t are also strong predictors of the
two-year excess return, with t-statistics in excess of …ve for the …rst estimated factor Fb1t ,
but with all factors statistically signi…cant at the 5 percent or better level. Together these
factors explain 26 percent of the variation in one year ahead returns. Although the second
factor, Fb2t , is strongly statistically signi…cant in column b, column c shows that once CPt is
included in the regression, it loses its marginal predictive power and the adjusted R2 statistic
rises from 26 to 45 percent. The information contained in Fb2t is more than captured by CPt .
Because we …nd similar results for the excess returns on bonds of all maturities, we hereafter
omit output from multivariate regressions using Fb2t and CPt as a separate predictors.
    Columns d through h display estimates of the marginal predictive power of the estimated
            !
factors in F 5t and the single predictor factors F 5t and F 6t . The single predictor factors
explain virtually the same fraction of future excess returns as do the unrestricted speci…cations
                                                                                     !
that include each factor as separate predictor variables. For example, both F 6t and F 6t
                                                                !
explain 26 percent of next year’s excess bond return; both F 5t and F 5t explain 22 percent.
                                            !
Column e shows that the …ve factors in F 5t are strongly statistically signi…cant even when
CPt is included, implying that these factors contain information about future returns that
                                                            2
is not contained in forward spreads. The 45 percent R from this regression indicates an
economically large degree of predictability of future bond returns. About the same degree of
                                                                              2
predictability is found when the single factor F 5t is included with CPt (R = 44 percent).
   The results in Tables 2b-2d for excess returns on three-, four-, and …ve-year bonds are
similar to those reported in Table 2a for two-year bonds. In particular, (i) the single factors
F 5t and F 6t predict future bond returns just as well than the unrestricted regressions that
include each factor as separate predictor variables, (ii) the …rst estimated factor continues to


                                               13
display strongly statistically signi…cant predictive power for bonds of all maturities, and (iii)
the speci…cations explain an economically large fraction of the variation in future returns.
There are, however, a few notable di¤erences from Table 2a. The coe¢ cients on the third and
                                                                                             (3)
fourth common factors are more imprecisely estimated in unrestricted regressions of rxt+1 ,
  (5)         (5)    !
rxt+1 , and rxt+1 on F 5t , as evident from the lower t-statistics. But notice that, in every
                                                                                (2)
case, the third factor retains the strong predictive power it exhibited for rxt+1 once CPt is
included as an additional predictor (column c of Tables 2b-2d). Moreover, the single factors
F 5t and F 6t remain strongly statistically signi…cant predictors of excess returns on bonds of
                                               2
all maturities and continue to deliver high R . F 6t alone explains 24, 23, and 21 percent of
next years excess return on the three-, four-, and …ve-year bond, respectively; F 5t explains
19, 17, and 14 percent of next years excess returns on these bonds, and F 5t and CPt together
explain 44, 45, and 42 percent of next years excess returns. When the information in CPt
and Fbt is combined, the magnitude of forecastability exhibited by excess bond returns is
remarkable.

Implications for A¢ ne Models The results reported in Tables 2a-2b indicate that good
forecasts of excess bond returns can be made with only a few estimated factors, and that
the best forecasts are based on combinations of factors that summarize information from
a large panel of economic activity and the Cochrane-Piazzesi factor CPt . It is reassuring
that some of estimated factors (Fb2t in particular, and to a lesser extent Fb3t ) are found to
contain information that is common to that the Cochrane-Piazzesi factor, suggesting that
CPt summarizes a large body of information about economic and …nancial activity.
  The crucial point, however, is that measures of real activity and in‡ation in the aggregate
economy contain economically meaningful information about future bond returns that is not
contained in CPt , and therefore not contained in forward spreads, yield spreads, or even
yield factors estimated as the principal components of the yield covariance matrix. (The
…rst three principal components of the yield covariance matrix are the “level,” “slope,” and
“curvature,” yield factors studied in term structure models in …nance.) These …ndings are
ruled out by a¢ ne term structure models where the forecastability of bond returns and bond
yields is completely summarized by yields or forward rates. In a¢ ne models, log bond prices
are linear functions of the state variables. Thus, if there are K state variables, bond yields
can serve as state variables, and will contain any forecasting information that is in the state
variables. Since bond returns, forward rates, and yields are all linear functions of one another,
a¢ ne models imply that any of these variables should contain all the forecastable information


                                               14
about future bond returns and yields.9 Thus the …ndings reported above suggest that a¢ ne
models may fail to describe an important aspect of bond data.

Economic Interpretation of the Factors What economic interpretation can we give to
the predictor factors? Because the factors are only identi…able up to a r     r matrix, a detailed
interpretation of the individual factors would be inappropriate. Nonetheless, it is useful to
brie‡y characterize the factors as they relate to the underlying variables in our panel dataset.
Figures 1 through 5 show the marginal R2 for our estimates of F1t , F2t , F3t , F4t , and F8t . The
marginal R2 is the R2 statistic from regressions of each of the 132 individual series in our
panel dataset onto each estimated factor, one at a time, using the full sample of data. The
…gures display the R2 statistics as bar charts, with one …gure for each factor. The individual
series that make up the panel dataset are grouped by broad category and labeled using the
numbered ordering given in the Data Appendix.
    Figure 1 shows that the …rst factor loads heavily on measures of employment and produc-
tion (employees on nonfarm payrolls and manufacturing output, for example), but also on
measures of capacity utilization and new manufacturing orders. It displays little correlation
with prices or …nancial variables. We call this factor a real factor. The second factor, which
has a correlation with CPt of -45%, loads heavily on several interest rate spreads (Figure 2),
explaining almost 70 percent of the variation in the Baa Fed funds rate spread. The third
and fourth factors load most heavily on measures of in‡ation and price pressure but display
little relation to employment and output. Figure 3 and 4 show that they are highly correlated
with both commodity prices and consumer prices, while Fb4t is also highly correlated with the
level of nominal interest rates (for example by the …ve-year government bond yield). Nominal
interest rates may contain information about in‡ationary expectations that is not contained
in measures of the price level. We call both Fb3t and Fb4t in‡ation factors.
    Finally, Figure 5 shows that the eighth estimated factor, Fb8t , loads heavily on measures
of the aggregate stock market. It is highly correlated with the log di¤erence in both the
composite and industrial Standard and Poor’s Index and the Standard and Poor’s dividend
yield but bears little relation to other variables. We call this factor a stock market factor.
It should be noted, however, that this factor is not merely proxying for the stock market
dividend yield, shown elsewhere to have predictive power for excess bond returns (e.g., Fama
and French (1989)). The factor’s correlation with the dividend yield is less than 60% in our
sample (Figure 5). Moreover, results not reported indicate that–conditional on the dividend
  9
      Cochrane (2005), Ch. 19, provides a useful discussion of this issue.


                                                       15
yield–the stock market factor we estimate displays strong marginal predictive power for future
excess returns.
   Since the factors are orthogonal by construction, we can characterize their relative impor-
tance in F 5t and F 6t by investigating the absolute value of the coe¢ cients on each factor in
the regressions (7) and (8). (Since the factors are identi…able up to an r                   r matrix, the signs
of the coe¢ cients have no particular interpretation.) Because the factors are orthogonal, it
is su¢ cient for this characterization to investigate just the coe¢ cients from the regression
                                 !
on all six factors contained in F 6t , as in (7).10 Using data from 1964:1-2003:12, we …nd the
following regression results (t-statistics in parentheses):

1 X (n)
   5
     rx = 1:03             1:72 Fb1t + 0:13 Fb1t3        1:01 Fb2t + 0:18 Fb3t     0:56 Fb4t + 0:78 Fb8t +ut+1 ;
4 n=2 t+1 (2:96)          ( 5:12)        (2:97)       ( 3:90)        (1:18)       ( 2:40)       (4:56)

                                                     2
                                                   R = 0:224:
The real factor, Fb1t , has the largest coe¢ cient in absolute value, implying that it is the
single most important factor in the linear combinations we form. The interest rate factor
Fb2t is second most important, and the stock market factor Fb8t third most. The in‡ation
factors Fb3t and Fb4t are relatively less important but still contribute more than the cubic in
the real factor. (Fb3t is not marginally signi…cant in these regressions because its coe¢ cient
is imprecisely estimated in forecasts of three-, four-, and …ve-year excess bond returns when
only factors are included as predictors. The variable is nonetheless an important predictor
of future bond returns because it is a strongly statistically signi…cant once CPt is included
as an additional regressor.) It is also worth noting that Fb1t and Fb1t3 account for half of the
adjusted R-squared statistic reported above.
   In most empirical applications involving macro variables, researchers choose a few time
series thought to be representative of aggregate activity. In monthly data, the usual suspects
tend to be a measure of industrial production, consumer and commodity in‡ation, and un-
employment. The next regression shows what happens if individual series of this type are
used to forecast excess bond returns:


1 X (n)
   5
     rx = 6:06             28:01 IPt + 0:56 CP It          0:09 CM P It       11:80 P P It + 1:36 U Nt +ut+1 ;
4 n=2 t+1 (2:88)          ( 0:74)        (0:02)           ( 2:55)             ( 0:79)          (0:99)

                                                     2
                                                   R = 0:113:
 10
      Strictly speaking, Fb1t
                           3
                              is not orthogonal, but in practice is found to be nearly so.

                                                          16
IPt is the log di¤erence in the industrial production index, CP It is the log di¤erence in the
consumer price index, CM P It is the log di¤erence in the NAPM commodity price index; P P It
is the log di¤erence in the producer price index, and U Nt is the unemployment rate for the
total population over 16 years of age. Unlike the factors, many of the usual suspect macro
                                                                                      2
series have little marginal predictive power for excess bond returns, and the R statistic
is lower. Interestingly, this occurs even though, for example, IPt and Fb1t have a simple
correlation of 83 percent in our sample. Of course, the choice of predictors above is somewhat
arbitrary given the large number of series available, and it is surely the case that di¤erent
speci…cations would lead to di¤erent results. (The cubic in IPt , however, is not a statistically
important predictor.) This fact serves to illustrate a point: when the information from
hundreds of predictors is systematically summarized, the possibility of omitting relevant
information is much reduced.

Are Bond Risk Premia Countercyclical? The …ndings presented so far indicate that
excess bond returns are forecastable by macroeconomic aggregates, but they do not tell us
whether there is a countercyclical component in risk premia, as predicted by economic theory.
To address this question, Figure 6 plots the 12 month moving average of both Fb1t and IPt over
time, along with shaded bars indicating dates designated by the National Bureau of Economic
Research (NBER) as recession periods. The …gure shows that the real factor, Fb1t , captures
marked cyclical variation in real activity. The correlation between the moving averages of
the two series plotted is 92 percent. Both Fb1t and IP growth reach peaks in the mid-to-late
stages of economic expansions, and take on their lowest values at the end of recessions. Thus
recessions are characterized by low (typically negative) IP growth and low values for Fb1t ,
while expansions are characterized by strong positive IP growth and high values for Fb1t .
    Connecting these …ndings back to the forecasts of excess bond returns, we see that excess
return forecasts are high when Fb1t is low (Table 2). These …ndings imply that return forecasts
have a countercyclical component, consistent with economic theories in which investors must
be compensated for bearing risks related to recessions. For example, Campbell and Cochrane
(1999) and Wachter (2006) study models in which risk aversion varies over the business cycle
and is low in good times when the economy is growing quickly. In these models, risk premia
(excess return forecasts) are low in booms but high in recessions, consistent with what we
…nd. The evidence that in‡ation factors also govern part of the predictable variation in excess
bond returns is consistent with economic theories for which risk premia vary with in‡ation
(e.g., Brandt and Wang (2003)), as well as with theories for which in‡ation and real activity


                                               17
contribute signi…cantly to variation in the price of risk (e.g.,Ang and Piazzesi (2003)).

3.2.2      Out-of-Sample Analysis and Small Sample Inference

We have formed the factors and conducted the regression analysis using the full sample of
data. In this section we report results on the out-of-sample forecasting performance of the
regression models studied in the previous section.11 This procedure involves fully recursive
factor estimation and parameter estimation using data only through time t for forecasting
at time t + 1. We conduct two model comparisons. First, we compare the out-of-sample
                                                                                       !
forecasting performance of the …ve-factor model that includes the estimated factors in F 5t
to a constant expected returns benchmark where, apart from an MA(12) error term, excess
returns are unforecastable as in the expectations hypothesis.12 Second, we compare the out-
of-sample forecasting performance of a speci…cation that includes the same …ve macro factors
plus to the Cochrane-Piazzesi factor, CPt , to a benchmark model that includes just the
Cochrane-Piazzesi factor, CPt , and a constant. This second speci…cation allows us to assess
the incremental predictive power of the macro factors above and beyond the predictive power
in CPt :
       Table 3 reports results from one year ahead out-of-sample forecast comparisons of log
                            (n)
excess bond returns, rxt+1 ; n = 2; ::; 5. For each forecast, M SEu denotes the mean-squared
                                                                         !      !
forecasting error of the unrestricted model including predictor factors F 5t or F 5t and CPt ;
M SEr denotes the mean-squared forecasting error of the restricted benchmark (null) model
that excludes additional forecasting variables. In the column labeled “M SEu =M SEr ”, a
                                                                         !       !
number less than one indicates that the model with the predictor factors F 5t or F 5t and
CPt has lower forecast error than the benchmark model that excludes additional predictor
variables.
       Results for two forecast samples are reported: 1985:1-2003:2; 1995:1-2003:2. The re-
                                                                                              (2)        (5)
sults for the …rst forecast sample are reported in Rows 1, 3, 5, and 7 for rxt+1 , ...,rxt+1
respectively. Here the parameters and factors were estimated recursively, with the initial
estimation period using only data available from 1964:12 through 1984:12. Next, the fore-
casting regressions were run over the period t =1964:12,...,1984:12 (dependent variable from
  11
     An important caveat with out-of-sample statistical tests is that they lack power relative to in-sample
regression forecasts (Inoue and Kilian (2004)). With this caveat in mind, we proceed using tests known to
have the best size and power properties among those available (Clark and McCracken (2001)).
  12
     Notice that this procedure is conservative, since the out-of-sample performance of the estimated factors
could only stronger if, in each recursion, we conducted a BIC speci…cation search to select the subset of
factors with the highest predictive power. But a recursive speci…cation search would tell us nothing about
the out-of-sample performance of the factors investigated above, so we do not pursue that avenue here.


                                                     18
t =1965:1,...,1984:12, independent variables from t =1964:1,...,1983:12) and the estimated pa-
rameters and values of the regressors at t =1984:12 were used to forecast annual compound
returns for 1985:12.13 All parameters and factors are then reestimated from 1964:1 through
1985:1, and forecasts were recomputed for excess returns in 1986:1, and so on, until the …nal
out-of-sample forecast is made for returns in 2003:12: The same procedure is used to compute
results reported in the other rows, where the initial estimation period is t =1964:1,...,1995:1.
The column labeled “Test Statistic”in Table 3 reports the ENC-NEW test statistic of Clark
and McCracken (2001) for the null hypothesis that the benchmark model encompasses the
unrestricted model with additional predictors. The alternative is that the unrestricted model
contains information that could be used to improve the benchmark model’s forecast. “95%
Asympt. CV”gives the 95th percentile of the asymptotic distribution of the ENC-NEW test
statistic.
                                                                    !
       The results show that the model including the …ve factors in F 5t improves substantially
over the constant expected returns benchmark, for excess bond returns of every maturity.
The models have a mean-squared error that is anywhere from 79 to 93 percent of the con-
stant expected returns benchmark mean-squared error, depending on the excess return being
forecast and the forecast period. For the period 1995:1-2003:12 the model has a forecast error
variance that is only 84, 86, 89, and 93 percent of the constant expected returns benchmark
      (2)         (5)
for rxt+1 , ...,rxt+1 respectively. The ENC-NEW test statistic always indicates that the im-
provement in forecast power is strongly statistically signi…cant, at the one percent or better
level. Moreover, the reduction in mean-square-error over the benchmark is about the same
regardless of which forecast period is analyzed.
                                                                     !
   The results also show that the model including the …ve factors in F 5t and CPt improves
substantially over a benchmark that includes a constant and CPt . This reinforces the con-
clusion form the in-sample analysis, namely that the estimated factors contain information
about future returns that is not contained in the CP factor. The models that include the …ve
factors in addition to the CP factor have a mean-squared error that is any where from 81 to
94 percent of that of the benchmark that includes only CP and a constant. The ENC-NEW
test statistic always indicates that the improvement in forecast power is strongly statistically
signi…cant, at the one percent or better level.
    To guard against inadequacy of the asymptotic approximation in …nite samples, the Ap-
pendix reports the results of a comprehensive bootstrap inference for speci…cations using four
  13
    Note that the regressors must be lagged 12 months to account for the 12-period overlap induced from
continuously compounding monthly returns to obtain annual returns.



                                                  19
regression models. The results show that the magnitude of predictability found in historical
data is too large to be accounted for by sampling error in samples of the size we currently
have. The statistical relation of the factors to future returns is evident, even accounting for
the small sample distribution of standard test statistics.

4      A Decomposition of Yield Spreads

The evidence above suggests that risk premia on bond returns vary signi…cantly with real
activity, as captured by Fb1t . Researchers in macroeconomics are often more interested in the
behavior of bond yields rather than returns. The aim of this section is to investigate whether
movements in yield risk premia are also related to real economic activity, in a manner similar
to that documented above for return risk premia.
       It is not a given that they should be so related. While there is a simple linear relation
between returns and yields, there is no simple linear transformation between their risk pre-
mium components. To see this, note that the n-period yield can be written as the average of
                                                                                (n)
expected future nominal short-rates plus an additional term                     t ,   which we refer to as a yield
risk-premium:
                             (n)       1     (1)  (1)                (1)               (n)
                            yt     =     Et yt + yt+1 +           + yt+N    1    +     t :                    (9)
                                       N
                                                                      (n)
In the expectations hypothesis, the yield risk premium,               t ,   is assumed constant.
                                                     (n)
       We refer to the yield risk premium            t     interchangeably as a term premium. The term
premium should not be confused with the term spread itself, which is simply the di¤erence in
yields between the n-period bond and the one-period bond. Of course, without restrictions
                     (n)
of some kind on      t ,   the equation above is just a statement of yields, not a model. But with
 (n)
 t     constant, as in the expectations hypothesis, excess bond returns (studied above) should
                                                                                                    (n)
be unforecastable. Thus the evidence above implies that risk premia in yields, t , also vary.
The precise relation between term premia and risk premia is likely to be complicated and
nonlinear, however, because the latter is a function of the expected one-period change in the
                                 (n)        (n 1)
risk premium on yields,          t     Et   t+1 ;   which in principle varies both with maturity and over
time. It therefore remains an open question as to whether term premia are closely related to
the same empirical state variables that return risk premia are found to be in linear forecasting
regressions.
    In this section we …rst identify movements in the term structure that are plausibly related
to the risk-premium component, t , and then ask how movements in t are related to Fb1t .
                                     (n)                                 (n)


To accomplish the …rst objective, we decompose the term structure using a simple bivariate


                                                           20
vectorautoregression (VAR) for the yield spread and the federal funds rate. The VAR errors
are orthgonalized so that the federal funds rate does not respond contemporaneously to the
yield spread innovation. Using this orthogonalization, innovations in the yield spread will be
orthogonal to contemporaneous and lagged values of the federal funds rate, F Ft .
       It is natural to interpret these orthogonalized innovations as movements in risk premia,
 (n)
 t .For example, the expectation term above, a function of future nominal rates, captures
movements in expected in‡ation and expected real interest rates. If the Federal Reserve cares
only about in‡ation and the output gap, it will move the funds rate in response to anticipated
changes in these variables, but it will not react to ‡uctuations in the yield curve that are
orthogonal to expected in‡ation and expected real interest rates, (which a¤ect the output
gap). Thus, if the yield curve changes but the federal funds rate does not, that must signify
a movement in risk premia. We use this interpretation of Federal Reserve behavior as an
identi…cation assumption.
   In practice, the Federal Reserve is known to move gradually in response to changes in
expected in‡ation and expected real interest rates. Moreover, the bond market may move
in anticipation of policy changes by the Federal Reserve. Nevertheless, the funds rate, as
the target of the monetary authority, summarizes a large amount of economic information
upon which expectations of future in‡ation and future real interest rates are based; it is also
extremely persistent. Given these facts, we assume that current and lagged values of the fed-
eral funds rate (included in the VAR), summarize the market’s expectations of future Federal
Reserve policy, so that the VAR innovations in the yield spread equation (orthogonalized as
described above) capture genuine movements in risk premia.14 Thus we label the residual
in the yield spread equation a “risk premium” component, and present evidence below on
this identi…cation assumption. However one labels this component, we argue that it is of
interest in its own right, as discussed below. We use the terms “orthogonalized yield spread
innovation”and “risk premium component”interchangeably to describe this VAR residual.
   Two features of this VAR decomposition deserve emphasis. First, the decomposition is
intended to isolate movements in the term structure that may be plausibly related to move-
  14
    Some researchers have used federal funds futures rates to measure the …nancial market’s expectation
of future federal funds rates changes (Krueger and Kuttner (1996), Rudebusch (1998), Brunner (2000),
Kuttner (2001), Bernanke and Kuttner (2003)). There are at least two drawbacks with this approach for our
application. First, the data from the futures market is more limited, which restricts the sample size. Second,
and more important for our application, Piazzesi and Swanson (2004) show that a signi…cant fraction of the
variation in feds funds futures re‡ects movements in risk-premia, not merely movements in expected future
funds rates. Since we are interested in the risk premium component of yields, we do not include federal funds
futures data in our VAR.



                                                     21
ments in risk premia; it is not intended to fully characterize the term premium component of
yield spreads. To see this, observe that any movement in term premia that is correlated with
the funds rate (and therefore expected future short rates) would not be captured by our or-
thogonalized decomoposition. Second, we do not assign any interpretation to the innovations
in the federal funds equation. In particular, we do not consider them policy shocks or even
exogenous movements in the funds rate. The aim is to use the bivariate VAR to decompose
yields in an interesting way, not to identify policy shocks.
   Such a decomposition would be made more di¢ cult by estimating a larger VAR (as
would be required to identify policy shocks). Under the identifying assumption given above,
any movement in the yield spread associated with funds rate changes is correlated with the
expectations component in (9). All remaining movements (given by the orthogonalized VAR
                                                    (n)
residuals), must re‡ect movements in risk-premia    t .   Including additional variables in the
VAR would hamper this identi…cation, since the residuals in the yield spread equation would
then be orthogonal not only to the funds rate itself, but also to movements in the additional
variables holding …xed the funds rate. Under our identi…cation assumption, these latter
movements in the term structure reveal movements in risk premia. Since these are precisely
the movements we seek to identify as part of the residual, it is important not to remove them
by estimating a larger VAR. The essence of our identi…cation assumption is that the federal
funds rate itself summarizes a large amount of economic information upon which expectations
are based, so it is not necessary to include this information along with the funds rate in the
VAR.
   The procedure just described decomposes movements in the term structure; it does not
provide a complete statistical model of yield changes. It is more common in the term structure
literature to measure movements in yield risk premia by imposing multifactor a¢ ne models
that prohibit arbitrage. The “model”in our decomposition approach boils down to assump-
tions about Federal Reserve behavior that may admittedly be di¢ cult to assess empirically.
On the other hand, the approach allows us to sidestep the counterfactual implication of a¢ ne
term structure models that bond yields should completely drive out macroeconomic variables
as interest rate and return forecasters. This latter consideration is important for our appli-
cation, since the results above imply that risk premia in returns move with real economic
activity unrelated to yields, forward rates and lagged returns.
   We focus on the spread between the …ve-year Treasury bond and the one-year bond using
quarterly data, available from the Federal Reserve. We use quarterly data in order to insure
that each observation in our sample contains a meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit-


                                             22
tee, at which the Federal Reserve sets interest rates. Table 4 plots variance decompositions
from a two-lag, bivariate VAR for the funds rate and the …ve-year Treasury yield spread,
  (5)  (1)                                                                         (5 1)
yt    yt . Below, we denote the orthgonalized VAR residual in the yield spread, ryt      :
Several points about the variance decompositions bear noting.
   First, in the full sample, yield spread innovations have a negligible a¤ect on the funds
rate but an economically signi…cant a¤ect on yields. The innovations explain 34 percent of
the one-step-ahead forecast error in the …ve-year yield spread, and roughly 40 percent of the
overall variation in the yield spread. Thus, shocks to the yield curve holding …xed the funds
rate account for a large fraction of the variance in the term spread in our sample.
   Second, yield spread innovations have become more important over time. We study this
decomposition over three subperiods: 1964:Q1-1979:Q2 (pre-Volcker), 1983:Q1-2005:Q4 (re-
cent) and 1987:Q3-2005:Q4 (Greenspan). (We omit the interim years from 1979 to 1983, in
which the Federal Reserve was experimenting with a nonborrowed reserve operating proce-
dure.) Comparing the early period to the two latter periods, we see that fraction of forecast
error variance in the yield spread that is explained by its own shocks has risen dramatically,
especially in the short-run. For example, in the Greenspan period, this component explains
the vast majority–82 percent–of the one-step ahead forecast error in the yield spread. The
results are similar for the “recent period.”Yield spread innovations explain 76 percent of the
one-step-ahead forecast error in yields and 35 percent over long horizons. By contrast, in the
pre-Volcker period, yield spread innovations explain only 33 percent of one-step-ahead fore-
cast error in yields and 16 percent over long horizons. These …ndings imply that movements
in the term structure that are orthogonal to movements in the funds rate have become a
much more economically important source of variation in yields in recent decades.
   Third, the di¤erences in variance decompositions across subperiods appear more attribut-
able to di¤erences in the volatility of the orthogonalized forecast errors across subperiods
than to di¤erences in the VAR parameter estimates. Indeed, Figure 9 shows that the impulse
responses to a one-standard deviation increase in the yield spread are quite similar across
subperiods. Moreover, if we …x the VAR parameters at their full sample estimated values, we
…nd a large increase in the standard deviation of the orthogonalized yield spread residual in
the recent sample compared to the pre-Volcker sample. This standard deviation is normalized
to one in the full sample, but is 0.76 in the pre-Volcker sample and 1.11 in the recent sample.
(This can be seen clearly in Figure 10, discussed below.) We conclude that it is reasonable
to use the full sample to form a long estimate of the risk premium component of the term
structure.


                                              23
   We have assumed that that VAR innovations in the yield spread, which hold …xed the
funds rate, capture movements in term premia rather than movements in expected in‡ation
and expected real interest rates. We have also assumed that current and lagged values of
the funds rate summarize the market’s expectation of future Federal Reserve policy moves. If
either of these identi…cation assumptions were incorrect, we would expect the funds rate to
respond subsequently to innovations in the yield spread. The left panels of Figures 9 provide
no evidence that this is the case. The impact reaction is zero by construction, since the shock
to yields does not contemporaneously a¤ect the funds rate (by the orthogonalization assump-
tion). But the responses in future periods are outcomes of the analysis. These responses
show that yield spread innovations have an economically small and statistically insigni…cant
impact on the federal funds rate over any future horizon. In three distinct subperiods, the
impulse response of the funds rate to a yield spread innovation is almost ‡at, suggesting that
our identi…cation assumption is reasonable. By contrast, the response of yield spread itself
to such a shock strongly positive and persistent, dying out after about 15 quarters.
    We now turn to the question of whether the term premium component of the yield spread
we identify is related to real economic activity, as measured by the real factor Fb1t . Table
5 displays the results of univariate forecasting regressions of the orthogonalized innovations
in the yield spread onto the lagged factor Fb1t , where we have estimated both the forecast
error for the yield spread and Fb1t over the same sample used to estimate return risk premia
above. Results for other factor are not reported since we …nd little relation between the risk
premium component in yields and the other factors. The table shows that Fb1t is unrelated to
the orthogonal component of future yields in the early subperiods, but is a strong predictor
                                                                                     (5 1)
in the Greenspan period. This factor alone explains 11 percent of the variation in ryt     one
                                                b
quarter ahead in the Greenspan period. Since F1t is positively correlated with measures of
output and employment, these …ndings are qualitatively similar to those presented above for
bond returns: they suggest that investors must be compensated for risks related to recessions
or, conversely, that investors require lower risk premia in good times when the economy has
been expanding.
   The point estimate in the regression reported in Table 5 suggests that the a¤ect of Fb1t on
risk premia in yields in the Greenspan period is economically large. A one-standard deviation
increase in Fb1t leads to a decline of 0.48 in the orthogonalized yield spread. This implies a
decline of greater than two standard deviations in the risk premium component of the term
spread. Given the large fraction of variation in the short-term forecast error of yield spreads
that is explained by this component in recent decades, these …ndings imply that much of


                                              24
the variation in yield spreads associated with real activity in the Greenspan era was entirely
unrelated to Federal Reserve Policy. When the economy is growing, as in recent data, these
forces contribute to a ‡attening of the yield curve even in periods when the Federal Reserve
has been raising interest rates.

4.1     Is the Term Premium Related to Future Real Activity?

It is well known that the term spreads as a whole forecast real activity, particularly output
growth (Stock and Watson (1989), Chen (1991), Estrella and Hardouvelis (1991)). A conven-
tional interpretation of these results is that a ‡at yield curve portends a slowing of economic
activity. Table 6, top panel, con…rms these …ndings in our sample: the term spread as a
             yt , is a strong predictor of the real factor Fb1t+1 , explaining eight percent of
         (5)   (1)
whole, yt
its one-quarter-ahead variation. Moreover, the estimated coe¢ cient has the anticipated sign:
high yield spreads forecast positive economic activity, and vice versa.
      Table 6 suggests that this forecasting power comes entirely from the expectations com-
ponent of long term yields, rather than the term premium. We disaggregate the total yield
                                                                      (5 1)
spread into its orthogonalized residual, or term premium, component ryt     , and the re-
                                                                                               (5 1)
maining component explained by the VAR. We denote this expectations component eyt+1 :
                     (5 1)         (5 1)                                 (5)    (1)             (5 1)
The components ryt           and eyt+1     are orthogonal and sum to yt        yt : Note that eyt+1
contains movements in the yield spread that are related to current and lagged values of the
funds rate, as well as to lagged values of the yield spread.
                                                  (5 1)
   The second panel of Table 6 shows that ryt           has no predictive power for future real
activity. The coe¢ cient in the regression is zero, as is the R2 . The third panel of Table 6
shows that, historically, the only component of the yield spread that has forecast real activity
                                      (5 1)
is the expectations component, eyt+1 : This component is a strongly statistically signi…cant
                                                               (5 1)
predictor of real activity, while the risk premium component ryt     has no marginal predictive
power. Thus, while the yield spread as a whole forecasts real activity, as is well known, the
risk premium component we identify is completely uninformative about future real activity.
The …ndings imply that real activity responds di¤erently to movements in the term structure
that are unrelated to the federal funds rate than it does to other movements in the term
structure.
                                         (5 1)
      The risk premium component ryt             also has no predictive power in the Greenspan period
(bottom panel of Table 6), although, in this shorter sample, neither does the explained
            (5 1)
component eyt+1 . Yield spreads as a whole display little forecasting power for real activity
over this period, consistent with previous …ndings of (Stock and Watson (2003)).

                                                     25
         These …ndings may be related to the behavior of the yield curve in recent quarters. The
economy has grown robustly in recent data. The results above suggest that show that such
growth has a negative a¤ect on the term premium. Figure 10 displays a time series plot
                                                          (5 1)
of our estimated term premium component ryt                       , the orthogonalized shock to the yield
spread equation from the bivariate VAR. From the far right-hand-side of the …gure it is clear
that, since 2004:Q2, this component of yields has been entirely responsible for the ‡at yield
curve observed in recent data. In particular, in every quarter from 2004:Q3 to 2005:Q4,
this component was negative and in some periods strongly so. In 2004:Q3, for example, this
component stood at         1:33 percent per annum. But since the total yield spread was positive
in each of these quarters, (ranging from 1.02 to 0.10 percent per annum), these results imply
                                                        (5 1)
that the expectations component of the yield spread, eyt+1 , was even more strongly positive
                                                       (5 1)
over this period. Indeed, the average value of eyt+1 over the last …ve quarters exceeds the full-
sample mean of the yield spread itself. Since it is this component and only this component of
the term structure that has historically forecast real activity, the …ndings provide no evidence
that the ‡at yield curve in recent data is currently signaling slow or negative economic growth.
If anything, recent data imply that the term structure is currently signaling positive economic
growth.
    The behavior of the term structure in recent data appears to have been perceived, at
least in part, as a surprise by the Federal Reserve, precisely because important movements
in long-term yields seem to have been unrelated to Federal Reserve policy.15 The …ndings
here imply that such movements in long-term yields have become more important in recent
decades, and now comprise a signi…cant fraction of yield spread forecast error. These …ndings
also lend some support to the judgements of Federal Reserve policymakers, which suggested
that a signi…cant portion of the decline in yield spreads recently appears to have resulted
from a fall in risk premia (Greenspan (2005)). For the Greenspan era, our results suggest
that term premia fall when the economy has been growing.

5        Conclusion

We contribute to the literature on bond return forecastability by showing that macroeconomic
fundamentals have important predictive power for excess returns on U.S. government bonds.
To do so, we use dynamic factor analysis to summarize the information from a large number
    15
    For example, Chairman Alan Greenspan noted that “The drop in long-term rates is especially surprising
given the increase in the federal funds rate over the same period. Such a pattern is clearly without precedent
in our recent experience” (Greenspan (2005)).


                                                     26
of macroeconomic series. The approach allows us to eliminate the arbitrary reliance on a
small number of imperfectly measured indicators to proxy for macroeconomic fundamentals,
and makes feasible the use of a vast set of economic variables that are more likely to span
the unobservable information sets of …nancial market participants.
   We emphasize two aspects of our …ndings. First, in contrast to the existing empirical
literature, (which has focused on predictive regressions using …nancial indicators), we …nd
strong predictable variation in excess bond returns that is associated with macroeconomic
activity. Second, speci…cations using pure …nancial variables omit pertinent information
about future bond returns associated with macroeconomic fundamentals. The factors we
estimate have substantial predictive power independent of that in the Cochrane-Piazzesi
forward factor, and therefore independent of that in the forward rates, yields, and yield
factors of bonds with maturities from one to …ve years. When the information contained in
our estimated factors is combined with that in the Cochrane-Piazzesi forward factor, we …nd
remarkably large violations of the expectations hypothesis. These …ndings suggest that a¢ ne
term structure models–which imply that bond yields or their linear transformations should
summarize the predictive content in bond returns and yields–may be missing a quantitatively
important aspect of bond data.
   The predictive power of the estimated factors not just statistically signi…cant, it is eco-
nomically important, with factors explaining between 21-26 percent of one year ahead excess
bond returns. The factors also exhibit stable and strongly statistically signi…cant out-of-
sample forecasting power for future returns. The main predictor variables are factors based
on real activity that are highly correlated with measures of output and employment, but
two in‡ation factors and a stock market factor also contain information about future bond
returns.
   We then investigate the behavior of the term structure. Using a bivariate VAR for the
yield spread and the federal funds rate, we show that shocks to the yield spread holding …xed
the federal funds rate (interpreted as movements in risk premia) have become an economically
important source variation in the forecast error of the term structure over the last 20 years. In
the Greenspan era, these shocks are found to have a strong countercyclical component, and are
forecastable by a “real” factor highly correlated with measures of output and employment
growth. This suggests that investors must be compensated for risks related to recessions
or, conversely, that investors require lower risk premia in good economic times. When the
economy is growing, these forces contribute to a ‡attening of the yield curve even in periods
when–as recently–the Federal Reserve has been raising interest rates.


                                               27
   Movements in the risk premium component of the yield curve display no forecasting
power for real activity, however. Thus, real activity has historically responded di¤erently to
movements in the term structure that are orthogonal to the federal funds rate than it does
to other movements.
   The results for the post-Greenspan period also suggest that the behavior of the term
structure may depend on whether Federal Reserve policy moves coincide with positive or
negative economic growth. On the one hand, if an increase in interest rates is accompanied
by an increase in economic activity (as recently), the policy movement is likely to coincide
with a decline in risk premia, which works to ‡atten yield curve. Such a movement should
partially o¤set any increase in the yield spread that arises from an increase in expected
in‡ation. On the other hand, if an increase in interest rates is accompanied by an decline in
economic activity, (perhaps partly as a result of the rate increase), the policy movement may
coincide with an increase in risk premia, which works to steepen yield curve. In this event,
the change in risk premia should reinforce any increase in the yield spread that arises from
an increase in expected in‡ation.
   The overall results support the hypothesis that bond risk premia vary with aggregate
quantities and prices, consistent with theoretical notions that risk premia move with pref-
erences and technologies themselves driven by macroeconomic fundamentals. For example,
the real and in‡ation factors we study may be reasonable proxies for the consumption and
in‡ations shocks that enter models of time-varying risk premia like those of Campbell and
Cochrane (1999), Brandt and Wang (2003) and Wachter (2006). At the same time, the
analysis here leaves a number of questions for future work. For one, we cannot rule out the
possibility that the evidence we uncover is driven, not by rational variation in risk premia,
but instead by behavioral biases. Moreover, the statistical evidence we o¤er falls far short
of estimating a yet-to-be developed general equilibrium model that marries the dynamics of
macro variables and bond risk premia. Finally, the question of why forward rates and yields
appear to contain information about future bond returns that is largely independent of that in
macro factors that are highly correlated with measures of real activity and in‡ation remains
unanswered. These questions and more pose interesting research challenges for the future.




                                             28
                           Appendix: Small Sample Inference

   According to the asymptotic theory for PCA estimation discussed in Section 2, het-
eroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent standard errors that are asymptotically N (0; 1)
can be used to obtain robust t-statistics for the in-sample regressions studied in Section
                       p
5.1. Moreover, provided T =N goes to zero as the sample increases, the Fbt can be treated
as observed regressors, and the usual t-statistics are valid (Bai and Ng (2005)). To guard
against inadequacy of the asymptotic approximation in …nite samples, in this section consider
bootstrap inference for speci…cations using four regression models: (i) a model using just the
                     !                                                                        !
estimated factors in F 5t as predictor variables, (ii) a model using the estimated factors in F 5t
and CPt , (iii) a model using just the single linear combination of …ve estimated factors, F 5t ,
and (iv) a model using F 5t and CPt : Small sample inference is especially important when the
right-hand-side variables are highly persistent (e.g., Bekaert, Hodrick, and Marshall (1997);
Stambaugh (1999); Ferson, Sarkissian, and Simin (2003)) but, as Table 1 demonstrates, none
of the factors from our preferred speci…cations are highly persistent. Nevertheless, we pro-
ceed with a bootstrap analysis as a robustness check, by generating bootstrap samples of the
exogenous predictors Zt (here just CPt ), as well as of the estimated factors Fbt :
                            (n)
   Bootstrap samples of rxt+1 are obtained in two ways, …rst by imposing the null hypothesis
of no predictability, and second, under the alternative that excess returns are forecastable by
the factors and conditioning variables studied above. The use of monthly bond price data
to construct continuously compounded annual returns induces an MA(12) error structure in
the annual log returns. Thus under the null hypothesis that the expectations hypothesis is
true, annual compound returns are forecastable up to an MA(12) error structure, but are
not forecastable by other predictor variables or additional moving average terms. Bootstrap
sampling that captures the serial dependence of the data is straightforward when, as in this
case, there is a parametric model for the dependence under the null hypothesis (Horowitz
(2003)). In this event, the bootstrap may be accomplished by drawing random samples
                                                     p
from the empirical distribution of the residuals of a T consistent, asymptotically normal
estimator of the parametric model, in our application a twelfth-order moving average process.
We use this approach to form bootstrap samples of excess returns under the null. Under
the alternative, excess returns still have the MA(12) error structure induced by the use
of overlapping data, but estimated factors Fbt are presumed to contain additional predictive
power for excess returns above and beyond that implied by the moving average error structure.
   We take into account the pre-estimation of the factors by re-sampling the T           N panel
of data, xit . This creates bootstrapped samples of the factors themselves. For each i, least

                                               29
squares estimation of ebit =    bit 1 +vit
                               ie          yields estimates bi of the persistence of the idiosyncratic
                                                                                  0
errors and of the residuals vbit ; t = 2; : : : T , where recall that ebit = xit bi fbt . Then vbit is re-
sampled (while preserving the cross-section correlation structure) to yield bootstrap samples
of the idiosyncratic errors ebit . Bootstrap samples are denoted eeit . In turn, bootstrap values of
                                                                                                0
xit are constructed by adding the bootstrap estimates of the idiosyncratic errors, eeit , to b fbt .  i
Estimation by the method of principal components on the bootstrapped data then yields a
new set of estimated factors. The linear combination F 5t is reestimated in each bootstrap
simulation. Together with bootstrap samples of Zt (also based on an AR(1) model), this
delivers a set of bootstrap regressors. Each regression using the bootstrapped data gives new
estimates of the regression coe¢ cients in (2) and new R2 statistics. This is repeated B times.
Bootstrap con…dence intervals for the parameter estimates and R2 statistics are calculated
from B = 10; 000 replications. The results are reported in Tables 4a-4d for two-, three-, four-
and …ve-year excess bond returns, respectively.
   Tables A1-A4 indicate that the results based on bootstrap inference are broadly consistent
with those based on asymptotic inference in Tables 2a-2d. Con…dence intervals from data
generated under the alternative are reported in the columns headed “bootstrap.”Con…dence
intervals from data generated under the null are reported in the columns headed “Bootstrap
under the null.” The coe¢ cients on the exogenous predictors and estimated factors are all
well outside the 95% con…dence interval under the no-predictability null. Moreover, the
coe¢ cients on factors that are statistically di¤erent from zero in Table 2a-2d have con…dence
intervals under the alternative that exclude zero, indicating statistical signi…cance at the 5
percent level. The exceptions to this are the two in‡ation factors, which display con…dence
intervals under the alternative that contain zero for some speci…cations (as in the asymptotic
analysis). However, even these coe¢ cients are too large to be explained under the null of no
predictability, and the single linear combination of factors, F 5t , is always strongly statistically
signi…cant regardless of which excess return is being forecast.
    We also compute the small sample distribution of the R2 statistics. For two-year bond
                               !
returns, the …ve-factor model F 5t generates an adjusted R-squared statistic of 22% in histor-
ical data; by contrast, using bootstrapped data, the 95% bootstrapped con…dence interval for
this statistic under the no-predictability null ranges from 1.4% to 1.9%. Similarly, the …ve
factors and CPt deliver an adjusted R-squared statistic of 45% in historical data; by contrast,
using bootstrapped data, the 95% bootstrapped con…dence interval for this statistic under
the no-predictability null ranges from just 2.3% to 4.3%. The results are similar for bonds
of other maturities. In short, the magnitude of predictability found in historical data is too


                                                   30
large to be accounted for by sampling error in samples of the size we currently have. The
statistical relation of the factors to future returns is evident, even accounting for the small
sample distribution of standard test statistics.




                                              31
                                                   Data Appendix


               Table A.1 lists the short name of each series, its mnemonic (the series label used
     in the source database), the transformation applied to the series, and a brief data
     description. All series are from the Global Insights Basic Economics Database, unless the
     source is listed (in parentheses) as TCB (The Conference Board’s Indicators Database) or
     AC (author’s calculation based on Global Insights or TCB data). In the transformation
     column, ln denotes logarithm, ∆ln and ∆2ln denote the first and second difference of the
     logarithm, lv denotes the level of the series, and ∆lv denotes the first difference of the
     series.

                      Table A.1 Data sources, transformations, and definitions

  Series Number        Short name       Mnemonic   Tran                                    Description
1                  PI                  a0m052      ∆ln    Personal Income (AR, Bil. Chain 2000 $) (TCB)
2                  PI less transfers   a0m051      ∆ln    Personal Income Less Transfer Payments (AR, Bil. Chain 2000 $) (TCB)
3                  Consumption         a0m224_r    ∆ln    Real Consumption (AC) a0m224/gmdc (a0m224 is from TCB)
4                  M&T sales           a0m057      ∆ln    Manufacturing And Trade Sales (Mil. Chain 1996 $) (TCB)
5                  Retail sales        a0m059      ∆ln    Sales Of Retail Stores (Mil. Chain 2000 $) (TCB)
6                  IP: total           ips10       ∆ln    Industrial Production Index - Total Index
7                  IP: products        ips11       ∆ln    Industrial Production Index - Products, Total
8                  IP: final prod      ips299      ∆ln    Industrial Production Index - Final Products
9                  IP: cons gds        ips12       ∆ln    Industrial Production Index - Consumer Goods
10                 IP: cons dble       ips13       ∆ln    Industrial Production Index - Durable Consumer Goods
11                 IP: cons nondble    ips18       ∆ln    Industrial Production Index - Nondurable Consumer Goods
12                 IP: bus eqpt        ips25       ∆ln    Industrial Production Index - Business Equipment
13                 IP: matls           ips32       ∆ln    Industrial Production Index - Materials
14                 IP: dble matls      ips34       ∆ln    Industrial Production Index - Durable Goods Materials
15                 IP: nondble matls   ips38       ∆ln    Industrial Production Index - Nondurable Goods Materials
16                 IP: mfg             ips43       ∆ln    Industrial Production Index - Manufacturing (Sic)
17                 IP: res util        ips307      ∆ln    Industrial Production Index - Residential Utilities
18                 IP: fuels           ips306      ∆ln    Industrial Production Index - Fuels
19                 NAPM prodn          pmp         lv     Napm Production Index (Percent)
20                 Cap util            a0m082      ∆lv    Capacity Utilization (Mfg) (TCB)
21                 Help wanted indx    lhel        ∆lv    Index Of Help-Wanted Advertising In Newspapers (1967=100;Sa)
22                 Help wanted/emp     lhelx       ∆lv    Employment: Ratio; Help-Wanted Ads:No. Unemployed Clf
23                 Emp CPS total       lhem        ∆ln    Civilian Labor Force: Employed, Total (Thous.,Sa)
24                 Emp CPS nonag       lhnag       ∆ln    Civilian Labor Force: Employed, Nonagric.Industries (Thous.,Sa)
25                 U: all              lhur        ∆lv    Unemployment Rate: All Workers, 16 Years & Over (%,Sa)
26                 U: mean duration    lhu680      ∆lv    Unemploy.By Duration: Average(Mean)Duration In Weeks (Sa)
27                 U < 5 wks           lhu5        ∆ln    Unemploy.By Duration: Persons Unempl.Less Than 5 Wks (Thous.,Sa)
28                 U 5-14 wks          lhu14       ∆ln    Unemploy.By Duration: Persons Unempl.5 To 14 Wks (Thous.,Sa)
29                 U 15+ wks           lhu15       ∆ln    Unemploy.By Duration: Persons Unempl.15 Wks + (Thous.,Sa)
30                 U 15-26 wks         lhu26       ∆ln    Unemploy.By Duration: Persons Unempl.15 To 26 Wks (Thous.,Sa)
31                 U 27+ wks           lhu27       ∆ln    Unemploy.By Duration: Persons Unempl.27 Wks + (Thous,Sa)
32                 UI claims           a0m005      ∆ln    Average Weekly Initial Claims, Unemploy. Insurance (Thous.) (TCB)
33                 Emp: total          ces002      ∆ln    Employees On Nonfarm Payrolls: Total Private
34                 Emp: gds prod       ces003      ∆ln    Employees On Nonfarm Payrolls - Goods-Producing
35                 Emp: mining         ces006      ∆ln    Employees On Nonfarm Payrolls - Mining
36                 Emp: const          ces011      ∆ln    Employees On Nonfarm Payrolls - Construction
37                 Emp: mfg            ces015      ∆ln    Employees On Nonfarm Payrolls - Manufacturing
38                 Emp: dble gds       ces017      ∆ln    Employees On Nonfarm Payrolls - Durable Goods
39                 Emp: nondbles       ces033      ∆ln    Employees On Nonfarm Payrolls - Nondurable Goods
40                 Emp: services       ces046      ∆ln    Employees On Nonfarm Payrolls - Service-Providing
41    Emp: TTU           ces048    ∆ln    Employees On Nonfarm Payrolls - Trade, Transportation, And Utilities
42    Emp: wholesale     ces049    ∆ln    Employees On Nonfarm Payrolls - Wholesale Trade
43    Emp: retail        ces053    ∆ln    Employees On Nonfarm Payrolls - Retail Trade
44    Emp: FIRE          ces088    ∆ln    Employees On Nonfarm Payrolls - Financial Activities
45    Emp: Govt          ces140    ∆ln    Employees On Nonfarm Payrolls - Government
46    Emp-hrs nonag      a0m048    ∆ln    Employee Hours In Nonag. Establishments (AR, Bil. Hours) (TCB)
47    Avg hrs            ces151    lv     Avg Weekly Hrs of Prod or Nonsup Workers On Private Nonfarm Payrolls -
                                          Goods-Producing
48    Overtime: mfg      ces155    ∆lv    Avg Weekly Hrs of Prod or Nonsup Workers On Private Nonfarm Payrolls -
                                          Mfg Overtime Hours
49    Avg hrs: mfg       aom001    lv     Average Weekly Hours, Mfg. (Hours) (TCB)
50    NAPM empl          pmemp     lv     Napm Employment Index (Percent)
51    Starts: nonfarm    hsfr      ln     Housing Starts:Nonfarm(1947-58);Total Farm&Nonfarm(1959-)(Thous.,Saar)
52    Starts: NE         hsne      ln     Housing Starts:Northeast (Thous.U.)S.A.
53    Starts: MW         hsmw      ln     Housing Starts:Midwest(Thous.U.)S.A.
54    Starts: South      hssou     ln     Housing Starts:South (Thous.U.)S.A.
55    Starts: West       hswst     ln     Housing Starts:West (Thous.U.)S.A.
56    BP: total          hsbr      ln     Housing Authorized: Total New Priv Housing Units (Thous.,Saar)
57    BP: NE             hsbne*    ln     Houses Authorized By Build. Permits:Northeast(Thou.U.)S.A
58    BP: MW             hsbmw*    ln     Houses Authorized By Build. Permits:Midwest(Thou.U.)S.A.
58    BP: South          hsbsou*   ln     Houses Authorized By Build. Permits:South(Thou.U.)S.A.
60    BP: West           hsbwst*   ln     Houses Authorized By Build. Permits:West(Thou.U.)S.A.
61    PMI                pmi       lv     Purchasing Managers' Index (Sa)
62    NAPM new ordrs     pmno      lv     Napm New Orders Index (Percent)
63    NAPM vendor del    pmdel     lv     Napm Vendor Deliveries Index (Percent)
64    NAPM Invent        pmnv      lv     Napm Inventories Index (Percent)
65    Orders: cons gds   a0m008    ∆ln    Mfrs' New Orders, Consumer Goods And Materials (Bil. Chain 1982 $) (TCB)
66    Orders: dble gds   a0m007    ∆ln    Mfrs' New Orders, Durable Goods Industries (Bil. Chain 2000 $) (TCB)
67    Orders: cap gds    a0m027    ∆ln    Mfrs' New Orders, Nondefense Capital Goods (Mil. Chain 1982 $) (TCB)
68    Unf orders: dble   a1m092    ∆ln    Mfrs' Unfilled Orders, Durable Goods Indus. (Bil. Chain 2000 $) (TCB)
69    M&T invent         a0m070    ∆ln    Manufacturing And Trade Inventories (Bil. Chain 2000 $) (TCB)
70    M&T invent/sales   a0m077    ∆lv    Ratio, Mfg. And Trade Inventories To Sales (Based On Chain 2000 $) (TCB)
                                     2
71    M1                 fm1       ∆ ln   Money Stock: M1(Curr,Trav.Cks,Dem Dep,Other Ck'able Dep)(Bil$,Sa)
                                     2
72    M2                 fm2       ∆ ln   Money Stock:M2(M1+O'nite Rps,Euro$,G/P&B/D Mmmfs&Sav&Sm Time
                                          Dep(Bil$,Sa)
                                    2
73    M3                 fm3       ∆ ln   Money Stock: M3(M2+Lg Time Dep,Term Rp's&Inst Only Mmmfs)(Bil$,Sa)
74    M2 (real)          fm2dq     ∆ln    Money Supply - M2 In 1996 Dollars (Bci)
                                     2
75    MB                 fmfba     ∆ ln   Monetary Base, Adj For Reserve Requirement Changes(Mil$,Sa)
                                     2
76    Reserves tot       fmrra     ∆ ln   Depository Inst Reserves:Total, Adj For Reserve Req Chgs(Mil$,Sa)
                                     2
77    Reserves nonbor    fmrnba    ∆ ln   Depository Inst Reserves:Nonborrowed,Adj Res Req Chgs(Mil$,Sa)
                                     2
78    C&I loans          fclnq     ∆ ln   Commercial & Industrial Loans Oustanding In 1996 Dollars (Bci)
79    ∆C&I loans         fclbmc    lv     Wkly Rp Lg Com'l Banks:Net Change Com'l & Indus Loans(Bil$,Saar)
                                     2
80    Cons credit        ccinrv    ∆ ln   Consumer Credit Outstanding - Nonrevolving(G19)
81    Inst cred/PI       a0m095    ∆lv    Ratio, Consumer Installment Credit To Personal Income (Pct.) (TCB)
82    S&P 500            fspcom    ∆ln    S&P's Common Stock Price Index: Composite (1941-43=10)
83    S&P: indust        fspin     ∆ln    S&P's Common Stock Price Index: Industrials (1941-43=10)
84    S&P div yield      fsdxp     ∆lv    S&P's Composite Common Stock: Dividend Yield (% Per Annum)
85    S&P PE ratio       fspxe     ∆ln    S&P's Composite Common Stock: Price-Earnings Ratio (%,Nsa)
86    Fed Funds          fyff      ∆lv    Interest Rate: Federal Funds (Effective) (% Per Annum,Nsa)
87    Comm paper         cp90      ∆lv    Cmmercial Paper Rate (AC)
88    3 mo T-bill        fygm3     ∆lv    Interest Rate: U.S.Treasury Bills,Sec Mkt,3-Mo.(% Per Ann,Nsa)
89    6 mo T-bill        fygm6     ∆lv    Interest Rate: U.S.Treasury Bills,Sec Mkt,6-Mo.(% Per Ann,Nsa)
90    1 yr T-bond        fygt1     ∆lv    Interest Rate: U.S.Treasury Const Maturities,1-Yr.(% Per Ann,Nsa)
91    5 yr T-bond        fygt5     ∆lv    Interest Rate: U.S.Treasury Const Maturities,5-Yr.(% Per Ann,Nsa)
92    10 yr T-bond       fygt10    ∆lv    Interest Rate: U.S.Treasury Const Maturities,10-Yr.(% Per Ann,Nsa)
93    Aaa bond           fyaaac    ∆lv    Bond Yield: Moody's Aaa Corporate (% Per Annum)
94    Baa bond           fybaac    ∆lv    Bond Yield: Moody's Baa Corporate (% Per Annum)
95    CP-FF spread       scp90     lv     cp90-fyff (AC)
96    3 mo-FF spread     sfygm3    lv     fygm3-fyff (AC)
97    6 mo-FF spread     sfygm6    lv     fygm6-fyff (AC)
98    1 yr-FF spread     sfygt1    lv     fygt1-fyff (AC)
99    5 yr-FF spread     sfygt5    lv     fygt5-fyff (AC)
100   10 yr-FF spread    sfygt10   lv     fygt10-fyff (AC)
101   Aaa-FF spread      sfyaaac   lv     fyaaac-fyff (AC)
102   Baa-FF spread      sfybaac   lv     fybaac-fyff (AC)
103   Ex rate: avg       exrus     ∆ln    United States;Effective Exchange Rate(Merm)(Index No.)
104   Ex rate: Switz      exrsw    ∆ln    Foreign Exchange Rate: Switzerland (Swiss Franc Per U.S.$)
105   Ex rate: Japan      exrjan   ∆ln    Foreign Exchange Rate: Japan (Yen Per U.S.$)
106   Ex rate: UK         exruk    ∆ln    Foreign Exchange Rate: United Kingdom (Cents Per Pound)
107   EX rate: Canada     exrcan   ∆ln    Foreign Exchange Rate: Canada (Canadian $ Per U.S.$)
                                     2
108   PPI: fin gds        pwfsa    ∆ ln   Producer Price Index: Finished Goods (82=100,Sa)
                                     2
109   PPI: cons gds       pwfcsa   ∆ ln   Producer Price Index: Finished Consumer Goods (82=100,Sa)
                                     2
110   PPI: int mat’ls     pwimsa   ∆ ln   Producer Price Index:I ntermed Mat.Supplies & Components(82=100,Sa)
                                     2
111   PPI: crude mat’ls   pwcmsa   ∆ ln   Producer Price Index: Crude Materials (82=100,Sa)
                                     2
112   Spot market price   psccom   ∆ ln   Spot market price index: bls & crb: all commodities(1967=100)
                                     2
113   Sens mat’ls price   psm99q   ∆ ln   Index Of Sensitive Materials Prices (1990=100)(Bci-99a)
114   NAPM com price      pmcp     lv     Napm Commodity Prices Index (Percent)
                                     2
115   CPI-U: all          punew    ∆ ln   Cpi-U: All Items (82-84=100,Sa)
                                     2
116   CPI-U: apparel      pu83     ∆ ln   Cpi-U: Apparel & Upkeep (82-84=100,Sa)
                                     2
117   CPI-U: transp       pu84     ∆ ln   Cpi-U: Transportation (82-84=100,Sa)
                                     2
118   CPI-U: medical      pu85     ∆ ln   Cpi-U: Medical Care (82-84=100,Sa)
                                     2
119   CPI-U: comm.        puc      ∆ ln   Cpi-U: Commodities (82-84=100,Sa)
                                     2
120   CPI-U: dbles        pucd     ∆ ln   Cpi-U: Durables (82-84=100,Sa)
                                     2
121   CPI-U: services     pus      ∆ ln   Cpi-U: Services (82-84=100,Sa)
                                     2
122   CPI-U: ex food      puxf     ∆ ln   Cpi-U: All Items Less Food (82-84=100,Sa)
                                     2
123   CPI-U: ex shelter   puxhs    ∆ ln   Cpi-U: All Items Less Shelter (82-84=100,Sa)
                                     2
124   CPI-U: ex med       puxm     ∆ ln   Cpi-U: All Items Less Midical Care (82-84=100,Sa)
                                     2
125   PCE defl            gmdc     ∆ ln   Pce, Impl Pr Defl:Pce (1987=100)
                                     2
126   PCE defl: dlbes     gmdcd    ∆ ln   Pce, Impl Pr Defl:Pce; Durables (1987=100)
                                     2
127   PCE defl: nondble   gmdcn    ∆ ln   Pce, Impl Pr Defl:Pce; Nondurables (1996=100)
                                     2
128   PCE defl: service   gmdcs    ∆ ln   Pce, Impl Pr Defl:Pce; Services (1987=100)
                                     2
129   AHE: goods          ces275   ∆ ln   Avg Hourly Earnings of Prod or Nonsup Workers On Private Nonfarm
                                          Payrolls - Goods-Producing
                                    2
130   AHE: const          ces277   ∆ ln   Avg Hourly Earnings of Prod or Nonsup Workers On Private Nonfarm
                                          Payrolls - Construction
                                    2
131   AHE: mfg            ces278   ∆ ln   Avg Hourly Earnings of Prod or Nonsup Workers On Private Nonfarm
                                          Payrolls - Manufacturing
132   Consumer expect     hhsntn   ∆lv    U. Of Mich. Index Of Consumer Expectations(Bcd-83)
References

Ang, A., and M. Piazzesi (2003): “A No-Arbitrage Vector Autoregression of Term Struc-
  ture Dynamics With Macroeconomic and Latent Variables,” Journal of Monetary Eco-
  nomics, 50, 745–787.

Bai, J., and S. Ng (2002): “Determining the Number of Factors in Approximate Factor
 Models,”Econometrica, 70(1), 191–221.

        (2005): “Con…dence Intervals for Di¤usion Index Forecasts and Inference for Factor-
  Augmented Regressions,”Econometrica, forthcoming.

Bekaert, G., R. J. Hodrick, and D. Marshall (1997): “On Biases in Tests of the
  Expectations Hypothesis of the Term Structure of Interest Rates,” Journal of Financial
  Economics, 44, 309–348.

Bernanke, B. S., and J. Boivin (2003): “Monetary Policy in a Data-Rich Environment,”
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 50(3), 525–546.

Bernanke, B. S., J. Boivin, and P. Eliasz (2005): “Should Central Banks Respond to
  Movements in Asset Prices?,”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(1).

Bernanke, B. S., and K. N. Kuttner (2003): “What Explains the Stock Market’s Re-
  action to Federal Reserve Policy?,”Journal of Finance forthcoming.

Bikbov, R., and M. Chernov (2005): “No Arbitrage Macroeconomic Determinants of the
  Yield Curve,”Unpublished paper, Columbia Graduate School of Business.

Boivin, J., and M. Giannoni (2005): “DSGE Models in a Data-Rich Environment,” Un-
  published paper, Columbia University.

Brandt, M. W., and K. Q. Wang (2003): “Time-Varying Risk Aversion and Unexpected
 In‡ation,”Journal of Monetary Economics, 50, 1457–1498.

Brunner, A. D. (2000): “On the Derivation of Monetary Policy Shocks: Should We Throw
  the VAR Out with the Bathwater?,”Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 32, 252–279.
Campbell, J. Y., and J. H. Cochrane (1999): “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-
  Based Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy,
  107, 205–251.

Campbell, J. Y., and R. J. Shiller (1991): “Yield Spreads and Interest Rates: A Bird’s
  Eye View,”Review of Economic Studies, 58, 495–514.

Chen, N. F. (1991): “Financial Investment Opportunities and the Macroeconomy,”Journal
 of Finance, 46(2), 529–54.

Clark, T., and M. McCracken (2001): “Tests of Equal Forecast Accuracy and Encom-
  passing for Nested Models,”Journal of Econometrics, 105, 85–110.

Cochrane, J. H. (2005): Asset Pricing, Revised Edition. Princeton University Press,
  Princeton, NJ.

Cochrane, J. H., and M. Piazzesi (2005): “Bond Risk Premia,”The American Economic
  Review, 95(1), 138–160.

Connor, G., and R. Korajczyk (1986): “Performance Measurement with the Arbitrage
  Pricing Theory: A New Framework for Analysis,” Journal of Financial Economics, 15,
  373–394.

Connor, G., and R. A. Korajczyk (1988): “Risk and Return in an Equilibrium APT:
  Application of a New Test Methodology,”Journal of Financial Economics, 21, 255–289.

Dai, Q., and K. Singleton (2002): “Expectation Puzzles, Time-Varying Risk Premia, and
 A¢ ne Models of the Term Structure,”Journal of Financial Economics, 63, 415–441.

Duffee, G. R. (2002): “Term Premia and Interest Rate Forecasts in A¢ ne Models,”Journal
  of Finance, 57, 405–443.

Estrella, A., and G. Hardouvelis (1991): “The Term Structure as a Predictor of Real
  Economic Activity,”Journal of Finance, 46(2), 555–76.

Fama, E. F., and R. H. Bliss (1987): “The Information in Long-Maturity Forward Rates,”
  American Economic Review, 77(4), 680–692.

Fama, E. F., and K. R. French (1989): “Business Conditions and Expected Returns on
  Stocks and Bonds,”Journal of Financial Economics, 25, 23–49.
Ferson, W. E., S. Sarkissian, and T. T. Simin (2003): “Spurious regressions in …nancial
  economics?,”Journal of Finance, 58(4), 1393–1413.

Giannone, D., L. Reichlin, and L. Sala (2002): “Tracking Greenspan: Systematic and
  Unsystematic Monetary Policy Revisited,”CEPR Working Paper No. 3550.

        (2005): “Monetary Policy in Real Time,”in NBER Macroeconomics Annual: 2004,
  ed. by M. Gertler, and K. Rogo¤. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Greenspan, A. (2005): “Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan at the Federal Reserve
  Board’s semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress Before the Committee on
  Financial Services„”U.S. House of Representatives, July 20, 2005.

Horowitz, J. L. (2003): “The Bootstrap,” in Handbook of Econometrics, ed. by J. J.
  Heckman, and E. Leamer, vol. 5. Elsevier Science B.V., North Holland.

Inoue, A., and L. Kilian (2004): “In-Sample or Out-of-Sample Tests of Predictability:
  Which One Should We Use?,”Econometric Reviews, 23(4), 371–402.

Kozicki, S., and P. A. Tinsley (2001): “Term Structure of Monetary Policy Under Al-
  ternative Models of Agent Expectations,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control,
  25(1-2), 149–184.

        (2005): “Term structure transmission of monetary policy,” Fed. Reserve Bank of
  Kansas city Working Paper 05-06.

Krueger, J. T., and K. N. Kuttner (1996): “The Fed Funds Futures Rate as a Predictor
 of Federal Reserve Policy,”Journal of Futures Markets, 16, 865–869.

Kuttner, K. N. (2001): “Monetary Policy Surprises and Interest Rates: Evidence from the
  Federal Funds Futures Market,”Journal of Monetary Economics, 47, 523–544.

Ludvigson, S. C., and S. Ng (2006): “The Empirical Risk-Return Relation: A Factor
  Analysis Approach,”Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Newey, W. K., and K. D. West (1987): “A Simple, Positive Semide…nite, Heteroskedas-
  ticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix,”Econometrica, 55, 703–708.

Piazzesi, M., and E. Swanson (2004): “Futures Prices as Risk-Adjusted Forecasts of
  Monetary Policy,”NBER Working Paper No. 10547.
Rudebusch, G. (1998): “Do Measures of Monetary Policy in a VAR Make Sense?,” Inter-
  national Economic Review, 39, 907–931.

Sargent, T. J. (1989): “Two Models of Measurements and the Investment Accelerator,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 97, 251–287.

Sargent, T. J., and C. A. Sims (1977): “Business Cycle Modeling Without Pretending
  to Have Too Much Apriori Theory,” in New Methods of Business Cycle Research, ed. by
  C. A. Sims. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Minneapolis, MN.

Stambaugh, R. F. (1999): “Predictive Regressions,” Journal of Financial Economics, 54,
  375–421.

Stock, J. H., and M. W. Watson (1989): “New Indexes of Coincident and Leading
  Economic Indicators,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual: 1989, ed. by O. J. Blanchard,
  and S. Fischer, pp. 351–94. MIT Press, Cambridge.

             (1991): “A Probability Model of the Coincident Economic Indicators,” in The
  Leading Economic Indicators: New Approaches and Forecasting Records, ed. by G. Moore,
  and K. Lahiri, pp. 63–90. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

         (2002a): “Forecasting Using Principal Components From a Large Number of Pre-
  dictors,”Journal of the American Statistical Association, 97(460), 1167–1179.

         (2002b): “Macroeconomic Forecasting Using Di¤usion Indexes,”Journal of Business
  and Economic Statistics, 20(2), 147–162.

         (2003): “Forecasting Output and In‡ation: The Role of Asset Prices,” Journal of
  Economic Literature.

         (2004): “Forecasting With Many Predictors,” Unpublished paper, Princeton Uni-
  versity.

         (2005): “Implications of Dynamic Factor Models for VAR Analysis,” Unpublished
  paper, Princeton University.

Wachter, J. (2006): “A Consumption Based Model of the Term Structure of Interest
 Rates,”Journal of Financial Economics, 79, 365–399.
                                     Table 1: Summary Statistics for fbit



                                              i    AR1(fbit )     Ri2
                                              1      0.767       0.177
                                              2      0.764       0.249
                                              3     -0.172       0.304
                                              4      0.289       0.359
                                              5      0.341       0.403
                                              6    -0.0132       0.439
                                              7      0.320       0.471
                                              8      0.233       0.497

    For i = 1; : : : 8, fbit is estimated by the method of principal components using a panel of data with 132
indicators of economic activity from t=1964:1-2003:12 (480 time series observations). The data are transformed
(taking logs and di¤erenced where appropriate) and standardized prior to estimation. AR1(fbit ); is the …rst-order
autocorrelation coe¢ cients for factors i. The relative importance of the common component, Ri2 , is calculated as
the fraction of total variance in the data explained by factors 1 to i.
              Table 2a: Regressions of Monthly Excess Bond Returns on Lagged Factors


                                              (2)                  0 b
                                  Model: rxt+1 =           0   +   1 Ft   +   2 CPt   +   t+1 ;

           Regressor        (a)     (b)     (c)     (d)     (e)                            (f )     (g)      (h)
              Fb1t                 -0.93 -0.74 -0.93 -0.75
            (t-stat)              (-5.19) (-4.48) (-4.96) (-4.71)
              Fb1t3                0.06    0.05    0.06    0.05
            (t-stat)              (2.78) (2.70) (2.87) (2.71)
              Fb2t                 -0.40   0.08
            (t-stat)              (-3.10) (0.71)
              Fb3t                 0.18    0.24     0.18   0.24
            (t-stat)              (2.24) (3.84) (1.87) (3.85)
              Fb4t                 -0.33 -0.24 -0.33 -0.25
            (t-stat)              (-2.94) (-2.51) (-2.65) (-2.61)
              Fb8t                 0.35    0.24    0.35    0.24
            (t-stat)              (4.35) (2.70) (3.83) (2.89)
              CPt          0.45            0.41            0.40                                              0.39
            (t-stat)      ( 8.90)         (5.22)          (5.89)                                             (6.0)
              F 5t                                                                         0.54              0.43
            (t-stat)                                                                      (5.52)            (5.78)
              F 6t                                                                                  0.50
            (t-stat)                                                                               (6.78)
                 2
               R           0.31       0.26          0.45           0.22       0.45        0.22      0.26    0.44

    Notes: The table reports estimates from OLS regressions of excess bond returns on the lagged variables named
                                      (n)                                                       bt denotes
in column 1. The dependent variable rxt+1 is the excess log return on the n-year Treasury bond. F
                                                bit . These denote factors estimated by the method of principal
a set of regressors including F 5t ; F 6t , and F
components using a panel of data with 132 individual series over the period 1964:1-2003:12. F 5t , is the single
                                                                        b1t , Fb3 , Fb3t , Fb4t , and Fb8t : F 6t , is
factor constructed as a linear combination of the …ve estimated factors F       1t
                                                                                   b1t , Fb2t ; Fb1t3 , Fb3t , Fb4t , and
the single factor constructed as a linear combination of the six estimated factors F
Fb8t : CPt is the Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) factor that is a linear combination of …ve forward spreads. Newey
and West (1987) corrected t-statistics have lag order 18 months and are reported in parentheses. Coe¢ cients that
are statistically signi…cant at the 5% or better level are highlighted in bold. A constant is always included in the
regression even though its estimate is not reported in the Table. The sample spans the period 1964:1 to 2003:12.
        Table 2b: Regressions of Monthly Excess Bond Returns on Lagged Factors


                                       (3)                  0 b
                             Model: rxt+1 =         0   +   1 Ft   +   2 CPt    +    t+1 ;

                Regressor       (a)       (b)    (c)                    (d)          (e)      (f )
                   Fb1t                 -1.59 -1.22
                  (t-stat)             (-4.68) (-4.39)
                    Fb1t3               0.11    0.10
                  (t-stat)             (3.12) (2.96)
                    Fb3t                 0.19   0.30
                  (t-stat)             (1.05) (2.78)
                    Fb4t                -0.53 -0.36
                  (t-stat)             (-2.23) (-2.12)
                    Fb8t                0.64    0.44
                  (t-stat)             (3.73) (2.74)
                    CPt         0.85            0.76                                          0.75
                  (t-stat)     ( 8.52)         (6.13)                                        (6.16)
                    F 5t                                                0.91                  0.69
                  (t-stat)                                             (5.28)                (5.55)
                    F 6t                                                             0.89
                  (t-stat)                                                          (6.57)
                       2
                     R          0.34         0.18           0.44       0.19          0.24    0.44

Notes: See Table 2a.
        Table 2c: Regressions of Monthly Excess Bond Returns on Lagged Factors


                                       (4)                  0 b
                             Model: rxt+1 =         0   +   1 Ft   +   2 CPt    +    t+1 ;

                Regressor       (a)       (b)    (c)                    (d)          (e)      (f )
                   Fb1t                 -2.05 -1.51
                  (t-stat)             (-4.49) (-4.20)
                    Fb1t3               0.16    0.14
                  (t-stat)             (3.20) (3.08)
                    Fb3t                 0.18   0.35
                  (t-stat)             (0.68) (2.22)
                    Fb4t                -0.63   -0.37
                  (t-stat)             (-1.77) (-1.50)
                    Fb8t                0.95    0.64
                  (t-stat)             (3.75) (2.83)
                    CPt         1.24            1.13                                          1.11
                  (t-stat)     ( 8.58)         (6.40)                                        (6.30)
                    F 5t                                                1.19                  0.87
                  (t-stat)                                             (5.08)                (5.39)
                    F 6t                                                             1.20
                  (t-stat)                                                          (6.57)
                       2
                     R          0.37         0.16           0.45       0.17          0.23    0.45

Notes: See Table 2a.




                                                        4
        Table 2d: Regressions of Monthly Excess Bond Returns on Lagged Factors


                                       (5)                  0 b
                             Model: rxt+1 =         0   +   1 Ft   +   2 CPt    +    t+1 ;

                Regressor       (a)       (b)    (c)                    (d)          (e)      (f )
                   Fb1t                 -2.27 -1.63
                  (t-stat)             (-4.10) (-3.86)
                    Fb1t3               0.18    0.15
                  (t-stat)             (3.06) (2.95)
                    Fb3t                 0.18   0.38
                  (t-stat)             (0.55) (1.92)
                    Fb4t                -0.78   -0.48
                  (t-stat)             (-1.80) (-1.54)
                    Fb8t                1.13    0.76
                  (t-stat)             (3.68) (2.76)
                    CPt         1.46            1.34                                          1.32
                  (t-stat)     ( 7.90)         (6.00)                                        (5.87)
                    F 5t                                                1.36                  0.98
                  (t-stat)                                             (4.80)                (5.08)
                    F 6t                                                             1.41
                  (t-stat)                                                          (6.47)
                       2
                     R          0.34         0.14           0.41       0.14          0.21    0.42

Notes: See Table 2a.




                                                        5
                   Table 3: Out-of-Sample Predictive Power of Macro Factors
Row Forecast Sample                  Comparison                M SEu =M SEr   Test Statistic 95% Asympt. CV
                                                             (2)
                                                           rxt+1
                                    !
 1     1985:1-2003:12               F 5t   v.s.   const            0.794         50.07*          3.28
                                    !
 2     1995:1-2003:12               F 5t   v.s.   const            0.838         21.83*          2.01
                            !
 3     1985:1-2003:12       F 5t   +CP     v.s.   const + CP       0.810         45.77*          3.28
                            !
 4     1995:1-2003:12       F 5t   +CP     v.s.   const + CP       0.884         14.04*          2.01
                                                             (3)
                                                           rxt+1
                                    !
 5      1985:1-2003:2               F 5t   v.s.   const            0.839         35.17*          3.28
                                    !
 6      1995:1-2003:2               F 5t   v.s.   const            0.858         16.75*          2.01
                            !
 7      1985:1-2003:2       F 5t   +CP     v.s.   const + CP       0.858         29.77*          3.28
                            !
 8      1995:1-2003:2       F 5t   +CP     v.s.   const + CP       0.894         10.70*          2.01
                                                             (4)
                                                           rxt+1
                                    !
 9     1985:1-2003:12               F 5t   v.s.   const            0.874         26.28*          3.28
                                    !
10     1995:1-2003:12               F 5t   v.s.   const            0.888         14.05*          2.01
                            !
11     1985:1-2003:12       F 5t   +CP     v.s.   const + CP       0.891         21.86*          3.28
                            !
12     1995:1-2003:12       F 5t   +CP     v.s.   const + CP       0.913          9.00*          2.01
                                                             (5)
                                                           rxt+1
                                    !
13     1985:1-2003:12               F 5t   v.s.   const            0.905         20.20*          3.28
                                    !
14     1995:1-2003:12               F 5t   v.s.   const            0.925         10.30*          2.01
                            !
15     1985:1-2003:12       F 5t   +CP     v.s.   const + CP       0.926         15.18*          3.28
                            !
16     1995:1-2003:12       F 5t   +CP     v.s.   const + CP       0.941          6.39*          2.01

 *Signi…cant at the one percent or better level.
 Notes: See next page.
    Notes: The table reports results from one-year-ahead out-of-sample forecast comparisons of n-period log excess
                          !                                                                         0  !
                                                                Fb1t ; Fb1t3 ; Fb3t ; Fb4t ; Fb8t
                  (n)
bond returns, rxt+1 . F 5t denotes the vector of factors                               : Rows denoted “F 5t v.s.
                                                                                               !
const” report forecast comparisons of an unrestricted model, which includes the variables in F 5t as predictors,
                                                                                   !
with a restricted, constant expected returns benchmark (const). Rows denoted “F 5t +CP v.s. const + CP ”
                                                                                      !
report forecast comparisons of an unrestricted model, which includes the variables in F 5t and CP as predictors,
with a restricted benchmark model that includes a constant and CP . M SEu is the mean-squared forecasting
error of the unrestricted model; M SEr is the mean-squared forecasting error of the restricted benchmark model
that excludes additional forecasting variables. In the column labeled “M SEu =M SEr ”, a number less than one
indicates that the unrestricted model has lower forecast error than the restricted benchmark model. The …rst row of
each panel displays results in which the parameters and factors were estimated recursively, using an initial sample
of data from 1964:1 through 1984:12. The forecasting regressions are run for t =1964:1,...,1984:12 (dependent
variables from 1964:1-1983:12, independent variable from 1965:1-1984:12), and the values of the regressors at
t =1984:12 are used to forecast annual returns for 1975:1-1975:12. All parameters and factors are then reestimated
from 1964:1 through 1985:1, and forecasts are recomputed for returns in 1985:2-1986:1, and so on, until the …nal
out-of-sample forecast is made for returns in 2003:12. The same procedure is used to compute results reported in
the second row, where the initial estimation period is t =1964:1,...,1994:12. The column labeled “Test Statistic”
reports the ENC-NEW test statistic of Clark and McCracken (2001) for the null hypothesis that the benchmark
model encompasses the unrestricted model with additional predictors. The alternative is that the unrestricted
model contains information that could be used to improve the benchmark model’s forecast. “95% Asympt. CV”
gives the 95th percentile of the asymptotic distribution of the test statistic.




                                                          7
           Table 4: Variance Decomposition of Funds Rate and Five-Year Yield Spread
                                                                   (5)   (1)
                                  F Ft+h                          yt+h yt+h
         Horizon h     F F shock Yield spread shock     F F shock Yield spread shock
                                       1954:Q3-2005:Q4
             1           1.000           0.000            0.663           0.337
             2           0.997           0.003            0.656           0.344
             3           0.996           0.004            0.647           0.353
             4           0.995           0.005            0.637           0.363
            1            0.997           0.003            0.594           0.406
                                 1954:Q3-1979:Q2 (pre-Volcker)
             1           1.000           0.000            0.671           0.329
             2           1.000           0.000            0.780           0.220
             3           0.998           0.002            0.818           0.182
             4           0.995           0.005            0.833           0.167
            1            0.907           0.093            0.836           0.164
                                   1983:Q1-2005:Q4 (recent)
             1           1.000           0.000            0.237           0.763
             2           0.993           0.007            0.407           0.593
             3           0. 984          0.016            0.516           0.484
             4           0.975           0.025            0.597           0.421
            1            0.906           0.094            0.649           0.351
                                 1987:Q3-2005:Q4 (Greenspan)
             1           1.000           0.000            0.183           0.817
             2           0.994           0.006            0.462           0.538
             3           0.999           0.001            0.636           0.364
             4           0.998           0.002            0.730           0.270
            1            0.938           0.062            0.830           0.170

   Notes: The table reports the fraction of the variance in the h step-ahead forecast error of the variable listed at
the head of each column that is attributable to innovations in the federal funds rate equation, “F F shock,” and
to innovations in the yield spread equation. The decompositon is calculated from a second order bivariate VAR
              (5)     (1)
for F Ft and yt+1    yt+1 . The residuals are orthogonalized by a Cholesky decomposition of the VAR errors with
F Ft ordered …rst.




                                                         8
                              Table 5: Forecasts of Orthgonalized Yield Spread
                                     Model: ryt+1 = 0 + Fb1;t + "t+1
                                               (5 1)


                                        0                                         R2
                                    (t-stat)             (t-stat)                 —

                                               1964:Q1-2003:Q4
                                      0.014           0.015          0.000
                                     (0:18)           (0:14)           —
                                         1964:Q1-1979:Q2 (pre-Volcker)
                                     -0.096           -0.030         0.001
                                    ( 1:24)          ( 0:48)           —

                                        1979:Q3-2003:Q4 (post-Volcker)
                                     0.078            0.106          0.007
                                     (0:63)          (0:65)            —

                                        1987:Q3-2003:Q4 (Greenspan)
                                   0.004642         -0.529          0.11
                                    (0:04)          ( 3:21)          —

              (5 1)
    Notes: ryt+1      is the orthogonalized yield spread between the …ve-year Treasury bond and the one-year bond,
                                                                 (5)     (1)
calculated from a second order bivariate VAR for F Ft and yt+1    yt+1 . The residuals are orthogonalized by a
                                                                    (5 1)
Cholesky decomposition of the VAR errors with F Ft ordered …rst. ryt+1 denotes the orthogonalized residuals
                       b1;t denotes the …rst common factor from the dataset on aggregate activity. Newey and
in the yield equation. F
West (1987) corrected t-statistics have lag orderthree quarters and are reported in parentheses. Coe¢ cients that
are statistically signi…cant at the 5% or better level are highlighted in bold.




                                                          9
               Table 6: Forecasts of Real Factor with Five-Year Yield Spread Components
                               Model: Fb1;t+1 = 0 +
                                                         (5)   (1)
                                                        yt    yt   + "t+1
                                                                                                  2
                             0                                                                 R
                        (t-stat)             (t-stat)                                          —
                         -0.194               0.310                                           0.08
                        ( 1:20)               (2:30)                                           —


                                   Model: Fb1;t+1 =
                                                                          (5 1)
                                                           0   +        ryt       + "t+1
                                                                                                  2
                             0                                                                R
                        (t-stat)            (t-stat)
                         -0.011              -0.007                                          -0.01
                        ( 0:09)             ( 0:02)


                         Model: Fb1;t+1 =
                                                                (5 1)               (5 1)
                                              0   +    1   eyt           +    2   ryt       + "t+1
                                                                                                  2
                             0                     1                          2                R
                        (t-stat)             (t-stat)                    (t-stat)              —
                         -0.223               0.339                       -0.006              0.08
                        ( 1:41)               (2:60)                     ( 0:02)               —

                                       1987:Q3-2003:Q4 (Greenspan)
                         Model: Fb1;t+1 =
                                                                (5 1)               (5 1)
                                              0   +    1   eyt           +    2   ryt       + "t+1
                                                                                                  2
                             0                     1                          2               R
                        (t-stat)             (t-stat)                    (t-stat)             —
                         -0.231                0.11                        0.07              -0.02
                        ( 1:11)               (0:78)                      (0:20)              —

           b1;t denotes the …rst common factor from the dataset on aggregate activity. The explanatory variables
    Notes: F
         (5)      (1)
include yt    yt ; the spread between the …ve-year Treasury bond and the one-year bond. This yield spread is
                                                                                    (5)    (1)
decomposed into two components using a second order bivariate VAR for F Ft and yt+1       yt+1 : The component
          (5 1)
denoted ryt+1 is the orthogonalized innovation in the yield spread equation calculated from the VAR, where the
VAR errors are orthgonalized so that the federal funds rate does not respond contemporaneously to the yield spread
                                          (5 1)
innovation.. The component denoted eyt+1          is the remaining component of the yield spread, that component
“explained”by current and lagged values of the funds rate and lagged values of the yield spread. Newey and West
(1987) corrected t-statistics with lag order three quarters and are reported in parentheses. Coe¢ cients that are
statistically signi…cant at the 5% or better level are highlighted in bold. Except for the third panel, the data are
quarterly and span the period 1964:Q1-2003:Q4.




                                                               10
                                                                                                       (2)
                                      Table A1: Small Sample Inference, rxt+1
                                                            (2)                    0 !
                                          Model: rxt+1 =                  0   +    1 F 5t   +   t+1

                                           Bootstrap                                          Bootstrap under the null
     xt            ^               95% CI                     90% CI                          95% CI           90% CI
    Fb1t      -0.935        (   -1.389 -0.474)     (       -1.333 -0.538)              (   -0.022 -0.020) ( -0.022 -0.020)
    Fb1t3     0.062         (   0.023 0.102)       (       0.031 0.094)                (   0.001 0.001)   ( 0.001 0.001)
    Fb3t      0.177         (   -0.043 0.413)      (       -0.009 0.371)               (   -0.003 0.003) ( -0.003 0.003)
    Fb4t      -0.334        (   -0.533 -0.137)     (       -0.494 -0.182)              (   -0.004 0.003) ( -0.003 0.002)
    Fb8t      0.352         (   0.141 0.542)       (       0.184 0.511)                (   -0.007 0.008) ( -0.007 0.007)
    R2        0.225         (   0.123 0.400)       (       0.139 0.381)                (   0.014 0.019)   ( 0.015 0.018)
    R2        0.217         (   0.113 0.393)       (       0.130 0.375)                (   0.004 0.008)   ( 0.004 0.008)
                                                 (2)                      0 !
                                     Model: rxt+1 =               0   +   1 F 5t   +       2 CPt   +    t+1

                                           Bootstrap                                          Bootstrap under the null
      xt           ^               95% CI                     90% CI                          95% CI           90% CI
     b
    F1t       -0.745        (   -1.141 -0.325)         (   -1.075 -0.401)              (   -0.025 -0.016) ( -0.024 -0.017)
    Fb1t3     0.055         (   0.020 0.091)           (   0.026 0.083)                (   0.000 0.001)   ( 0.000 0.001)
    Fb3t      0.237         (   0.010 0.459)           (   0.046 0.412)                (   -0.004 0.004) ( -0.003 0.003)
    Fb4t      -0.247        (   -0.450 -0.055)         (   -0.389 -0.099)              (   -0.005 0.003) ( -0.004 0.002)
    Fb8t      0.244         (   0.065 0.424)           (   0.095 0.394)                (   -0.007 0.008) ( -0.006 0.007)
    CPt       0.395         (   0.262 0.519)           (   0.283 0.498)                (   0.004 0.012)   ( 0.005 0.011)
    R2        0.455         (   0.245 0.548)           (   0.268 0.524)                (   0.022 0.047)   ( 0.023 0.043)
    R2        0.448         (   0.235 0.542)           (   0.258 0.518)                (   0.009 0.034)   ( 0.010 0.031)
                                                            (2)                    0
                                          Model: rxt+1 =                  0   +    1 F 5t   +   t+1

                                    Bootstrap                                            Bootstrap under the null
         xt             ^    95% CI         90% CI                                        95% CI         90% CI
        F 5t       0.539 ( 0.304 0.758) ( 0.356 0.729)                                ( 0.008 0.011) ( 0.008 0.011)
        R2         0.221 ( 0.084 0.384) ( 0.111 0.368)                                ( 0.008 0.015) ( 0.009 0.014)
        R2         0.219 ( 0.082 0.383) ( 0.109 0.367)                                ( 0.006 0.013) ( 0.007 0.012)
                                                 (2)                      0
                                     Model: rxt+1 =               0   +   1 F 5t   +       2 CPt   +    t+1

                                             Bootstrap                                      Bootstrap under the null
             xt         ^              95% CI         90% CI                                 95% CI         90% CI
            F 5t       0.427     (   0.216 0.626) ( 0.252 0.601)                       (   0.007 0.012) ( 0.007 0.012)
            CPt        0.389     (   0.255 0.516) ( 0.273 0.493)                       (   0.004 0.011) ( 0.005 0.011)
            R2         0.447     (   0.215 0.530) ( 0.240 0.506)                       (   0.017 0.041) ( 0.019 0.038)
            R2         0.444     (   0.211 0.528) ( 0.237 0.504)                       (   0.013 0.037) ( 0.014 0.034)
Notes: See next page.
                                                                              (n)
    Notes: Let xit denote the regressor variables used to predict rxt+1 : Let zit ; i = 1; : : : N; t = 1; : : : T be stan-
                                                                                !                                               0
dardized data from which the factors are extracted. The vector of factors, F 5t = Fb1t ; Fb1t      3 b
                                                                                                     ; F2t ; Fb3t ; Fb4t ; Fb8t ;
F 5t is the single linear combination of these factors formed by regressing the average (across maturity) of excess
                    !      !                                                                        !
bond returns on F 5t . F 5t     ft , where ft is a r 1 vector of latent common factors. Denote F 5t = Ft : By
de…nition, zit = 0 Ft + uit . Let ^ i and Fbt be the principal components estimators of i and Ft , and let u
                     i                                                                                       ^it be
the estimated idiosyncratic errors. For each i = 1; : : : N , we estimate an AR(1) model u
                                                                                         ^it =                 iu
                                                                                                                ^it 1   + wit . Let
u
~1;: = u1;: . For t = 2; : : : T , let u
                                       ~it = ^i u
                                                ~it 1 + w
                                                        ~it , where w
                                                                    ~i;t is sampled (with replacement) from w
                                                                                                            ^:;t ; t = 2; : : : T .
                 0
               ^
Then z~it = Ft + u
               i
                   b                                                                            e
                      ~it . Estimation by principal components on the data z~ yields Ft . The remaining regressor,
CPt , is obtained by …rst estimating an AR(1), and then resampling the residuals of the autoregression. Denote
                           (n)                                                       ~ ^ + e~, where ^ are the least
the dependent variable rx      as y~: Unrestricted samples y~t are generated as y~ = X
                              t+1
squares estimates reported in column 2, and e~ are resampled from least squares MA(12) residuals, and X     ~ is a set
of bootstrapped regressors with F^t replaced by F~t . Samples under the null are generated as y~ = y + e~0 , where e~0
is resampled form the residuals of least squares estimated MA(12) process.
                                                                                                      (3)
                                      Table A2: Small Sample Inference, rxt+1
                                                           (3)                    0 !
                                          Model: rxt+1 =                 0   +    1 F 5t   +   t+1

                                           Bootstrap                                         Bootstrap under the null
     xt            ^               95% CI            99% CI                                  95% CI           99% CI
     b
    F1t       -1.589        (   -2.547 -0.713)  ( -2.356 -0.882) (                        -0.022 -0.020) ( -0.022 -0.020)
    Fb1t3     0.114         (   0.045 0.185)    ( 0.058 0.173)   (                        0.001 0.001)   ( 0.001 0.001)
    Fb3t      0.185         (   -0.251 0.679)   ( -0.175 0.560) (                         -0.004 0.003) ( -0.003 0.002)
    Fb4t      -0.530        (   -0.933 -0.127)  ( -0.849 -0.210) (                        -0.004 0.003) ( -0.003 0.002)
    Fb8t      0.645         (   0.259 1.029)    ( 0.319 0.969)   (                        -0.008 0.008) ( -0.006 0.008)
    R2        0.189         (   0.089 0.377)    ( 0.103 0.342)   (                        0.014 0.019)   ( 0.015 0.018)
    R2        0.180         (   0.079 0.370)    ( 0.093 0.335)   (                        0.004 0.008)   ( 0.004 0.008)
                                              (3)            !
                                     Model: rxt+1 = 0 + 01 F 5t + 2 CPt +                              t+1

                                           Bootstrap                                         Bootstrap under the null
      xt           ^               95% CI                     90% CI                         95% CI           90% CI
     b
    F1t       -1.223        (   -2.015 -0.431)         (   -1.875 -0.545)             (   -0.033 -0.021) ( -0.032 -0.022)
    Fb1t3     0.100         (   0.035 0.162)           (   0.045 0.152)               (   0.000 0.002)   ( 0.001 0.001)
    Fb3t      0.300         (   -0.132 0.753)          (   -0.047 0.667)              (   -0.004 0.004) ( -0.004 0.003)
    Fb4t      -0.361        (   -0.702 0.018)          (   -0.632 -0.058)             (   -0.005 0.003) ( -0.004 0.002)
    Fb8t      0.436         (   0.113 0.774)           (   0.155 0.718)               (   -0.008 0.010) ( -0.007 0.008)
    CPt       0.764         (   0.525 0.982)           (   0.556 0.941)               (   0.005 0.015)   ( 0.006 0.014)
    R2        0.446         (   0.227 0.539)           (   0.249 0.522)               (   0.021 0.042)   ( 0.022 0.040)
    R2        0.439         (   0.217 0.533)           (   0.239 0.516)               (   0.008 0.030)   ( 0.009 0.028)
                                                           (3)                    0
                                          Model: rxt+1 =                 0   +    1 F 5t   +   t+1

                                    Bootstrap              Bootstrap under the null
          xt            ^    95% CI          90% CI         95% CI         90% CI
         F 5t      0.911 ( 0.473 1.376 ) ( 0.560 1.285) ( 0.008 0.011) ( 0.008 0.011)
         R2        0.189 ( 0.055 0.367) ( 0.076 0.335) ( 0.009 0.015) ( 0.009 0.014)
         R2        0.187 ( 0.053 0.366) ( 0.074 0.334) ( 0.006 0.013) ( 0.007 0.012)
                                                 (3)                     0
                                     Model: rxt+1 =              0   +   1 F 5t   +       2 CPt   +    t+1

                                             Bootstrap                                     Bootstrap under the null
             xt         ^              95% CI         90% CI                                95% CI         90% CI
            F 5t       0.694     (   0.278 1.087) ( 0.338 1.026)                      (   0.007 0.012) ( 0.007 0.012)
            CPt        0.754     (   0.504 0.971) ( 0.546 0.938)                      (   0.004 0.011) ( 0.005 0.010)
            R2         0.442     (   0.203 0.521) ( 0.226 0.495)                      (   0.017 0.040) ( 0.018 0.037)
            R2         0.440     (   0.199 0.519) ( 0.223 0.493)                      (   0.013 0.035) ( 0.014 0.033)

Notes: See Table A1.
                                                                                                     (4)
                                    Table A3: Small Sample Inference, rxt+1
                                                          (4)                    0 !
                                       Model: rxt+1 =                   0   +    1 F 5t   +   t+1

                                         Bootstrap                                          Bootstrap under the null
     xt            ^              95% CI           99% CI                                   95% CI           99% CI
    Fb1t      -2.046       (   -3.281 -0.917) ( -3.155 -1.090) (                         -0.022 -0.020) ( -0.022 -0.020)
    Fb1t3     0.157        (   0.062 0.261)   ( 0.078 0.240)   (                         0.001 0.001)   ( 0.001 0.001)
    Fb3t      0.183        (   -0.442 0.826)  ( -0.293 0.721) (                          -0.003 0.003) ( -0.003 0.002)
    Fb4t      -0.625       (   -1.165 -0.086) ( -1.076 -0.180) (                         -0.004 0.003) ( -0.003 0.002)
    Fb8t      0.948        (   0.433 1.462)   ( 0.506 1.389)   (                         -0.007 0.008) ( -0.006 0.007)
    R2        0.167        (   0.084 0.357)   ( 0.098 0.331)   (                         0.015 0.019)   ( 0.015 0.018)
    R2        0.158        (   0.074 0.350)   ( 0.088 0.324)   (                         0.004 0.008)   ( 0.004 0.008)
                                            (4)            !
                                   Model: rxt+1 = 0 + 01 F 5t + 2 CPt +                               t+1

                                         Bootstrap                                          Bootstrap under the null
      xt           ^              95% CI                     90% CI                         95% CI           90% CI
    Fb1t       -1.506      (   -2.518 -0.440)         (   -2.338 -0.640)             (   -0.045 -0.029) ( -0.042 -0.030)
    Fb1t3      0.136       (   0.052 0.222)           (   0.064 0.208)               (   0.001 0.002)   ( 0.001 0.002)
    Fb3t       0.353       (   -0.215 0.923)          (   -0.104 0.805)              (   -0.007 0.005) ( -0.006 0.004)
    Fb4t       -0.375      (   -0.849 0.131)          (   -0.754 0.002)              (   -0.006 0.004) ( -0.005 0.003)
    Fb8t       0.640       (   0.166 1.105)           (   0.244 1.027)               (   -0.008 0.010) ( -0.007 0.008)
    CPt        1.128       (   0.789 1.447)           (   0.846 1.386)               (   0.008 0.019)   ( 0.008 0.018)
    R2         0.459       (   0.254 0.560)           (   0.278 0.537)               (   0.021 0.041)   ( 0.022 0.039)
    R2         0.452       (   0.244 0.554)           (   0.269 0.530)               (   0.008 0.029)   ( 0.009 0.027)
                                                          (4)                    0
                                       Model: rxt+1 =                   0   +    1 F 5t   +   t+1

                                       Bootstrap              Bootstrap under the null
             xt          ^       95% CI         90% CI         95% CI         90% CI
            F 5t       1.188 ( 0.660 1.784) ( 0.735 1.713) ( 0.008 0.011) ( 0.008 0.011)
            R2         0.167 ( 0.053 0.343) ( 0.071 0.316) ( 0.008 0.015) ( 0.009 0.014)
            R2         0.165 ( 0.051 0.342) ( 0.069 0.315) ( 0.006 0.013) ( 0.007 0.012)
                                                (4)                     0
                                   Model: rxt+1 =               0   +   1 F 5t   +       2 CPt   +    t+1

                                         Bootstrap                                        Bootstrap under the null
      xt           ^             95% CI           90% CI                                  95% CI           90% CI
     c         0.033       (   -1.321 1.274) ( -0.163 0.623)                       (   0.466 0.479)   ( 0.467 0.478)
     F 5t      1.188       (   0.660 1.784 ) ( -1.075 -0.401)                      (   -0.025 -0.016) ( -0.024 -0.017)
     CPt       0.395       (   0.262 0.519) ( 0.283 0.498)                         (   0.004 0.012)   ( 0.005 0.011)
     R2        0.455       (   0.245 0.548) ( 0.268 0.524)                         (   0.022 0.047)   ( 0.023 0.043)
     R2        0.448       (   0.235 0.542) ( 0.258 0.518)                         (   0.009 0.034)   ( 0.010 0.031)
Notes: See Table A1.
                                                                                                   (5)
                                   Table A4: Small Sample Inference, rxt+1
                                                        (5)                    0 !
                                      Model: rxt+1 =                  0   +    1 F 5t   +   t+1

                                        Bootstrap                                         Bootstrap under the null
     xt        ^                95% CI            99% CI                                  95% CI           99% CI
    Fb1t    -2.271      (    -3.822 -0.735)  ( -3.513 -1.023) (                        -0.022 -0.020) ( -0.022 -0.020)
    Fb1t3   0.179       (    0.056 0.295)    ( 0.078 0.280)   (                        0.001 0.001)   ( 0.001 0.001)
    Fb3t    0.182       (    -0.612 0.929)   ( -0.444 0.790) (                         -0.003 0.003) ( -0.003 0.002)
    Fb4t    -0.782      (    -1.445 -0.125)  ( -1.329 -0.269) (                        -0.004 0.003) ( -0.003 0.002)
    Fb8t    1.129       (    0.481 1.841)    ( 0.598 1.700)   (                        -0.008 0.008) ( -0.007 0.007)
    R2      0.147       (    0.069 0.315)    ( 0.078 0.294)   (                        0.014 0.019)   ( 0.015 0.019)
    R2      0.138       (    0.059 0.308)    ( 0.068 0.286)   (                        0.004 0.008)   ( 0.004 0.008)
                                           (5)            !
                                  Model: rxt+1 = 0 + 01 F 5t + 2 CPt +                              t+1

                                        Bootstrap                                         Bootstrap under the null
      xt        ^               95% CI                     90% CI                         95% CI           90% CI
    Fb1t      -1.629     (   -2.914 -0.185)         (   -2.638 -0.368)             (   -0.049 -0.032) ( -0.047 -0.033)
    Fb1t3     0.154      (   0.040 0.264)           (   0.057 0.247)               (   0.001 0.002)   ( 0.001 0.002)
    Fb3t      0.384      (   -0.404 1.112)          (   -0.236 0.978)              (   -0.007 0.005) ( -0.006 0.004)
    Fb4t      -0.485     (   -1.116 0.133)          (   -1.025 0.017)              (   -0.007 0.005) ( -0.006 0.004)
    Fb8t      0.764      (   0.145 1.351)           (   0.242 1.282)               (   -0.010 0.012) ( -0.009 0.010)
    CPt       1.341      (   0.922 1.711)           (   0.993 1.645)               (   0.009 0.022)   ( 0.009 0.021)
    R2        0.421      (   0.213 0.514)           (   0.242 0.492)               (   0.020 0.040)   ( 0.021 0.038)
    R2        0.414      (   0.203 0.508)           (   0.232 0.485)               (   0.007 0.028)   ( 0.008 0.026)
                                                        (5)                    0
                                      Model: rxt+1 =                  0   +    1 F 5t   +   t+1

                                          Bootstrap                                      Bootstrap under the null
        xt          ^              95% CI          90% CI                                 95% CI         90% CI
       c        -0.145       (   -1.940 1.457) ( -1.725 1.238)                     (    0.470 0.473) ( 0.470 0.472)
       F 5t     1.362        (   0.596 2.087) ( 0.756 2.001)                       (    0.008 0.011) ( 0.008 0.011)
       R2       0.146        (   0.027 0.303) ( 0.046 0.287)                       (    0.008 0.015) ( 0.009 0.014)
       R2       0.145        (   0.025 0.301) ( 0.044 0.286)                       (    0.006 0.013) ( 0.007 0.012)
                                              (5)                     0
                                  Model: rxt+1 =              0   +   1 F 5t   +       2 CPt   +    t+1

                                        Bootstrap                                         Bootstrap under the null
     xt         ^               95% CI                     90% CI                         95% CI           90% CI
    F 5t      -0.745     (   -1.141 -0.325)         (   -1.075 -0.401)             (   -0.025 -0.016) ( -0.024 -0.017)
    CPt       0.395      (   0.262 0.519)           (   0.283 0.498)               (   0.004 0.012)   ( 0.005 0.011)
    R2        0.455      (   0.245 0.548)           (   0.268 0.524)               (   0.022 0.047)   ( 0.023 0.043)
    R2        0.448      (   0.235 0.542)           (   0.258 0.518)               (   0.009 0.034)   ( 0.010 0.031)
Notes: See Table A1.
                                                                   Figure1: Marginal R-squares for F 1


           0.8



           0.7



           0.6



           0.5
R-square




           0.4



           0.3



           0.2



           0.1



            0
                 1   5     9   13   17   21   25   29   33   37   41   45   49   53    57   61   65   69   73   77   81    85   89   93   97 101 105 109 113 117 121 125 129

                         Output                         Emp.&Hrs                      Orders & Housing                    Money, Credit & Finan                Prices

                 Notes: Chart shows the R-square from regressing the series number given on the x-axis onto F 1. See the appendix for a description of
                 the numbered series. The factors are estimated using data from 1964:1-2003:12.
                                                                    Figure 2: Marginal R-squares for F2

            0.8



            0.7



            0.6



            0.5
R-squares




            0.4



            0.3



            0.2



            0.1



             0
                  1   5   9    13   17   21   25   29    33   37   41   45   49   53   57   61   65   69   73   77   81   85   89   93   97 101 105 109 113 117 121 125 129

                      Output                            Emp.&Hrs                  Orders & Housing                   Money, Credit & Finan                  Prices


                  Notes: See Figure 1.
                                                        Figure 3: Marginal R-squares for F3

           0.6




           0.5




           0.4
R-square




           0.3




           0.2




           0.1




            0
                 1   5   9    13 17 21 25 29 33 37 41 45 49 53 57 61 65 69 73 77 81 85 89 93 97 101 105 109 113 117 121 125 129

                     Output                  Emp.&Hrs            Orders & Housing        Money, Credit & Finan     Prices

                 Notes: See Figure 1.
                                                          Figure 4: Marginal R-squares for F4

             0.3




            0.25




             0.2
R-squares




            0.15




             0.1




            0.05




              0
                   1   5   9    13 17 21 25 29 33 37 41 45 49 53 57 61 65 69 73 77 81 85 89 93 97 101 105 109 113 117 121 125 129
                       Output                  Emp.&Hrs            Orders & Housing        Money, Credit & Finan     Prices

                   Notes: See Figure 1.
                                                                     Figure 5: Marginal R-squares for F8

            0.7




            0.6




            0.5




            0.4
R-squares




            0.3




            0.2




            0.1




             0
                  1     5    9   13   17   21   25   29   33   37   41   45   49   53   57   61   65   69   73   77   81   85   89   93   97 101 105 109 113 117 121 125 129

                       Output                         Emp.&Hrs                     Orders & Housing                   Money, Credit & Finan                 Prices


                      Notes: See Figure 1.
                                     Figure 6: First factor and IP growth
                          2


                          1
12 Month moving average




                          0


                          -1


                          -2

                          -3
                                                         IP growth          First factor

                          -4
                           1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000
                               Note: Standardized units are reported. Shadings denote
                               months designated as recessions by the NBER
                      Figure 7: Out-of-Sample Forecasts of 2-yr Bond Returns
                 8
                                              Forecast          Actual Return
                 6

                 4
Annual Returns




                 2

                 0

                 -2

                 -4

                 -6
                      1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000
                  Note: Shading denotes months designated as recessions by the NBER.
                       Figure 8: Impulse Responses, Full Sample
                  R esponse of FF to Yield Spread (5-1)
           1.6


           1.2


           0.8


           0.4


           0.0


          -0.4
                   2    4     6     8     10    12    14    16    18    20



               R esponse ofYield Spread to Yield Spread (5-1)
             .3

             .2

             .1

             .0

            -.1

            -.2

            -.3

            -.4
                   2    4     6     8     10    12    14    16    18    20

Notes: The Chart shows the 20-quarter response of variables to a one-standard deviation
innovation in the spread on the five- minus one-year Treasury bond. The VAR residuals
are orthogonalized using a Cholesky decomposition with the funds rate ordered first. The
dashed lines represent two-standard error bands. The sample period is 1954:Q3-2005:Q4.
                                Figure 9: Impulse Responses, Subsamples

                                                Pre-Volcker Period
            R esponse ofFF to Yield Spread (5-1)                     R esponse ofYield Spread to Yield Spread (5-1)
  1.6                                                            .2


                                                                 .1
  1.2

                                                                 .0
  0.8
                                                                 -.1
  0.4
                                                                 -.2

  0.0
                                                                 -.3


 -0.4                                                            -.4
        2     4    6   8   10   12   14   16   18    20                2    4   6    8   10   12   14   16   18   20



                                                     Recent Period
            R esponse ofFF to Yield Spread (5-1)                     R esponse ofYield Spread to Yield Spread (5-1)
  1.2                                                            .3

  1.0                                                            .2

  0.8                                                            .1

  0.6                                                            .0

  0.4                                                            -.1

  0.2                                                            -.2

  0.0                                                            -.3

 -0.2                                                            -.4
        2     4    6   8   10   12   14   16   18    20                2    4   6    8   10   12   14   16   18   20



                                                    Greenspan Period

            R esponse ofFF to Yield Spread (5-1)                       R esponse ofYield Spread to Yield Spread
  1.2                                                            .3

                                                                 .2

  0.8                                                            .1

                                                                 .0

  0.4                                                            -.1

                                                                 -.2

  0.0                                                            -.3

                                                                 -.4

 -0.4                                                            -.5
        2     4    6   8   10   12   14   16   18    20                2    4   6    8   10   12   14   16   18   20




Notes: See next page.
Notes: The Chart shows the 20-quarter response of variables to a one-standard deviation
innovation in the spread on the five- minus one-year Treasury bond. The VAR residuals
are orthogonalized using a Cholesky decomposition with the funds rate ordered first. The
dashed lines represent two-standard error bands. The sample period in the top panel is
1954:Q3-1979:Q2, in the middle panel is 1983:Q1-2005Q4, and in the bottom panel
1987:Q3-2005Q4.
                                                                                                        Figure 10: Orthgonalized Residuals of Yield Spread (5-1)

5



4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              post-Volcker
3
                                                                     pre-Volcker
2



1



0
     1955Q1
              1956Q2
                       1957Q3
                                1958Q4
                                         1960Q1
                                                  1961Q2
                                                           1962Q3
                                                                    1963Q4
                                                                             1965Q1
                                                                                      1966Q2
                                                                                               1967Q3
                                                                                                        1968Q4
                                                                                                                 1970Q1
                                                                                                                          1971Q2
                                                                                                                                   1972Q3
                                                                                                                                            1973Q4
                                                                                                                                                     1975Q1
                                                                                                                                                              1976Q2
                                                                                                                                                                       1977Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                1978Q4
                                                                                                                                                                                         1980Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                  1981Q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                           1982Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1983Q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1985Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1986Q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1987Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1988Q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1990Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1991Q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1992Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1993Q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1995Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1996Q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1997Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1998Q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2000Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2001Q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2002Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2003Q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2005Q1
-1



-2



-3



-4

                       Notes: The figure plots the residual for the yield spread (5-1) from a bivariate VAR of yields spreads and the federal funds rate. The VAR
                       errors are orthgonalized so that the federal funds rate does not respond contemporaneously to a yield spread shock. Standardized units
                       are reported. The lines in the plot represent plus and minus two-standard deviations in the pre- and post-Volcker regimes.
