NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DOES HEAD START IMPROVE CHILDREN’S LIFE CHANCES?
EVIDENCE FROM A REGRESSION DISCONTINUITY DESIGN
Jens Ludwig
Douglas L. Miller
Working Paper 11702
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11702
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2005

This paper substantially extends an earlier version written with Nate Balis presented at the Fall 2001 APPAM
meetings. This research was supported in part by the Georgetown University Graduate School of Arts and
Sciences, UC-Davis, and a grant from the Foundation for Child Development to the Georgetown Center for
Research on Children in the U.S., and was conducted in part while Ludwig was the Andrew W. Mellon
Fellow in Economic Studies at the Brookings Institution and a visiting scholar at the Rockefeller
Foundation’s Bellagio Conference and Study Center. Miller gratefully acknowledges funding from the
National Institute on Aging, through Grant Number T32-AG00186 to the NBER. Thanks to Zehra Aftab,
Bradley Hardy, Zac Hudson, Sinead Keegan, Robert Malme, Meghan McNally, Julie Morse, Joe Peters,
Berkeley Smith and Eric Younger for excellent research assistance, to Jule Sugarman, Craig Turner and
Edward Zigler for information about the history of Head Start, to Eliana Garces and Michael Maltz for
sharing data and programs, and to Doug Almond, Colin Cameron, Mark Cohen, Philip Cook, William
Dickens, Sue Dynarski, Greg Duncan, Ted Gayer, William Gormley, Jon Gruber, Hilary Hoynes, Brian
Jacob, Leigh Linden, Deborah Phillips, Sarah Reber, Peter Reuter, Romi Webster and seminar participants
at BLS, UC-Berkeley, UC-Davis, UC-Santa Cruz, Columbia, Cornell, NBER, Rutgers, Stanford and the
Institute for Research on Poverty at the University of Wisconsin for helpful comments. Any errors and all
opinions are of course ours alone. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Jens Ludwig and Douglas L. Miller. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Does Head Start Improve Children’s Life Chances? Evidence from a Regression Discontinuity
Design
Jens Ludwig and Douglas L. Miller
NBER Working Paper No. 11702
October 2005
JEL No. I18, I20, I38
ABSTRACT
This paper exploits a new source of variation in Head Start funding to identify the program’s effects
on health and schooling. In 1965 the Office of Economic Opportunity (OEO) provided technical
assistance to the 300 poorest counties in the U.S. to develop Head Start funding proposals. The result
was a large and lasting discontinuity in Head Start funding rates at the OEO cutoff for grant-writing
assistance, but no discontinuity in other forms of federal social spending. We find evidence of a large
negative discontinuity at the OEO cutoff in mortality rates for children ages 5-9 from causes that
could be affected by Head Start, but not for other mortality causes or birth cohorts that should not
be affected by the program. We also find suggestive evidence for a positive effect of Head Start on
educational attainment in both the 1990 Census, concentrated among those cohorts born late enough
to have been exposed to the program, and among respondents in the National Education Longitudinal
Study of 1988.
Jens Ludwig
Georgetown University
Public Policy Institute
3520 Prospect Street, NW
Washington, DC 20007
and NBER
ludwigj@georgetown.edu
Douglas L. Miller
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
dlmiller@ucdavis.edu

I. Introduction
This paper provides new evidence on the effects of the Head Start program on schooling
and health by drawing on a new source of variation in program funding. We exploit a
discontinuity in program funding across counties that resulted from how the Office of Economic
Opportunity (OEO) launched the program during the spring of 1965 as part of the War on
Poverty. Head Start was established to provide preschool, health and other social services to
poor children ages 3 or 4. It represents one of the federal government’s primary means for
addressing the large disparities in cognitive and non-cognitive skills observed along race and
class lines well before children start school.1 Head Start currently serves over 800,000 children
each year at a cost of around $7 billion (Haskins, 2004).
Early childhood may represent a particularly promising target for human capital
interventions given evidence that neurodevelopmental plasticity may decline with age, together
with the possibility of dynamic complementarities in learning (Duncan et al., 1998, Shonkoff and
Phillips, 2000, Carniero and Heckman, 2003). “Two generation” programs like Head Start,
which target parents as well as children, could also change the stream of human capital
investments that parents make in their children over the life course. Head Start’s medical
services may also improve children’s health, an important outcome in its own right that may also
be associated with lifetime economic outcomes (Case, Fertig and Paxson, 2003, Almond, 2005).
Whether Head Start yields lasting benefits to program participants in practice is an open
question, the answer to which will necessarily rest on non-experimental evidence for the
1 For example the measured gap in achievement test scores between black and white children ages 3-4 years old is
usually around 1 standard deviation, not much different from the gap observed among children in 9th or 12th grade
(Jencks and Phillips, 1998, Phillips et al., 1998). Disparities in non-cognitive outcomes such as physical aggression

1

foreseeable future. The federal government has recently sponsored a randomized evaluation of
Head Start’s short-term impacts, which yields evidence of program impacts on achievement tests
1 year after participation on the order of .1 to .2 standard deviations (HHS, 2005).2 However
controversy about whether any Head Start benefits “fade out” date back to the program’s
beginning (for example Wolff and Stein, 1966), and has led to recent proposals for changing the
program’s focus from “comprehensive services to intellectual development” (Haskins, 2004).
Even if the government’s new randomized evaluation of Head Start included funding to study
long-term impacts (which unfortunately it does not), experimental evidence on long-term effects
would not be available for 15 or 20 years.
Policy makers might be tempted to draw inferences about Head Start’s long-term effects
from the encouraging experimental impact estimates found for other model early childhood
programs such as Perry Preschool and Carolina Abacedarian, which seem to improve
achievement test scores and educational attainment and reduce involvement with anti-social
behavior well into adulthood.3 However these programs are much smaller and more intensive
than Head Start, and as a result may not be very informative about what we might expect from
the less-costly, larger-scale Head Start.4
To date the best available evidence for the longer-term effects of Head Start comes from
within-family comparisons of siblings who have and have not participated in the program (Currie
have been documented along family income lines for children as young as 17 months (Tremblay et al. 2004).
2 Positive impacts were estimated for letter-word identification (~.2sd), pre-writing and vocabulary scores (~.1sd),
and the frequency with which parents read to children (~.15sd), with no detectable effects on oral comprehension or
math skills. Effects on problem behaviors were observed for children 3 but not 4 years old (HHS, 2005).
3 Because there are so many excellent reviews of this literature already we do not discuss these findings in any detail
in our paper. Interested readers are referred to Barnett (1995), Donohue and Siegelman (1998), Karoly et al. (1998),
Campbell et al. (2002), Currie (2001), Ramey and Campbell (1994), Carniero and Heckman (2003), Krueger
(2003a), Schweinhart et al. (2005), and Magnuson and Waldfogel (2005).

2

and Thomas, 1995, Garces, Thomas and Currie, 2002, hereafter CT and GTC). CT find positive
program impacts on test scores for children around 8-10 years old, but these improvements fade
out for black children. Theirs is also one of the few studies to consider Head Start effects on
health, and they find that Head Start improves immunization rates for all children but has no
statistically significant effects on height-for-age. The findings in GTC suggest long-term effects
on educational attainment for whites, and reductions in crime among African-Americans.
While both CT and GTC substantially improve upon previous studies by controlling for
unmeasured family fixed-effects associated with Head Start participation, as one recent review
notes with respect to the program’s long-term impacts: “The jury is still out on Head Start”
(Currie, 2001, p. 213). There necessarily remains some uncertainty about what drives variation
across siblings in participation, and whether enrollment is related to unmeasured child-specific or
time-varying family attributes that also affect outcomes. For policy purposes it is important to
develop a better understanding of Head Start’s impacts on schooling, given the lack of evidence
to date of lasting effects on African-Americans and the fact that more than a third of all black
children are poor and nearly one-third of all poor children are black (Census Bureau, 1999, p.
483). Also important is to learn more about Head Start’s effects on non-academic outcomes such
as health, given debates about whether to increase the program’s focus on educational services.
Our paper exploits a discontinuity in program funding across counties that resulted from
OEO’s implementation of the program during the spring of 1965. Unlike other federal social
programs, Head Start provides funding directly to local service providers. Out of concern that
the most disadvantaged communities would be unable to develop proposals for Head Start
4 Chicago Child-Parent Centers are less intensive but have not been experimentally studied (Reynolds et al., 2001).
3

funding, OEO sent staff to the 300 poorest counties in the country to identify potential service
providers and help them develop proposals (Jones, 1979, pp. 6-7).
The first key result in this paper is to demonstrate that Head Start participation and
funding rates are 50% to 100% higher in counties with poverty rates just above OEO’s cutoff (the
“treatment” group) compared to those just below (controls). These findings come from
(somewhat noisy) county-level federal expenditure data obtained from the National Archives, as
well as from the National Education Longitudinal Study (NELS), which provides information
about a nationally representative sample of 1988 eighth graders. The funding difference at the
heart of our design appears to have persisted through the late 1970s.
We use this discontinuity in funding across counties to identify Head Start impacts by
comparing outcomes for people in treatment and control counties “near” the OEO cutoff.
Identification comes from the assumption that potential outcomes are smooth around the cutoff.
Because the cutoff was based on a predetermined variable, common concerns about strategic
behavior with the regression discontinuity (RD) research design are not likely to be an issue here.
Our main finding is that there is a large discontinuity in mortality rates to children 5-9
years of age during the period 1973-83 due to causes-of-death that were directly or indirectly
screened for and addressed as part of Head Start’s health services. This mortality effect is quite
large, equal to 33-75% of the control mean, enough to drive mortality rates from these causes in
the treatment counties down to about the national average. To rule out other explanations we
demonstrate there is no discontinuity for other causes-of-death or age groups that should not be
affected by Head Start.

4

We also examine educational attainment drawing on two separate data sources, neither of
which is ideal (as is often the case in working with historical data5) but which taken together
seem to provide suggestive evidence for a positive effect of Head Start on schooling. The
challenge is to measure adult schooling outcomes for those who were young children in counties
“near” the OEO cutoff in the 1960s and 1970s. We first show that there is a discontinuity at the
OEO cutoff in educational attainment in the 1990 Census, which is limited to cohorts born late
enough to have been affected by Head Start. While the Census provides us with large samples
near the cutoff, the disadvantage is that we only identify county of residence for people as adults.
To address the possibility of bias from selective migration we show there is also a
discontinuity at the OEO cutoff in schooling in the NELS, which improves upon the Census by
recording each respondent’s county of residence at age 13 rather than adulthood, but at the cost
of small samples local to the cutoff. Importantly, we do not find discontinuities in key parent
characteristics that are predictive of children’s outcomes, such as maternal education. This last
finding does not seem consistent with a story in which our results for children’s schooling
outcomes in the NELS are driven by selective migration of families across county lines.
Do these estimates actually identify the effects of Head Start? One concern is that other
forms of government spending might also vary discontinuously around the cutoff. Yet we show
the estimated discontinuity at the OEO cutoff in other federal social spending is small and not
significant. Another potential concern is the possibility that Head Start and other OEO activities
might have affected community mobilization, which could have affected political behavior and in

5 For example, Goldin and Katz (2000) measure schooling returns with data from a state census from 1915 available
only for Iowa, and Collins and Margo (2004) examine the effects of the race riots of the 1960s on urban housing
markets but cannot directly measure economic damage. Both studies are nonetheless interesting and informative.

5

turn local or state spending patterns. Yet we show there is no evidence of a discontinuity in voter
registration rates across counties in any year from 1968 through 1980.
Our estimates – like every RD study – rely on functional form assumptions for
identification. We show that our results are generally robust to using different specifications to
control for unobserved variables that vary with 1960 county poverty rates, including various
flexible polynomials as well as non-parametric functions using the approach of Porter (2003).
We also present a series of specification tests that demonstrate that there is no discontinuity in
most “background” variables such as race or urbanicity. We show there are no discontinuities in
child mortality or schooling at other “pseudo-cutoffs” where there are no discontinuities in Head
Start funding, nor are there discontinuities in achievement test scores for children in the ECLS-K
who were of Head Start age in the late 1990s after the discontinuity in funding had dissipated.
Ideally we would like to extend our analysis to consider Head Start impacts on other
longer-term outcomes as well. However our data are not very informative about effects on labor
market outcomes because those “treated” by Head Start in our data are still relatively young
when we observe their long-term outcomes (mid-20s in both the Census and NELS) and many
are still enrolled in school. For reasons discussed in Section 3 below and Appendix A, the
available data are also not very informative about other potential outcomes of interest such as
achievement test scores or criminal activity. Understanding program impacts on these other
outcomes remains an important topic for future research.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The next section provides more
background on Head Start. The third and fourth sections discuss our data and empirical strategy.

6

Our main results for child mortality and educational attainment are presented in the fifth and
sixth sections, a variety of specification checks and robustness tests are presented in section
seven, and the final section discusses limitations and implications for public policy.
II. Background on Head Start
Our study provides new evidence on the long-term effects of Head Start by exploiting a
natural experiment generated by how the program was launched by OEO in 1964. Head Start
began as a summer program for children around ages 3 or 4; by 1970 a majority of program
participants were enrolled year-round (nine months).6 Widely perceived as a schooling program,
Head Start also provides meals, social services, parenting services (sometimes jobs),7 and a
variety of health services such as immunizations (DTP, polio, smallpox and measles) and
unusually comprehensive health screenings that included blood samples, urinalysis and other
tests for tuberculin, anemias, diabetes, and hearing and vision problems (North, 1979, O’Brien,
Connell, and Griffin, 2004). Daily observation of children by teachers could also help detect
problems where parents might not realize the severity of the problem or how to access treatment.
Because Head Start involves federal funding of local service providers, the challenge for
OEO in the spring of 1965 was to publicize Head Start, encourage local organizations such as
schools and public health or welfare agencies to submit proposals, review the proposals and fund
enough local programs to launch Head Start in the summer of 1965 on the grand scale desired by
President Johnson

all within the span of a few months. Despite OEO s efforts to publicize

6 The number of total participants (summer # in parentheses) by year (Jones, 1979): 1965 561,000 (561,000); 1966
733,000 (573,000); 1967 681,000 (466,000); 1968 693,825 (476,825); 1969 635,121 (421,665); 1970
434,880 (195,328); 1971 419,971 (123,485); 1972 379,000 (86,400); 1978 389,500 (26,000).
7 For example up to 47,000 parents were employed in Head Start centers the first year of the program and up to
another 500,000 parents were part-time volunteers (Zigler and Valentine, 1979, p. 69). Head Start also helps parents

7

Head Start, federal officials were concerned that applications from poor counties would be
under-represented in a nationwide grant competition (see for example Gillette, 1996, p. 231).
In response to this concern, Head Start associate director Jule Sugarman initiated an effort
to generate applications from the 300 poorest counties in the U.S. Volunteers from the federal
Presidential Management Intern (PMI) program were provided with funding to travel to the
selected counties for two to six weeks during the spring of 1965, locate local actors who would
be able to implement a Head Start program, work with them to develop a suitable proposal, fly
the completed application back to Washington and then defend the proposal to OEO reviewers.
Importantly, this particular feature of Head Start’s launch is widely documented in historical
accounts of the program’s beginning, suggesting that the discontinuity in grant-writing assistance
at the heart of our research design is not the figment of a single historian’s imagination.8 Below
we demonstrate that the result of this feature of Head Start’s launch is a discontinuity in countylevel Head Start program funding and participation rates, which persists through the late 1970s.
We use the targeting of Head Start grant-writing assistance to just the 300 poorest
counties to identify the effects of the program on people living in counties “near” the OEO cutoff
using a standard RD design. Often with RD designs we are concerned with the possibility of
strategic behavior that may push observational units above or below whatever cutoff is used for
the assignment of treatment. However there does not seem to be much room for strategic
behavior with our design given that Head Start grant-writing assistance was assigned on the basis
of a predetermined variable (poverty rates measured 5 years earlier), and the problem facing OEO

improve parenting skills (GAO, 1981, p. 13) and provides subsidized child care and other social services.
8 See for example Jones (1979), pp. 6-7, Gillette (1996), p. 222, President Johnson’s speech on Head Start of May
18, 1965 (Zigler and Valentine, 1979, pp. 69-70) and GAO (1981) p. 17.

8

administrators was one of excess funding supply rather than demand so there would be no
incentive for “gaming” or favoritism by OEO. However generalizability may be more of an issue
with our estimates: The 300th poorest county in the U.S. at the time Head Start was launched had
a 1960 poverty rate of around 59%, so counties near this cutoff are very poor counties indeed,
and most are located in the South.9 We return to this point in the conclusion.
III. Data
In what follows we provide a brief overview of the county- and individual-level data
sources used in our analysis. More details on each dataset are in Appendix A.
Perhaps the most important data question for our study is to understand what data source
OEO used to identify the 300 poorest counties in the U.S. in 1960. The answer is not
immediately obvious because the official federal poverty rate was only invented in 1964, and so
the 1960 Census does not include a measure of persons living in poverty. OEO apparently
identified the poorest counties using a special 1964 re-analysis of the 1960 Census conducted by
the Census Bureau for OEO using the then-newly-defined federal poverty rate, a copy of which
we have obtained from the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA).10
Other county-level data for our study include an OEO file for all federal expenditures on
every program for the years 1968 and 1972, also obtained from NARA. The expenditure data are
noisy because of some obvious errors (which we have tried to correct) as well as a few cases

9 One-third of the 300 poorest counties in 1960 were in Mississippi, Kentucky or Georgia. Almost all of the 300
poorest counties were in just ten states (Alabama, Arkansas, Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, North
Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee, and Texas). These ten states also account for more than two-thirds of the 300
“control” counties (with 1960 poverty rates that rank from 301st to 600th in the U.S.), with most of the rest located in
Florida, Oklahoma, Virginia or West Virginia.
10 The alternative possibility is that OEO targeted grant-writing assistance using data on the proportion of families
in the county with incomes below $3,000, although our analysis reveals that a larger discontinuity in funding at the
300th poorest county using the official poverty rate.

9

where an organization ran Head Start programs in multiple counties but only received federal
funding in the county with the group’s headquarters. Data on child mortality comes from the
Vital Statistics Compressed Mortality Files (CMF) for 1973-83, which include information on
both cause-of-death and the decedent’s age. To measure long-term schooling outcomes we use
data from a special tabulation conducted by the Census Bureau for us from the 1990 Census,
which include schooling and other outcomes disaggregated by county, age group, gender and
race. Finally, we draw on biannual county-level voter registration records from 1968 to 1988.
Our main source of individual-level data is a restricted-use geo-coded (with county
identifiers) version of the NELS, which provides information for a nationally representative
sample of 8th graders in 1988 with follow-up interviews in 1990, 1992, 1994 and 2000. One key
variable for our analysis is the NELS respondent’s county of residence in the base year (1988)
wave. A drawback with the NELS is the study is intended to provide a nationally representative
sample, and so the baseline (1988) survey includes only 649 respondents who lived in counties
with 1960 poverty rates among the 300 poorest, and 674 who lived in one of the next 300 poorest
counties (see Appendix A). Other key variables include whether parent reports about whether
the respondent has participated in Head Start (on average consistent with aggregate enrollment
data), and educational attainment in the 2000 wave of the study (around 25 years of age).
Note that we do not use several other obvious data sources that at first glance might seem
promising. We focus on the 1990 rather than 2000 Census because the Head Start funding
discontinuity behind our design attenuates over time, and because across-county migration will
be even more of a problem in 2000 than 1990. The High School and Beyond survey (unlike the

10

NELS) is not geo-coded at the county level. The restricted version of the Panel Study of Income
Dynamics provides annual geo-coded addresses but since the PSID has a national sampling frame
the data winds up providing a very small and unrepresentative draw of people in counties near
the OEO cutoff. The result is that we cannot detect a discontinuity in Head Start participation
among the small number of PSID respondents who live in counties near the OEO cutoff,
although we do use broader samples from the PSID below for descriptive mobility calculations.11
IV. Empirical Strategy
The heart of our research design is to examine whether discontinuities in Head Start
funding at the OEO cutoff are mirrored by discontinuities in other outcomes. Our analyses are
conducted using county-level data, the level at which our Census and mortality data are reported.
We aggregate the NELS to the county level as well, the simplest way to account within our semiparametric framework for the fact that students within counties are not independent units.12
Let Yc represent some average outcome for residents of county (c), such as child mortality
rate, let Pc represent each county’s poverty rate in 1960, and let the index (c) be defined over
counties sorted in descending order by their 1960 poverty rate (so that c=1 is the poorest county
and the OEO cutoff occurs at c=300). The provision of grant-writing assistance is a deterministic
function of the county’s 1960 poverty rate, as in equation (1), where P300=59.1984.
(1)

Gc = 1(Pc P300)
We can use the “sharp” regression discontinuity implied by (2) to estimate discontinuities

11 If we restrict our attention to PSID respondents for whom we have addresses at age 3 plus adult educational
outcomes, we are left with just around 97 people, who reside in only 19 of the 300 poorest counties and 123 people
who reside in only 27 of the next 300 counties.
12 That is, for each county (c) and NELS respondent (i) we calculate the average outcome within the county as Yc=
c(Yicwic) / c(wic), where wic represents the sampling weight for the survey wave from which we draw the

11

in outcomes at the OEO cutoff (Trochim, 1984), which is in some sense like an “intent to treat”
effect (ITT) – the effect of offering local service providers help in securing Head Start funding.
If the offer of grant-writing assistance had no effect beyond increasing the amount of
funding, then in principle we could calculate the effect on long-term outcomes per dollar of extra
Head Start funding by dividing the ITT effect for schooling or mortality by the ITT effect on
program funds. In practice scaling the ITT estimates in this way is complicated by the fact that
our estimates for the discontinuity in Head Start funding across counties are somewhat imprecise,
but perhaps more importantly are only available for a few of the birth cohorts exposed to the
Head Start funding discontinuity. The NELS captures discontinuities in Head Start participation
but will miss across-county differences in funding that go towards increased spending per
participant rather than expanded enrollment rates. In short we can generate fairly precise ITT
estimates on outcomes but have less power to reliably scale these estimates to recover the effects
per dollar of Head Start spending. We focus our analysis primarily on the “reduced form” ITTstyle estimates for the overall discontinuity in outcomes at the OEO cutoff.13
Our main estimating equation is given by (2), where m(Pc) is an unknown smooth
function of 1960 poverty, and

is the impact of grant writing assistance. The effect that we seek

to identify is the one relevant for the poorest counties near the OEO cutoff.14
(2)

Yc = m(Pc) + Gc +

c

accompanying outcome measure Yic, and (c) indexes the county in which each NELS respondent lives in 8th grade.
13 Estimating the effects of Head Start enrollment itself also requires a “stable unit treatment value assumption”
(SUTVA) that children’s outcomes are unaffected by participation rates among other county residents. This
assumption could be violated if for example Head Start affects the probability that a given classroom contains a
“rotten apple” that disrupts learning (Lazear, 2001) or if families share new parenting skills within social networks.
14 Given that the unit of treatment is the county, our empirical analysis focuses on estimating the effect for the
average county rather than the average child. In the next section we show that the results estimated for the average
child (that is, weighting by county population) are qualitatively similar to our preferred (un-weighted) estimates.

12

Identification of the causal effects of Head Start grant-writing assistance – the ITT
corresponding to a treatment of increased Head Start funding in the county – comes from
assuming smoothness in potential outcomes near the OEO cutoff (Porter, 2003). This is a
plausible assumption, as the cutoff was defined on the basis of a predetermined variable (poverty
rates 5 years before Head Start’s launch), and because (as we demonstrate below) this cutoff does
not seem to have been used to distribute funding for other federal programs.15
One practical question is how to model m(Pc). We present “parametric” estimates that
estimate (2) using different polynomial functions of Pc calculated using counties “near” the OEO
cutoff. We also refine the estimates by further controlling for observable county covariates from
the 1960 Census, such as total population and age or race distribution. This parametric approach
assumes we can adequately control for the other determinants of long-term outcomes that vary
across counties using a sufficiently flexible polynomial function of P. We focus on linear and
quadratic models, allowing the slope of these functions to vary on each side of the cutoff.
We also further relax these functional form assumptions and calculate our estimates
using the nonparametric regression discontinuity approach of Porter (2003). This method uses
locally linear regressions (Fan 1992) to estimate the left and right limits of the discontinuity. The
gap between these limits is the estimated treatment impact. This can be estimated in one step:
(3)

Yc = b0+ b1(Pc- P300)+ Gc+ b2Gc(Pc- P300) +

c

with kernel weights wc=K((Pc- P300)/h)
for a chosen bandwidth h. We essentially estimate a kernel-weighted linear regression
15 An alternative way to think about identification comes from Lee (2003). Under the smoothness assumption, the

allocation of technical grant-writing assistance for Head Start (G) can in the limit be thought of as randomized in the
neighborhood of P300. So long as the mapping between P and Y is also locally smooth then potential outcomes will

13

using data points to the left of the OEO cutoff, another kernel-weighted linear regression with
data to the right of the OEO cutoff, and then calculate our estimate for the treatment impact (the
parameter ) as the difference between the left and right limits of these regressions at the OEO
cutoff. For K(z) we use the Epanechnikov kernel, (.75)(1-.2z2)/ 5 for |z| < / 5.
We present standard errors below that come from analytically estimating the variance of
our parameter estimate using the formula as in equation (4), from Porter (2003). We have also
calculated bootstrapped standard errors, which are typically very similar to those from equation
(4).
(4)

Var[ ] = [(
where

2+

(P300)+

2-

(P300))×cK ] / [(Nh)×f(P300)]

2+

(P300) = right hand limit of variance of c at OEO cutoff
(P300) = left hand limit of variance of c at OEO cutoff
cK = constant function based on shape of kernel16
f(P300) = density of P at cutoff
2-

The remaining estimation issue has to do with bandwidth selection. Because the RD
design is identified only at the discontinuity, we try to balance the competing goals of staying as
local to the OEO cutoff as possible while ensuring we have enough data to yield informative
estimates. Unfortunately there is currently no widely agreed-upon method for selection of
optimal bandwidths in the semi-parametric RD context, and so our strategy is to present results
for a broad range of candidate bandwidths. We use a bandwidth range from 4 to 16 for most of
our datasets, with a focal preferred bandwidth of 8. For example, a bandwidth of 8 assigns
positive weight to the 958 counties in the NARA spending data that have 1960 poverty rates
within 8 * 5 = 17.9 percentage points of the (59.1984) cutoff. Our tables show how many

be independent of G given P, the necessary condition for identification (Hahn, Todd and van der Klaauw, 2001).
16 We have calculated the constant to be 2.0116, for the kernel that we use.

14

counties receive non-zero weight for each bandwidth and dataset. The 1990 Census provides
more information near the cutoff so we use a range of 1.5 to 6, with a preferred bandwidth of 3.
Appendix B discusses the results of a more formal bandwidth selection process using
leave-one-out cross-validation, which typically selects bandwidths more towards the upper end of
the range that we present, although this cross-validation procedure itself has several important
limitations as well. In any case, the overall pattern of findings across outcomes and datasets is
generally consistent for different bandwidths and semi-parametric versus parametric approaches.
V. Results for Head Start Funding and Participation
What effect did OEO’s Head Start grant-writing assistance to the 300 poorest counties
have on Head Start funding? Historical documents note that 240 (80%) of these 300 counties
received Head Start funding (GAO, 1981), compared to 43% of all counties nationwide
(estimated from our 1968 federal expenditure data). Data from the NELS and for county-level
federal expenditures are consistent with these historical accounts.
Table 1 shows that for the 349 “control” counties with 1960 poverty rates that are within
10 percentage points of the OEO cutoff from below (49.198 to 59.198), average Head Start
spending per 4 year old in 1968 was equal to $134 (in 1968 dollars). For the 228 “treatment”
counties with 1960 poverty rates 10 percentage points above the OEO cutoff this figure is $288
per 4 year old, more than twice as much. In 1972 Head Start spending per 4 year-old is still
nearly 60% higher in the treatment than control counties.
In Figure 1 we show that the difference shown in Table 1 in Head Start funding around
the OEO cutoff is driven in large part by a sharp drop-off in spending at the cutoff itself. The

15

solid line in the top panel presents a histogram of county-level Head Start spending per capita in
1968, calculated using a bin width of 4; the bottom panel shows Head Start spending in 1972.
Figure 1 also demonstrates that the discontinuity in Head Start spending in 1968 and 1972
is mirrored by a discontinuity in parent-reported Head Start participation rates among children in
the NELS (dashed line in both panels), calculated using the same bin width as with the spending
data and re-scaled to fit on the same axis. In fact the overall similarity in patterns across counties
is striking given that each data source is somewhat noisy (Appendix A) and capture different
points in time.17 The fact that we observe a discontinuity in Head Start participation rates for
NELS respondents, who would have been of Head Start age during the late 1970s, speaks to the
stability of the cross-sectional differences in county Head Start resources, and implies that many
cohorts were exposed to the “natural experiment” at the heart of our study.18
The top panel of Table 2 presents results from estimating the “first stage” effects of
OEO’s grant-writing assistance on Head Start participation rates in the NELS using the different
estimation approaches discussed in the preceding section. Since all of our results tables are
formatted similarly, we describe this format for Table 2 in some detail. Each row presents results
for a different dependent variable. Each column presents a different specification. The first five
columns (“Porter”) show results from non-parametric regression discontinuity specifications,
with varying bandwidths. For each bandwidth, we show the number of counties that receive non-

17 Of the 1,346 counties that received any Head Start funding in 1968, 72% received Head Start funding in 1972.
Of the 1,084 counties that received Head Start funding in 1972, 90% had received Head Start funding in 1968. The
counties funded in 1968 and 1972 may not overlap perfectly because of errors in the data on federal spending,
termination of OEO funding for some programs, and the addition of new Head Start programs in some areas.
18 The persistence of the discontinuity in county-level program funding presumably results from the flat trajectory of
Head Start appropriations over time after the first few years of the program’s launch (Haskins, 2004) together with a
hold harmless rule that prevented states from losing Head Start funding from one year to the next (Jones, 1979).
16

zero weight in estimation. We also present the point estimate and standard error.
For example in the first row, second column, we use a bandwidth of 4 to nonparametrically estimate the discontinuity in NELS Head Start participation using the base year
(“by”) weighted sample. There are 43 counties that contain NELS respondents and receive nonzero weight used to estimate this discontinuity. The point estimate of the impact is an increase in
probability of participation by .168, with a standard error of .135. Is this estimated impact in
Head Start participation large? To help answer this we show in the first column of the table
(“LHS Mean”) the left-hand-side predictions of the non-parametric regression at the threshold.19
This represents the no-program counterfactual against which the program impact can be
compared. Henceforth we refer to this as the “control mean.” As the non-parametric model is
re-estimated using larger bandwidths, we see (reading across the first row) that the point estimate
stays in the .120 to .168 range, and the standard error falls as more data are incorporated.
The final two columns, first row of Table 2 suggest that the estimate is not overly
sensitive to using a more parametric approach instead, specifically using data within 8 percentage
points of the threshold and modeling the direct impact of poverty as linear (allowing slopes to
change at the threshold), and in the final column modeling the impact of poverty as a quadratic,
again allowing the polynomial parameters to change at the threshold, using a larger poverty range
to incorporate more data.20
Figure 2 provides more intuition about these estimates by showing the semi-parametric

19 Each specification and bandwidth choice has its own left-hand-side mean. For parsimony we only report the
mean from the specification with a bandwidth of 8.
20 We have also estimated a specification similar to that of the final column, where we have also included covariates
such as 1960 log county population, 1960 % urban, and 1960 % black. Our results are typically invariant to the use
of these covariates, and so we do not report that specification in the tables.

17

estimates for m(P) and

using a bandwidth of 8 (solid lines in the figure), the parametric

estimates from the flexible quadratic specification (dashed lines), and raw cell means and their
95% confidence intervals from grouping the data into five categories on each side of the cutoff
over the range for which we graph our estimates (40 to 80 percent poor). Notice the cell mean
just to the right of the cutoff is almost twice the cell mean just left of the cutoff, consistent with
the idea that our estimates are not driven by decisions about the functional form used to model
m(P). Note also that with a county poverty rate of about 60% at the OEO cutoff and a Head Start
participation rate of around 40% at the right-hand limit, the NELS data imply around two-thirds
of all poor children participate in Head Start in the treatment counties at the OEO cutoff.
The second row of Table 2 shows that the estimated discontinuity in Head Start
participation using the NELS first follow-up sample (“f1”) is even larger than with the base year
sample, equal to between 70% and 140% of the control mean. These estimates may be more
relevant for the estimated outcomes shown below that use data from later NELS follow-ups.
The bottom panel of Table 2 and Figure 3 shows that the estimated discontinuities in
Head Start spending per 4-year-old are similarly large as a proportion of the control mean (left
limit). Because the spending data are noisy and the series is “jumpy” given a number of counties
have zero Head Start funding, these spending results are only statistically significant at larger
bandwidths that do more smoothing, driven by reductions in the standard errors rather than
changes in the point estimates. For example the discontinuity with a bandwidth of 16 is within
4% of the estimate for bw=4, yet the t-statistic is twice as larger with the former (2.2 versus 1.1).
How long did this discontinuity in Head Start funding at the OEO cutoff last?

18

Unfortunately we do not have high quality data that spans an extended time frame, and so must
infer what we can from indirect sources. The fact that the NELS participation rates jump at the
cutoff indicate that the Head Start funding discontinuity across counties persisted through 1979.
While the Community Partnership Act of 1974 required Head Start funding to become more
equalized across areas (at least across states), limited growth in program funding during the
1970s together with a “hold harmless” clause that prevented states from receiving funding below
1975 levels meant that funding equalization across areas began in earnest only in the late 1970s
(Jones, 1979, GAO, 1981). By the late 1990s the Head Start funding disparity across counties at
the OEO cutoff seems to have completely dissipated, as evidenced by the fact that we do not
observe a discontinuity in Head Start participation rates among children in the Early Childhood
Longitudinal Study, Kindergarten Class of 1998-99 (ECLS-K).
VI. Head Start and Child Mortality
To estimate the impact of Head Start on health, we draw on county-level data from the
Vital Statistics Compressed Mortality Files (CMF). We identify causes-of-death that may be
affected by Head Start through discussions with pediatricians about what health problems the
program’s health services should influence, which include tuberculosis, whooping cough,
infections, polio, measles, diabetes, malnutrition, meningitis, anemias, and respiratory problems
such as asthma, bronchitis or pneumonia (a detailed list and ICD-9 codes is in Appendix A).21
We label these “Head Start susceptible causes” or “relevant causes.” While most of these
causes-of-death are now relatively rare, they were much more common during our observation

21 Thanks to Romi Webster, MD of Children’s Hospital, Boston for helpful discussions.

19

period and are also generally more common in the South.22 We focus on mortality to children in
the age group 5-9, which should capture ongoing health effects of Head Start services provided to
children ages 3 or 4. (The alternative with the CMF would be to examine deaths to children ages
1-4, most of whom would be too young to have enrolled in Head Start). Our focus on mortality
to children 5-9 also seems appropriate given that most of the causes of death susceptible to Head
Start intervention are from chronic rather than acute conditions.
Table 3 presents evidence that the discontinuity in Head Start funding described above is
mirrored by a discontinuity in child mortality rates over the period 1973-83 for Head Start
susceptible causes. Graphs for the semi-parametric and quadratic polynomial estimates are
presented in Figure 4. We choose this time period because by 1973 all children in the 5-9 age
range would have been of Head Start age after the program was in existence, while the NELS
results shown above suggest that this age group would have been exposed to the discontinuity in
funding across the OEO cutoff through at least 1983.
The first row of Table 3 shows that there is a proportionately very large discontinuity in
mortality from relevant causes for children ages 5-9. The non-parametric estimates imply
discontinuities equal to 33% to 54% of the control mean of 3.4 per 100,000, with t-statistics
ranging from around 1.6 to 2.2. (The control mean implies that these causes of death account for
about 9% of all deaths). The parametric estimates are larger (around 65-75% of the control
mean) and significant at the usual 5% cutoff. This estimated impact is driven mostly by causes-

22 From 1960 to 2000 the all-age mortality rate in the U.S. declined by 80% for tuberculosis and 55% for influenza
and pneumonia (edcp.org/tb/pdf/tb_Incidence_Rates_USMD_60-00.pdf and bcbs.com/mcrg/mcrg_stats.pdf,
accessed 5/6/05). We assume these problems were more severe in the South during the 1960s and 1970s since
mortality rates are still higher in the South today. For example Mississippi’s mortality rate is 17% above the U.S.
average, with infant mortality rates usually around 33%-50% higher (US Statistical Abstracts, 1998, pp. 96, 98).

20

of-death that children are tested and treated for (anemias, respiratory ailments, meningitis, and to
a lesser extent diabetes) rather than vaccinated against (although some respiratory ailments can
be prevented by DTP vaccination). The discontinuity for mortality from all causes for children
5-9 is usually negative and just slightly larger in absolute value than deaths from Head Start
susceptible causes, but is much less precisely estimated.
One question is whether impacts of this proportional magnitude are plausible. For all
counties in the U.S. from 1973-83 the mean and median mortality rate for children 5-9 from
Head Start susceptible causes equaled around 2.0 and 1.8 per 100,000, respectively. So our
estimates suggest that in the treatment counties near the cutoff, Head Start eliminates most of the
“excess risk” of death from these causes (that is, the difference in mortality rates from the
national average). Put differently, a 50-100% increase in Head Start funding leads to a 33-75%
decline in mortality rates from relevant causes. This impact seems plausible given that poverty is
a powerful risk factor for child health (Sing and Yu, 1996, Case, Lubotsky and Paxson, 2002).
Some support for the idea that these mortality differences are due to Head Start rather
than other factors comes from the fact that we do not observe a similar discontinuity in mortality
rates for children 5-9 from causes that should not be affected by Head Start – namely, injuries
(second panel, Table 3).23 Although we might expect Head Start enrollment to affect
contemporaneous injury rate (see for example Currie and Hotz, 2004), we do not expect the
program to affect accident rates for children ages 5-9. The estimated discontinuities for injuries
range from +8.8% to -8.7% of the control mean and are never close to statistically significant.

23 In principle Head Start could have changed parent behaviors to affect injury rates. However in practice, as North
(1979, p. 245) notes, “Head Start’s obvious potential for health education was, unfortunately, never attained.”
Health education for parents often emphasizes nutrition and hygiene (O’Brien, Connell, and Griffin, 2004, p. 173).

21

Similarly there is no discontinuity in mortality from either relevant causes or injuries for people
25+ who would have been too old in 1973-83 to have received health services from Head Start.
The fifth and sixth rows of Table 3 show that the discontinuities in mortality for children
5-9 from causes plausibly affected by Head Start are found among both blacks and whites. The
magnitudes of the point estimates (as a share of the control mean) are somewhat larger for blacks
than whites with the semi-parametric estimates, although the reverse is true with our parametric
results. In any case strong conclusions about any race differences in Head Start’s impact on child
health are precluded by the fairly large standard errors for our estimates for blacks.
A final potential concern comes from the desegregation of hospitals in the South
(particularly Mississippi) following the 1964 Civil Rights Act, which led to large declines in
mortality to black infants (Almond, Chay and Greenstone, 2003). However hospital integration
would only be a problem for our identification strategy if integration varied discontinuously at
exactly the OEO cutoff used to allocate Head Start grant-writing assistance. Some evidence
against this counter-explanation for our findings comes from the fact that the reduction in
mortality among children 5-9 is not limited to blacks. Moreover while Almond et al. show large
declines in deaths to infants or post-neonates from hospital desegregation, Table 3 shows the
discontinuities at the OEO cutoff in infant mortality from Head Start-affected causes are
relatively small (5-20% of the control mean), positive and usually not significant.24
VII. Head Start and Educational Attainment
In this section we show that there is a discontinuity in educational attainment at the OEO
cutoff in the 1990 Census among those cohorts born late enough to have been affected by Head

22

Start, but not among earlier cohorts. The main drawback with the Census is the possibility of
selective migration as people move across counties from childhood to adulthood (when we
observe their place of residence). We show that the discontinuity in schooling outcomes for the
Census is mirrored among respondents to the NELS, for whom we observe addresses at age 13.
A. Census Results
Estimates for educational attainment by cohort from the 1990 Census are presented in
Table 4 and Figures 5 and 6. The cohort of primary interest consists of people ages 18-24 in
1990, who were born 1966-1972 and so all came of Head Start age while the program was in
existence. We call this the “directly treated” group. Also of potential interest are people 25-34
in 1990, born 1956-1965. Because about one-third to one-half of this cohort might have been of
Head Start age after the program was in operation, we call this the “partially directly treated”
group. The set of people ages 35-54 in 1990 might include parents of Head Start participants,
who were also involved in the program in a variety of ways, and older siblings who might have
benefited from spillover effects. We call this group the “indirectly treated” group. People 55
and over are unlikely to have been parents of Head Start participants and so are “untreated.”25
The top left panel of Figure 5 summarizes our results for completion of high school
diploma or equivalent for people ages 18-24 in 1990 (our directly treated group), while the top
panel of Table 4 summarizes our full set of results for alternative estimation approaches. There
is a relatively large discontinuity in high school completion for this directly treated group that
24 Restricting attention to just post-neonates yields similar results although the population data available with the
CMF for 1973-83 does not allow us to restrict the denominator to children 1-12 months of age.
25 By 1990 the oldest person who could have participated in Head Start would have been about 30 years of age.
Data from the Vital Statistics for 1960 suggests that about one-half of all births that year were to parents 25 or older
(55+ in 1990), and only about 1/4 were to parents 30+ (HEW, 1960). This means that most of the parents of Head
23

ranges from around 2 to 5 percentage points across most of our different estimation approaches
(the one exception being our semi-parametric estimator at the largest bandwidth). If Head Start
spending is 50% to 100% higher in treatment than control counties our results imply an elasticity
of high school completion to Head Start spending of around +.05 to .15. While the smoothed
trends and cell means in Figure 5 convey the visual impression that our discontinuity estimate is
driven by the functional form of m(P) – specifically, the “flattening out” of the general
downward trend in high school completion as 1960 county poverty increases – this impression is
incorrect: Figure 6 gives a less-aggregated picture of the data (a histogram calculated with a
bandwidth of 0.25) and shows a positive jump in high school completion rates at the OEO cutoff.
Note that in principle these schooling results may be biased by the Head Start effects on
mortality documented in the previous section. However any compositional bias is unlikely to be
important in practice given that the proportionately large mortality effect is still small in an
absolute sense, equal to around 1 or 2 deaths per 100,000 children. In comparison the estimated
discontinuity for high school completion equals between 2,000 and 5,000 per 100,000.
For college attendance the estimates are typically between 3 and 6 percentage points
(again smaller with a large bandwidth in the semi-parametric estimator), compared to a control
mean of 23 points. We do not find a discontinuity in college completion rates for this group, not
surprising given that most in this group will be too young to have graduated from college.
The second panel of Table 4 shows that the point estimates for high school completion
and college attendance are typically about twice as large for blacks as for the full sample,
although these estimates have large standard errors. Nevertheless the results are intriguing in
Start participants born in 1960 or later were younger than 25 in 1960 and so of course younger than 55 in 1990.

24

part because they differ from the sibling-difference estimates from CT and GTC, which show
long-term schooling impacts from Head Start for whites but not blacks.
Table 5 shows that the estimated discontinuities in educational attainment are much
smaller for older age groups than for the directly treated group of 18-24 year olds shown in Table
4. We find some evidence of statistically significant effects on high school completion and
college attendance for the partially directly treated group (25-34) and the indirectly treated group
(35-54), which are typically less than half as large as the estimates for our directly treated group.
In contrast, there are no discontinuities in educational attainment for any of our schooling
outcomes or estimation approaches for the “untreated” group (55 and older in 1990). This
pattern of estimates across cohorts in Tables 4 and 5 is consistent with what we would predict if
Head Start has a positive schooling effect for participants and a more modest impact on their
siblings and parents.
One concern with these results comes from the possibility of migration across counties
between when people were of Head Start age (3-4) and when they are observed as adults in the
1990 Census. If exposure to Head Start made individuals more likely to move out the state, then
we might expect to find a discontinuity in the fraction of individuals born in the same state. The
estimated discontinuities in the share of residents born in the state are usually not statistically
significant (Tables 4 and 5), but they tend to be somewhat larger in absolute value for younger
than older age groups, and larger for blacks than with the full-race sample.
B. NELS Results
One way to address concerns about selective migration is to replicate our schooling

25

estimates using the NELS, which allows us to identify county of residence for respondents in 8th
grade when most students were around 13 years old, about 8-10 years after Head Start age.
Figure 7 and Table 6 show that the results from the NELS are qualitatively similar to
those from the 1990 Census presented above, using the schooling variables measured in the 2000
wave of the NELS when respondents were around 25. Using a bandwidth of 6 yields a semiparametric estimate for completion of a high school diploma of around 19 points (around 1/3 of
the control mean), with a t-statistic of 2.0. Larger bandwidths yield smaller semi-parametric
estimates, although the parametric estimates are as large or larger (though imprecise). The
results in the next row for completion of either a high school degree or GED are somewhat
smaller. This suggests that part of Head Start’s impact is to move people along the diploma
versus GED margin, which is consistent with what has been found for Perry Preschool
(Schweinhart et al., 2005) and important given evidence that GED-holders do not fare as well as
high school graduates in the labor market (see Carneiro and Heckman, 2003).
The patterns for post-secondary school attendance are similar to those for high school
(second row). Among NELS respondents in the 600 poorest counties, about half of postsecondary school attendance does not result in completion of a degree or certificate, while 1520% results in a certificate or license, around 10% results in an associate’s degree and only
around 20% results in the completion of a bachelor’s degree or more. Overall the NELS data
suggest a discontinuity in educational attainment of between .5 and 1.0 years of school (third
row). Given that the NELS has small samples near the OEO cutoff, disaggregating further by
race with NELS yields very noisy estimates.

26

The NELS results for high school or equivalent or college attendance are usually on the
order of 2-3 times as large as the point estimates from the Census, although our estimates for the
effects of doubling Head Start funding per county on these measures are of about the same
magnitude as those estimated by GTC for Head Start participation for whites. The difference in
our estimates from the NELS versus Census data could be due in part to greater attenuation with
the Census results from migration across counties. Also possible are cohort differences in Head
Start effects: NELS respondents would have been younger in 1990 than 18-24, and we can see
from comparing Tables 4 and 6 that the control means for completion of high school or
equivalent are about 10 percentage points higher in the NELS than for the Census cohorts.
Although in principle we might wish to examine other long-term outcomes, most other
long-term outcome measures of interest are problematic with our data. For example labor market
outcomes for the directly treated cohorts in the Census and NELS (in their 20s) are not
discontinuous at the OEO cutoff because as Table 6 shows, a larger share of people in treatment
counties appears to be still enrolled in school at the time.26 In sum, where our data are strongest
– for schooling and especially mortality – estimated Head Start effects are strongest as well.
VIII. Extensions and Specification Checks
In this section we address three concerns with the findings presented above: (1) the
possibility of selective migration across counties between early childhood and when we first
observe people’s county of residence; (2) whether our estimates are artifacts of functional form
26 In other results not shown we have used the NELS to examine achievement test scores in 8th and 10th grade as

well as self-reported arrests. The available arrest data in the NELS are self-reported and so may substantially
understate youth involvement with crime (Kling, Ludwig and Katz, 2005). The test score data are limited by the fact
that the NELS sampling frame excludes many children in special education, and so any effect of Head Start to reduce
the chances children are in special education (as is found with more intensive early childhood programs such as

27

assumptions; and (3) whether there are discontinuities in other social spending at the OEO cutoff.
A. Selective Migration
If migration were random (independent of Head Start participation or outcomes) then our
estimates for program impacts would be attenuated, since treatment or control county residence is
a noisy measure of actual exposure. More worrisome is the possibility of non-random migration,
which is not a real concern with our mortality results (given we measure outcomes at ages 5-9,
just a few years after Head Start participation) although may be more of a problem with our
schooling estimates. But there are a few reasons to believe that our schooling estimates are not
simply artifacts of selective migration across counties.
One data point against the selective-migration hypothesis comes from the qualitative
similarity in results between the 1990 Census, which assigns people to treatment and control
counties based on county of residence during adulthood, and the NELS, which assigns people to
counties based on where they live at age 13. Migration across poor counties between ages 3-4
and age 13 appears to be modest at least according to the PSID, which provides small and
unrepresentative samples “close” to the OEO cutoff but at least lets us compare people in all 300
poorest counties with the next 300 poorest counties. Of the respondents in the 300 poorest
counties at age 3, fully 86% were in one of these counties at age 13; of those in one of these
counties at age 13, 64% were in one at age 3. Importantly, the results are similar for PSID
respondents in the next 300 poorest counties, and if anything slightly more low-education people
are leaving the “control” than “treatment” counties. With the caveats about the PSID sample in
these counties kept in mind, these data do not seem consistent with a selective migration
Abecedarian or Perry Preschool) may depress average test scores by including more marginal students.

28

explanation for the schooling findings reported above.27,28
B. Specification Tests
Another way to test for selective migration is to test for balance at the discontinuity in
exogenous characteristics that should not be affected by the intervention, since selective
migration with respect to such characteristics would lead to imbalance. As McCrary and Royer
(2003) note, the specification tests available with RD designs are also useful for examining the
more general continuity assumptions that provide identification. Under our identifying
assumptions about smoothness we would expect no discontinuity in exogenous characteristics at
the OEO cutoff. Just as in an experimental setting, we can test the assumption that the
assignment to treatment was as good as “random” by checking for balance on the covariates.
On the whole, exogenous covariates seem fairly well balanced at the OEO cutoff (Table
7). There is no systematic evidence for discontinuities in any of the Censuses from 1950 to 1990
in total county population (in thousands), percent black, or percent urban, measures that are often
associated with economic outcomes and may change within a county in response to selective
migration. Table 8 shows that with the NELS there are a few model specifications that yield
significant point estimates for one exogenous characteristic (either black or urban), but there is
no bandwidth that suggests imbalance across multiple exogenous characteristics. NELS is also
27 Of those at age 3 in counties with 1960 poverty rates that rank them 301-600, 78% were in one of these counties
at age 13. Of those in one of counties ranked 301-600 at age 13, 71% were in such a county at age 3. For
completion of high school diploma or equivalent, we find identical rates for in-movers into the treatment and control
counties (92%), defined as those in a treatment or control county at age 13 but not age 3. The high school
completion rate is lower for out-movers from the control than treatment counties (58 versus 91%), and consistent
with the idea of more out-migration of low-education people from controls, the high school completion rate among
stayers is slightly higher in the control than treatment counties (88 versus 79%). However restricting attention to
PSID respondents for whom we observe addresses at ages 3 and 13 and educational outcomes leaves us with just 100
people in the poorest 300 counties at age 13 and 128 in the next 300 poorest counties at age 13.
28 The NELS data suggest that around 70% of people living in counties with poverty rates just above (or below) the

29

balanced for parent outcomes like maternal schooling that predict children’s outcomes, which is
consistent with the very modest effects on schooling for the “indirectly treated” cohorts in the
1990 Census and which is not consistent with a story in which parents systematically move
across counties in ways related to children’s outcomes.
Another specification check is suggested by the fact that the across-county funding
discontinuity at the OEO cutoff seems to have dissipated over time (see for example the
recommendations in GAO, 1981), and so among kindergartners in 1998 who were surveyed as
part of the ECLS-K we do not observe any discontinuity in Head Start participation rates.
Reassuringly, we also do not observe discontinuities in children’s test scores at the OEO cutoff,
although we note the number of counties sampled by the ECLS-K is smaller than with the NELS.
Yet another specification test comes from examining whether there are statistically
significant discontinuities in outcomes that may be affected by Head Start at other “pseudocutoffs,” which might be the case if our estimates are an artifact of the functional form
assumptions behind our estimation approach. Table 9 shows the results using a pseudo-cutoff of
a 1960 county poverty rate of 40%, chosen (before looking at any of our outcome data) because
we do not see any evidence of discontinuities in Head Start spending here.29 For the mortality
variables, 2 out of 21 point estimates are statistically significant at the 5% level at our pseudocutoff. With our Census data only 5 out of 85 point estimates are statistically significant, and the
significant point estimates are not concentrated among cohorts exposed to Head Start as with our
estimates for the true OEO cutoff. The only significant point estimate in the NELS is for high
OEO cutoff at age 13 are in the same set of counties at age 25 in the 2000 wave of NELS.
29 We must be careful in conducting this sort of specification check because there are significant differences in Head
Start funding across counties even away from the OEO cutoff (Figure 1). If we arbitrarily choose a cutoff where

30

school completion and is of the opposite sign to what we find at the actual OEO cutoff.
C. Endogenous Break Point Tests
We have strong a priori reasons to believe that the discontinuity in Head Start assistance
occurred at the 300th poorest county. However, we are also interested in whether the data offers
supportive evidence for identifying the location of the threshold. In contrast to standard
parametric goodness-of-fit tests for break points (Piehl et. al. 2003, Bai and Perron 1998), in our
application computing the degrees-of-freedom correction is complicated by the “local” nature of
our estimation and by the non-uniform density of county poverty. To the best of our knowledge
there is no literature on threshold or break-point tests for non-parametric RD models. As such,
we performed a goodness-of-fit exercise that is in the same spirit of the parametric methods.
We examined each potential threshold from the 50th percentile of 1960 county poverty
rates (31 percent poor) through the 95th percentile (74 percent poor), in increments of .2 percent
poor. For each potential threshold, we estimated our discontinuity model at that point. We then
estimated a nonparametric locally-linear (Fan 1992) model at each data point, and came up with a
predicted value. Points to the left of the potential discontinuity were predicted using only data to
the left of the potential discontinuity, and similarly for points to the right. Based on these
predicted values, we created a measure of loss, equal to the sum of squared errors over the whole
data set. We then examined how this loss function varied across potential discontinuity points.
We performed this series of calculations for each of our three first stage variables: NELS
Head Start attendance, and 1968 and 1972 NARA records of Head Start funding per child. Plots
of the loss functions are presented in Figure 8, where lower values indicate better fit. For all
there is an actual program funding difference we might detect in part the effects of Head Start funding.

31

three variables, the loss function makes a noticeable improvement in the neighborhood of the
discontinuity. This improvement typically covers an area of plus or minus 3 percentage points
around the discontinuity. Although the local minimum is not exactly at 59.1984, it is close: 58.0
in the case of the NELS, 60.4 in the case of 1968 head start funding, and 59.4 in the case of 1972
head start funding. For the NELS, this local minimum is also a global minimum over the range
we examined. For 1968 and 1972 head start funding, there are also other minima in the range of
34 percent poor. However we are not concerned that these represent a discontinuity related to the
Head Start program, as this roughly corresponds to the 56th percentile of county poverty rates. In
addition, these minima are located in a region with much greater density of data, where the
degrees-of-freedom differences (due to greater density) can confound the goodness of fit
measure. Finally, we note the only region that experiences an improved goodness of fit across all
three first stage measures is the region around the 300th poorest county. On the whole, then, we
take this evidence as confirmatory that there is a discontinuity happening at our threshold.
D. Discontinuities in Other Spending
A final potential challenge to our identification of Head Start impacts with our research
design comes from the possibility of discontinuities in other forms of social spending at the OEO
cutoff. This seems unlikely since the decision to focus Head Start grant-writing assistance in the
300 poorest counties seems to have been made arbitrarily within the Head Start office rather than
as some part of larger OEO-wide policy. And in fact Figure 9 shows that the discontinuity in
other forms of federal social spending30 at the OEO cutoff is very small expressed as a share of

30 This category includes all appropriations by HEW, HUD, the US Department of Labor, and OEO, plus some
selected programs run by the Department of Agriculture such as low-income housing programs and school lunches.
32

the control mean (<2%, vs. 50-100% for Head Start), in absolute dollars (~$10 per capita, vs.
$100 or more per 4-year-old with Head Start), or compared to the standard error (t=0.16).31
A related concern is the possibility that because Head Start was part of OEO’s
Community Action Program, differences across counties in Head Start funding could generate
differences in political mobilization that could in turn affect local and state spending. Community
mobilization could also directly affect children’s schooling if “social capital” matters for longterm outcomes. To address this concern we analyze data on the ratio of registered voters to ageeligible (18+) county residents biannually from 1968 to 1980 (see Appendix A), and do not find
any statistically significant discontinuities in this measure in any year (Table 10).
E. Additional Estimation Issues
When we re-calculate all of our estimates weighting by county population, which
provides us with information about the effect on the average person rather than the average
county, the results for the NELS Head Start participation, for the mortality results, and for the
educational outcomes for the directly treated cohort in the Census are at least as strong as those
shown above (in terms of the absolute magnitude of the point estimates and their size in relation
to the standard errors). The results are weaker than those shown above for the NARA funding
results and for the NELS educational outcomes. However, the weighted estimates show
somewhat more pronounced discontinuities for the population measures in Table 7, and for
educational outcomes for the directly treated group at the pseudo-cutoff used in Table 9. To the
extent to which this serves as a diagnostic test, this finding provides further empirical
31 Focusing just on Federal education expenditures per child, including from the Title 1 program, yields a
statistically insignificant discontinuity estimate that is equal to around 5% of the left limit, while the estimated
discontinuity in spending specific to child and maternal health or nutrition programs are also proportionally small

33

justification for preferring the un-weighted to the weighted estimates.
Finally, conditioning our parametric estimates on exogenous covariates like percent of the
county that is black or urban does not do much to our results, consistent with findings above that
these covariates are balanced at the OEO cutoff.
IX. Conclusions
One contribution of our paper is to highlight a new source of identifying information for
the long-term effects of Head Start, generated by the discontinuity in program funding across
counties by virtue of the grant-writing assistance given in 1965 to just the poorest 300 counties.
We also demonstrate that the discontinuity in Head Start funding at the OEO cutoff is mirrored
by a large discontinuity in child mortality rates for causes of death plausibly affected by Head
Start. The impacts are proportionately large among both blacks and whites, although imprecisely
estimated for blacks. There are no significant discontinuities in either other causes of death or
age groups that should not be affected by Head Start.
Our evidence for positive Head Start impacts on educational attainment is suggestive,
although neither of the data sources available to us is quite ideal. We show that there are
statistically significant positive discontinuities in high school completion and college attendance
in the 1990 Census, concentrated among cohorts exposed to Head Start. We find similar results
for schooling outcomes in the NELS, which first identifies county of residence for people at age
13, and other data suggest there is a great deal of overlap between those living in the poorest
counties at age 3 (Head Start age) versus 13. The qualitative similarity in findings across data
sources strengthens the findings from each. Importantly, unlike the sibling-difference estimates
and statistically insignificant.

34

from GTC, we find suggestive evidence for schooling impacts on blacks as well as whites.
A final potential concern with our results is the possibility that the grant-writing
assistance provided by OEO could have generated a difference in the Head Start “production
function” across counties. While we cannot definitively rule this out, this seems unlikely in part
because the PMIs sent out in Spring 1965 were not in the field long enough to do much training.
Moreover once Head Start grants were awarded that spring, OEO conducted a massive national
training effort that would be expected to help standardize production technologies across areas.
What do our findings imply for public policy? One aspect of this question has to do with
generalizability of our estimated treatment effects. The gain from Head Start will be positively
related to the difference between the quality of the program’s educational and health services
versus the counter-factual family or child-care services children experience otherwise, and
perhaps as well to the quality of the post-Head Start schooling experience. If our study
population of poor children in the South in the 1960s and 1970s is more disadvantaged than the
average Head Start child today, then our estimates may provide an upper bound for the effects of
expanding Head Start funding for more recent national cohorts. Working in the opposite
direction may be improvements over time in average school quality for poor children.
With this caveat in mind, some rough calculations suggest that Head Start passes a
benefit-cost test at least for the cohorts of children for whom we estimate treatment effects. We
assume the “treatment” we study here is an extra $400 in spending on Head Start per 4-year-old
child in 2003 dollars (discontinuity in funding we estimate using 1972 data). On the benefit side
our estimates suggest mortality improvements yield benefits of around $180 per child.32 If our
32 Our Vital Statistics estimates for children 5-9 imply an effect on overall mortality rates of about 3 per 100,000.

35

NELS estimate is correct that the funding discontinuity in Head Start increases schooling by
about 0.5 years per child then we expect the present value of the associated earnings gains to be
around $9,000,33 although our study population is still too young (mid-20s) in our data to
measure earnings gains directly. For the poorest children in the 1960s-70s, Head Start seems to
yield net benefits even if there are distortions from raising tax revenues to support the program.
Over the past several years there has been growing concern in policy circles about the
ability of Head Start in its original incarnation to achieve lasting impacts on children, as
summarized by one recent policy brief: “When the emotional appeals [about Head Start] are
cleared from the table, what is left is a costly but unsuccessful experiment. … Head Start is not
working. Accept that, and let it go.”34 Our findings together with the sibling-difference
estimates from CT and GTC paint a less pessimistic picture about the ability of Head Start to
achieve lasting benefits for poor children. Importantly, this new research suggests that the noneducational components of Head Start may contribute to the program’s benefits, including the
mortality impacts presented in our paper, and that lasting impacts on educational attainment may
arise for blacks as well as whites. Many of the recent assessments of Head Start’s value would
appear to be overly pessimistic.

Using a value per statistical life of $6 million, which is about the value used by the EPA and FDA (Sunstein, 2004),
these mortality results would imply a modest benefit of around $180 per 4-year-old in a county.
33 If we use a conservative estimate for the returns to an additional year of schooling of 5 to 10% (Card, 1999), and
if Head Start does in fact increase educational attainment by around .5 years, then the benefits from increased
earnings (even assuming a relatively high discount rate of 6% and no annual productivity growth over time) would
be on the order of nearly $9,000 per 4-year-old (results from Krueger, 2003b, Table 5, multiplied by around 3).
34 “Don’t Cry for Me, Head Start,” Darcy Olsen and Eric Olsen, April 15, 1999, Daily Commentary, Cato Institute.
Concerns about the limited evidence in support of lasting Head Start effects are common in Washington, DC policy
discussions; see, for example, Haskins (2004) or Douglas Besharov’s testimony to the U.S. Senate Committee on
Health, Education, Labor and Pensions, Subcommittee on Children and Families, April 11, 2000.

36

References
Almond, Douglas V. (2005) “Is the 1918 Influenza Pandemic Over? Long-term Effects of In
Utero Influenza Exposure in the Post-1940 U.S. Population.” Working Paper, Columbia
University Department of Economics.
Almond, Douglas V., Kenneth Y. Chay, and Michael Greenstone (2003) “Civil Rights, the War
on Poverty, and Black-White Convergence in Infant Mortality in Mississippi.” Working Paper,
Department of Economics, University of California at Berkeley.
Bai, Jushan, and Pierre Perron, “Estimating and Testing Linear Models with Multiple Structural
Changes,” Econometrica 66:1 (1998), pp. 47-78.
Barnett, W. Steven (1995) “Long-Term Effects of Early Childhood Programs on Cognitive and
School Outcomes.” The Future of Children. 5(3): 25-50.
Boozer, Michael A., Alan B. Krueger and Shari Wolkin (1992) “Race and School Quality Since
Brown vs. Board of Education, in Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics.
Eds. Martin Bailey and Clifford Winston. Washington, DC: Brookings.
Campbell, Frances A., Craig T. Ramey, Elizabeth Pungello, Joseph Sparling, and Shari MillerJohnson (2002) Early Childhood Education: Young Adult Outcomes from the Abecedarian
Project. Applied Developmental Science. 6(1): 42-57.
Card, David (1999) “The Causal Effect of Education on Earnings.” In the Handbook of Labor
Economics, Volume 3A. Edited by Orley Ashenfelter and David Card. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
pp. 1801-1864.
Carneiro, Pedro and James J. Heckman (2003) “Human Capital Policy.” In Inequality in
America: What Role for Human Capital Policies? James J. Heckman and Alan B. Krueger.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. pp. 77-240.
Case, Anne, Darren Lubotsky and Christina Paxson (2002) “Economic Status and Health in
Childhood: The Origins of the Gradient.” American Economic Review. 92(5): 1308-1334.
Case, Anne, Angela Fertig and Christina Paxson (2003) “From Cradle to Grave? The Lasting
Impact of Childhood Health and Circumstance.” NBER Working Paper 9788.
Citro, Constance F. and Robert T. Michael (1995) Measuring Poverty: A New Approach.
Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Coleman, James S. et al. (1996) Equality of Educational Opportunity. Washington, DC: U.S.
37

Department of Health, Education and Welfare.
Collins, William and Robert A. Margo (2004) “The Economic Aftermath of the 1960s Riots:
Evidence from Property Values.” NBER Working Paper 10493.
Currie, Janet (2001) Early Childhood Education Programs. Journal of Economic Perspectives.
15(2): 213-238.
Currie, Janet and Joseph V. Hotz (2004) “Accidents Will Happen? Unintentional Injury,
Maternal Employment and Child Care Policy.” Journal of Health Economics. 23(1): 25-59.
Currie, Janet and Duncan Thomas (1995) Does Head Start Make a Difference? American
Economic Review. 85(3): 341-364.
Currie, Janet and Duncan Thomas (2000) School Quality and the Longer-Term Effects of Head
Start. Journal of Human Resources. 35(4): 755-774.
Donohue, John J. and Peter Siegelman (1998) Allocating Resources Among Prisons and Social
Programs in the Battle Against Crime. Journal of Legal Studies. 27: 1-43.
Duncan, Greg J., Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, J. Yeung, and J. Smith (1998) “How much does
childhood poverty affect the life chances of children?” American Sociological Review. 63: 406423.
Fan, Jianqing, (1992) “Design-adaptive Nonparametric Regression,” Journal of the American
Statistical Association, Vol. 87, No. 420, pp. 998-1004.
Fryer, Roland G. and Steven D. Levitt (2004) “Understanding the Black-White Test Score Gap in
the First Two Years of School.” Review of Economics and Statistics. 136(2): 447-464.
Garces, Eliana, Duncan Thomas, and Janet Currie (2002) Longer Term Effects of Head Start.
American Economic Review. 92(4): 999-1012.
General Accounting Office (1981) Head Start: An Effective Program But the Fund Distribution
Formula Needs Revision And Management Controls Need Improvement. Washington, DC:
General Accounting Office Report HRD-81-83.
Gillette, Michael L. (1996) Launching the War on Poverty: An Oral History. New York:
Twayne Publishers.
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz (2000) “Education and Income in the Early Twentieth
Century: Evidence from the Prairies.” Journal of Economic History. 60: 782-818.
38

Greenberg, Polly (1969) The Devil Has Slippery Shoes. New York: Macmillan.
Grogger, Jeffrey and Derek Neal (2000) “Further Evidence on the Effects of Catholic Secondary
Schooling.” In Brookings-Wharton Papers on Urban Affairs, Edited by William Gale and Janet
Rothenberg Pack. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press. pp. 151-202.
Guryan, Jonathan (2001) Does Money Matter? Regression-Discontinuity Estimates from
Education Finance Reform in Massachusetts. National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper 8269.
Guryan, Jonathan (2004) “Desegregation and Black Dropout Rates.” American Economic
Review. 94(4): 919-943.
Hahn, Jinyong, Petra Todd and Wilbert Van der Klaauw (2001) Identification and Estimation of
Treatment Effects with a Regression-Discontinuity Design. Econometrica. 69(1): 201-209.
Haskins, Ron (2004) “Competing Visions.” Education Next. 4(1): 26-33.
Hastie, Trevor, Robert Tibshirani, and Jerome Friedman (2001) The Elements of Statistical
Learning: Data Mining, Inference, and Prediction. New York: Springer.
Jencks, Christopher and Meredith Phillips (1998) “The Black-White Test Score Gap: An
Introduction.” In The Black-White Test Score Gap, Edited by Christopher Jencks and Meredith
Phillips. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press. pp. 1-54.
Jones, Jean Yavis (1979) The Head Start Program History, Legislation, Issues and Funding,
1964-1978. Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service Report 79-14 EPW.
Karoly, Lynn A. et al. (1998) Investing in Our Children: What We Do and Don’t Know About
the Costs and Benefits of Early Childhood Interventions. Santa Monica, CA: RAND.
Kling, Jeffrey R., Jens Ludwig and Lawrence F. Katz (2005) “Neighborhood Effects on Crime
for Male and Female Youth: Evidence from a Randomized Housing Voucher Experiment.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics. 120(1): 87-130.
Krueger, Alan B. (2003a) “Inequality, Too Much of a Good Thing.” In Inequality in America:
What Role for Human Capital Policies? James J. Heckman and Alan B. Krueger. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Krueger, Alan B. (2003b) “Economic Considerations and Class Size.” Economic Journal. 113:
34-63.
Ladd, Helen F. and Janet S. Hansen, Eds. (1999) Making Money Matter: Financing America’s
39

Schools. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Lazear, Edward P. (2001) “Educational Production.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 116(3):
777-803.
Lee, David S. (2003) “Randomized Experiments from Non-Random Selection in U.S. House
Elections.” Working Paper, Department of Economics, University of California at Berkeley.
Magnuson, Katherine A. and Jane Waldfogel (2005) “Early Childhood Care and Education:
Effects on Ethnic and Racial Gaps in School Readiness.” The Future of Children. 15(1): 169196.
McCrary, Justin and Heather Royer (2003) “Does Maternal Education Affect Infant Health? A
Regression Discontinuity Approach Based on School Age Entry Laws.” Working Paper,
University of Michigan.
Nagin, Daniel S. and Richard E. Tremblay (1999) Trajectories of boys physical aggression,
opposition, and hyperactivity on the path to physically violent and nonviolent juvenile
delinquency. Child Development. 79(5): 1181-1196.
Neal, Derek (2005) “Why Has Black-White Skill Convergence Stopped?” Cambridge, MA:
NBER Working Paper 11090.
Nelson, Charles A. (2000) “Neural plasticity and human development: The role of early
experience in sculpting memory systems.” Developmental Science. 3(2): 115-136.
North, A. Frederick (1979) “Health Services in Head Start.” In Project Head Start: A Legacy of
the War on Poverty, Edward Zigler and Jeanette Valentine, Eds.. NY: Free Press. pp. 231-257.
O’Brien, Robert, David B. Connell, and James Griffin (2004) “Head Start’s Efforts to Improve
Child Health.” In The Head Start Debates, Edward Zigler and Sally J. Styfco, Eds. Baltimore:
Paul H. Brooks. pp. 161-178.
Phillips, Meredith, Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, Greg J. Duncan, Pamela Klebanov, and Jonathan Crane
(1998) Family Background, Parenting Practices, and the Black-White Test Score Gap. In The
Black-White Test Score Gap, edited by Christopher Jencks and Meredith Phillips. Washington,
DC: Brookings Institution Press. pp. 103-145.
Piehl, Anne Morrison, Cooper, Suzanne J., Braga, Anthony A., and David M. Kennedy, (2003)
“Testing for Structural Breaks in the Evaluation of Programs,” The Review of Economics and
Statistics, 85(3): 550-558.
Piven, Frances Fox and Richard Cloward (1989) "Government Statistics and Conflicting
40

Explanations of Nonvoting," PS: Political Science and Politics. 22(3): 580-588.
Porter, Jack (2003) “Estimation in the Regression Discontinuity Model.” Working Paper,
Harvard University Department of Economics, draft date September 25, 2003.
Ramey, Craig T. and Frances A. Campbell (1984) “Preventive Education for High-Risk
Children: Cognitive Consequences of the Carolina Abecedarian Project.” American Journal of
Mental Deficiency. 88(5): 515-523.
Reiss, Albert J. and Jeffrey A. Roth (1993) Understanding and Preventing Violence.
Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Reynolds, Arthur J., Judy A. Temple, Dylan L. Robertson, and Emily A. Mann (2001) Longterm Effects of an Early Childhood Intervention on Educational Achievement and Juvenile
Arrest. Journal of the American Medical Association. 285(18): 2339-2346.
Rock, Donald A. and A. Jackson Stenner (2005) “Assessment Issues in the Testing of Children at
School Entry.” The Future of Children. 15(1): 15-34.
Schweinhart, Lawrence J., Jeanne Montie, Zongping Xiang, W. Steven Barnett, Clive R. Belfield
and Milagros Nores (2005) Lifetime Effects: The High/Scope Perry Preschool Study Through
Age 40. Ypsilanti, Michigan: High/Scope Press.
Shonkoff, J.P. and D.A. Phillips (2000) From Neurons to Neighborhoods: The Science of Early
Childhood Development. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Singh, Gopal K. and Stella M. Yu (1996) “U.S. Childhood Mortality, 1950 through 1993:
Trends and Socioeconomic Differentials.” American Journal of Public Health. 86(4): 505-512.
Sundquist, James L. (1969) On Fighting Poverty: Perspectives from Experience. New York:
Basic Books.
Sunstein, Cass R. (2004) “Are Poor People Worth Less Than Rich People? Disaggregating the
Value of Statistical Lives.” University of Chicago Law School, John M. Olin Law and
Economics Working Paper 207.
Tremblay, Richard E., Daniel S. Nagin, Jean R. Seguin, Mark Zoccolillo, Philip D. Zelazo,
Michael Boivin, Daniel Perusse, and Christa Japel (2004) “Physical Aggression During Early
Childhood: Trajectories and Predictors.” Pediatrics. 114(1): e43-e50.
Trochim, W. (1984) Research Design for Program Evaluation: The Regression Discontinuity
Approach. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications.
41

U.S. Census Bureau (1999) Statistical Abstract of the United States, 119th Ed. Washington, DC.
U.S. Department of Education (1994) National Education Longitudinal Study of 1988 Second
Follow-Up: Student Component Data File User’s Manual (NCES 94-374). Washington, DC:
Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare (1960) Vital Statistics of the United States,
1960. Volume 1: Natality. Washington, DC: United States Department of Health, Education and
Welfare.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Administration for Children and Families
(2005) Head Start Impact Study: First Year Findings. Washington, DC.
U.S. Statistical Abstract (1999) Statistical Abstract of the United States, 119th Ed. Washington,
DC: U.S. Census Bureau.
Wolff, Max and Annie Stein (1966) Study I: Six Months Later, A Comparison of Children Who
Had Head Start, Summer 1965, with Their Classmates in Kindergarten (A Case Study of
Kindergartens in Four Public Elementary Schools, New York City). Washington, DC: Research
and Evaluation Office, Project Head Start, Office of Economic Opportunity.
Zigler, Edward and Jeanette Valentine (1979) Project Head Start: A Legacy of the War on
Poverty. New York: Free Press.
Zigler, Edward and Sally J. Styfco (2004) “Preface.” The Head Start Debates. Baltimore: Paul
H. Brookes.

42

Appendix A: Data Sources
In what follows we discuss the various county-level data sources that we use to estimate
the long-term impacts of Head Start, and then discuss our student-level micro-data sources.
A. County-Level Data
Perhaps the most important data question for our study is to understand what data source
OEO used to identify the 300 poorest counties in the U.S. in 1960. The answer is not
immediately obvious because the official federal poverty rate was only invented in 1964, and so
the 1960 Census does not include a measure of persons living in poverty. OEO apparently
identified the poorest counties using a special 1964 re-analysis of the 1960 Census conducted by
the Census Bureau for OEO using the then-newly-defined federal poverty rate, a copy of which
we have obtained from the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA).35 The
alternative possibility is that OEO targeted grant-writing assistance using data on the proportion
of families in the county with incomes below $3,000, although our analysis reveals that a larger
discontinuity in funding at the 300th poorest county using the official poverty rate, suggesting
OEO used that measure instead.36
In order to document the discontinuity in Head Start funding around the OEO cutoff, and
to examine whether there is a similar discontinuity in other forms of federal spending, we have
also obtained from NARA a series of OEO data files on federal expenditures per county for the
years 1967 through 1980.37 The accuracy of these data is less than perfect. The electronic data
files have some obvious errors and are poorly documented.38 In the end only spending data from
1968 and 1972 were usable, in the sense that the data from the electronic files matched published
figures for total federal spending and Head Start spending at the national level, and the data
matched for Head Start at the state level as well. Another problem is that some federal spending
is passed through state governments. In these cases OEO pro-rated state spending across
counties, which might be reasonable on average but lead to error in measuring spending in the
poorest areas. A related challenge specific to the 1968 spending data is that the Child
35

NARA, Records of the Community Services Administration, Record Group 381: Putnam Print File, 1960.

36 Since the official poverty threshold for a family of four in 1960 dollars is $3,002 (Citro and Michael, 1995, p.
35), it is not surprising that the percent of a county s families with incomes less than $3,000 is highly correlated with
the official poverty rate for 1960 (+.95). The correlation between the two measures is not perfect because the
income level used to define whether a family is in poverty varies with the family s composition, and the two
measures of disadvantage produce slightly different rankings of which counties were the “poorest” in 1960.
37
Federal Outlays, County and State File [Machine-readable data file], 1967-1980 / conducted by the Office of
Economic Opportunity for the Executive Office of the President. Washington: OEO [producer], 1968: Washington:
National Archives and Records Service [ distributor]. Record Group 381. File Number: 3-381-73-157(A).
38 The records for 1968 and 1972 still contain a number of glitches such as alphabetic characters or brackets in the
last columns of the program expenditure and beneficiary files, which we infer should be zeros based on comparisons
with published expenditure and beneficiary data.

43

Development Group of Mississippi (CDGM) operated Head Start programs in a number of
counties in Mississippi, yet CDGM’s total funding is concentrated in the Mississippi county
(Clay) that housed CDGM’s headquarters.39 In any case, in addition to constructing a measure of
Head Start spending we create variables for spending on other social programs.40
Our primary data source on long-term schooling outcomes comes from a special
tabulation conducted for us by the U.S. Census Bureau for data from the 1990 Census. These
data include information on educational attainment, employment, earnings, and residence 5 years
ago disaggregated by age group, gender, and race. We use data from the 1990 rather than 2000
Census because the funding disparity across counties seems to have smoothed out over time,
which means that the discontinuity in funding will be less pronounced for young people in 2000
compared to 1990. At the same time the additional 10 years worth of mobility for older cohorts
from 1990 to 2000 will further attenuate our estimates for these age groups.
We also draw on county-level data from the Vital Statistics, which provides information
from a census of all death certificates in the U.S., including detailed cause-of-death codes
recorded during our observation period (1973-83) using the International Classification of
Diseases, 8th or 9th edition (ICD-8 and ICD-9) systems. Using data from the Compressed
Mortality Files we focus on mortality to children in the age group 5-9, which should capture the
health effects of Head Start services to children ages 3-4. We identify the causes-of-death that
may plausibly be affected by Head Start by consulting descriptions of the health services offered
by the program (for example North, 1979) together with discussions with pediatricians about
what health problems those services should influence. The detailed list of ICD-9 codes and
cause-of-death descriptions that we count as plausibly affected by Head Start is given in
Appendix Table A1.
Finally, we draw on county-level voter registration records collected from state officials
(ICPSR Study 9405) for the period 1968-88. We focus on the ratio of registered voters to
population 18 and over for the years 1968 through 1980 to capture possible effects of Head Start
39 We use information from the appendix map in Greenberg (1969) to identify other Mississippi counties in which
CDGM operated and interpolate spending across these counties, assuming that CDGM allocated their Head Start
spending across counties in proportion to county population. Results setting CDGM spending to missing are
qualitatively similar. The CDGM problem is not an issue for the 1972 data because the agency lost OEO funding in
the late 1960s.
40
For 1968 the data on program beneficiaries for Head Start matches up with published figures for the U.S. as a
whole, although the beneficiary variable seems to be largely missing for most other federal programs. Interpretation
of Head Start beneficiary data is complicated in 1968 because the program at that time was mostly summer-only,
although some areas had shifted towards a year-round program. For 1972 even the beneficiary variable for Head
Start records are generally missing. For 1972 we define total Head Start expenditures as federal spending dedicated
to three OEO programs with activity codes listed Head Start ($328.0 million), OEO’s Follow Thru program ($25.3
million), and OEO Community Services spending devoted to early childhood education ($11.7 million). The sum of
these three programs is approximately equal to published figures for total Head Start spending for this year (see
notes 8/18/03). Spending on other social programs is defined as expenditures by HEW, OEO (excluding those made
through Head Start), the Department of Labor, HUD, and selected programs from the Department of Agriculture.

44

or related OEO activities on voter registration rates. (The population data for the denominators
of these ratios come from the CMF discussed above). Note that voter data are not available for
all states although this becomes less of a problem over time,41 and voter registration totals may
be subject to some upward bias from voters who have left the county or state but are not
immediately removed from the voting rolls (see for example Piven and Coward, 1989). Note
also that trends in voter registration rates over time will diverge from trends in voting rates
because of variation over time in the propensity of registered voters to vote.
B. Individual-Level Data
Our main source of individual-level data is a restricted-use geo-coded version of the
NELS, sponsored by the U.S. Department of Education to survey a nationally representative
sample of 8th graders in 1988 with follow-up interviews in 1990, 1992, 1994 and 2000. These
individual-level data enable us to identify the long-term outcomes of Head Start participants
directly, rather than compare county-wide Head Start funding and average outcomes. These
micro-data also enable us to link the behavior of people as young adults to where they were
living at around age 13, which is at least somewhat closer to when they would have been of Head
Start age compared to when we first measure addresses for Census respondents.
The disadvantage of the NELS is that the study is intended to provide a nationally
representative sample and so the number of respondents who live in counties with 1960 poverty
rates “close” to the OEO cutoff is fairly limited. The original sample employed a two-stage
sampling design, with 1,052 schools selected in the first stage and 26 students per school selected
in the second. Excluded from the NELS sample in 1988 were students with mental handicaps,
physical or emotional problems, and inadequate command of the English language. In most
cases, 24 of the 26 students per school included in NELS were randomly sampled, while the
other two students were selected from among the Hispanic and Asian Islander students (U.S.
Department of Education, 1994). Base year participants were selected to participate in follow-up
surveys in part on the basis of the number of other base-year NELS participants in the student s
school at the time; dropouts were also retained in the sampling frame (U.S. Department of
Education, 1994). The Department of Education provides weighting variables that account for
the probability of participation in the base-year and follow-up surveys, as well as school
administrator and student survey non-response (U.S. Department of Education, 1994).
Overall the base year sample includes students drawn from 568 different counties. The
base year sample includes 649 students who lived in counties with 1960 poverty rates among the
300 poorest, and 674 respondents who lived in one of the next 300 poorest counties with respect
41 The ICPSR dataset is missing voter information for Alabama for 1968-72, Iowa for 1968-74, Kansas for 1968-70,
Minnesota for 1968-72, Texas for 1968-74, and Virginia for 1968-72. Note that by 1976 our dataset will include
complete information for all of the Southern states that account for most of the 600 with the poorest 1960 county
poverty rates, as mentioned above. The number of counties for which we have valid voter registration data in our
sample increases over time as follows: 1968, N=1,991; 1970, N=1,994; 1972, N=2,111; 1974, N=2,135; 1976,
N=2,732; 1978, N=2,879; and 1980, N=2,845.

45

to 1960 poverty. The NELS base year sample sizes for the 100 counties with poverty rates just
above the cutoff is N=183; for 200 counties above, N=493; for 100 counties with poverty rates
just below the cutoff, N=185; and for the 200 counties just below the cutoff, N=361.
Another potential concern with the NELS is that Head Start effects on grade retention
could affect the age distribution across counties of who is enrolled in 8th grade in 1988, although
in practice we do not find a discontinuity in age at the OEO cutoff.
The key explanatory variable of interest is whether the respondent has participated in
Head Start, which is reported at baseline by the child s parent rather than taken from
administrative records. The problem of recall errors with the NELS may be exacerbated by the
fact that parents of eighth graders are asked to report on their child s involvement in Head Start
or other preschool programs nearly 10 years earlier (1977-1979). Nevertheless the Head Start
participation rate suggested by the NELS data (13 percent) is generally consistent with that
implied by other data.42 The other key explanatory variable for our analysis comes from the
NELS respondent s county of residence, which we identify using information on the location of
the school that each respondent attended in 8th grade in 1988.43
Our main measures of educational attainment and labor market outcomes come from
responses to the 2000 follow-up survey, by which time respondents were around 25 years of age.
Our measures of academic achievement come from standardized tests administered in 1988.44
In principle an alternative micro-data source for our project would be the Panel Study of
Income Dynamics (PSID), which in 1995 asked all respondents ages 18 to 30 about their
participation in Head Start and other preschool programs and serves as the data source for GTC.
One advantage of the PSID relative to the NELS is the ability to identify where respondents live
42

This figure is similar to that reported by parents in the 1979 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth Child-Mother
file (NLSCM), in which 14 percent of white and 32 percent of African-American children participated in Head Start
(Currie and Thomas, 1995), and to figures reported in the PSID suggesting participation rates of between 10 and 12
percent for children born in the 1970'
s (Garces, Thomas and Currie, 2000). Head Start participation in the NELS is
also consistent with the figures implied by administrative data collected by the Federal government: If we assume
each Head Start participate is in the program for only one year, then around 12 percent of children four years old in
1978 were enrolled in Head Start. In 1978, the year in which the average NELS child would have been four years of
age, a total of 337,531 children participated in Head Start (GAO, 1981). Since each cohort under the age of 5 in
1978 averaged around 3 million children (U.S. Census Bureau, 1979), the ratio of program participants to children
age four was on the order of 0.11. Put differently, if children were only allowed to participate in Head Start at age
four, the available administrative data would suggest that 11 percent of the cohort of children enrolled in eighth
grade in 1988 (the NELS cohort) participated in Head Start.
43 For students in public schools we identified counties by matching NELS school identifiers with information from
the Common Core of Data, while for private-school students we identified the counties of their schools from the
1988 Private School Survey. Through this procedure we were able to identify the 1988 county of residence for 96%
of base-year NELS respondents.
44 We only use achievement tests for the base year because follow-up achievement test results are missing for an
unusually large share of dropouts in later waves (U.S. Department of Education, 1994, Grogger and Neal, 2000).

46

when they are actually of Head Start age rather than at some later point in time. In practice the
PSID, which like the NELS is intended to be representative at the national but not the state
(much less county) level, appears to provide an unrepresentative draw of people in the treatment
counties just above the OEO cutoff. The result is that among PSID sample members who
answered the 1995 Head Start question, we do not see the discontinuity in Head Start
participation that we observe in the NELS and the county-level federal spending data. For this
reason we do not use the PSID to directly estimate the effects of Head Start on outcomes using
the OEO discontinuity. However we do exploit the availability of geo-coded data for the larger
PSID sample in all poor counties to explore the problem of selective across-county migration
with our NELS and county-level data.45

45 An alternative explanation for the difference between the PSID and NELS in documenting a Head Start
discontinuity at the OEO cutoff is that the Head Start variable with the former may suffer from relatively greater
measurement error. The reason is that while the NELS asks parents of potential Head Start participants to report on
program involvement 10 years after their children would have been age-eligible to participate, the PSID asks people
to self-report on whether they were in Head Start from 15 to 25 years after they would have been of Head Start age.
We believe that sampling variability rather than measurement error is more likely to explain the PSID pattern of
Head Start participation around the OEO cutoff because we do not see any difference in outcomes for PSID
respondents at the cutoff.
47

Appendix Table A1
Causes of death susceptible to Head Start interventions
ICD-9 codes
10-18
33
34-35
36
38
45
55
70
250
260-269
280-285
320-322
466
480-487
490-491
492
493
494-496

Cause of death
Tuberculosis
Whooping cough
Streptococcal sore throat, scarlatina, erysipelas
Meningococcal infection
Septicemia
Acute poliomyelitis
Measles
Viral hepatitis
Diabetes mellitus
Nutritional deficiencies
Anemias
Meningitis
Acute bronchitis, bronchiolitis
Pneumonia and influenza
Bronchitis, chronic and unspecified
Emphysema
Asthma
Other chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases
and allied conditions

48

Appendix B:
“Optimal” Bandwidth Selection for Semi-Parametric Regression Discontinuity Estimates
In our non-parametric regression discontinuity estimates, we have primarily chosen the
range of bandwidths for which to present results based on visual inspection of the data. Our goal
has been to look as “locally” as possible, while still using enough data to obtain reasonable
statistical power. We have also explored a leave-one-out cross validation selection procedure
that we describe in this appendix, although in the end we reject the mechanical approach to
bandwidth selection that comes from this procedure for the reasons discussed below.
As is well known, cross-validation (henceforth referred to as “C-V”) is one method that
in principle can be used to select “tuning parameters” such as bandwidths. However, as is also
known, the asymptotic properties of C-V methods imply extremely slow rates of convergence.
This problem can represent itself in “noisy” measures of the optimal tuning parameter (Hastie et.
al., 2001). As we will describe below, the C-V estimates of the loss function are typically rather
flat, which we take to be an indication of this problem.
In addition, there is further complication due to the fact that we are trying to select the
optimal bandwidth for a non-parametric regression discontinuity estimator. To the best of our
knowledge existing literature does not provide specific guidance for this particular problem.
Applying the optimal bandwidth from a “typical” C-V exercise would seem to provide
misleading results, as the typical case involves estimating a function at the interior of the support
of the data, while our regression discontinuity involves two estimations at a boundary. Because
the bias/variance tradeoffs are likely to be different for boundary estimation than for interior
estimation, we should use a C-V technique that focuses on boundary predictions. Finally, we are
interested in the local nature of the data, and in identifying the optimal bandwidth for the local
density, conditional variance, etc. With these concerns in mind, we performed a C-V exercise as
described below.
Given a potential bandwidth, we form a loss function by looking at prediction errors for
each data point within 5 percentage points of 1960 county poverty from the 59.1984 cutoff. The
predictions for each point are made as follows: for points to the left of (less poor than) the
cutoff, we predict their values using a locally weighted regression using only data to their left
(exclusive of the data point being predicted). That is, we predict their values as if they were at
the boundary of the estimation. For points to the right of the cutoff, we predict their values using
only data to their right. As a result, our loss function is an average of boundary prediction errors,
and is local to the cutoff of interest. We create this loss for a range of potential bandwidths from
1 to 16, and then examine the results. We do this for several different left hand side variables of
interest.
Appendix Table B presents the results from this exercise for several key variables
presented in the paper’s main tables. Several patterns emerge. First, the bandwidths selected by
our C-V procedure are typically toward the upper end of the range of bandwidths for which
49

results are presented in the body of the paper. Second, the estimated loss function from the C-V
exercise is very “flat.” To see this, we show the range of bandwidths (we only consider
bandwidths in the range of 1 to 16) whose loss function is no more than 5% greater than the
“optimal.” This set is typically very wide. The third point that emerges is that for most
variables, the estimated treatment impact from using the C-V bandwidth is similar to that from
using our preferred bandwidth.

50

0

2

4

6

8

Figure 1A: Head Start Participation and 1968 Funding

0

20

40
60
County Poverty Rate, 1960
$ Per Capita 1968, NARA

80

100

Partic NELS

0

2

4

6

8

Figure 1B: Head Start Participation and 1972 Funding

0

20

40
60
County Poverty Rate, 1960
$ Per Capita 1972, NARA

80
Partic NELS

100

Figure 2: Estimated Discontinuity in Head Start Participation in the NELS
Panel A: Discontinuity in Head Start participation, NELS base year sample (“by”)
Flexible quadratic

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

Nonparametric

40

50

60
povrate60

70

80

Panel B: Discontinuity in Head Start participation, NELS first follow up sample (“f1”)
Flexible quadratic

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

Nonparametric

40

50

60
povrate60

70

80

Note: Panel A Estimated nonparametric discontinuity = .136 T-stat = 1.51, bandwidth = 8.
Panel B Estimated nonparametric discontinuity = .176 T-stat = 1.83, bandwidth = 8.

Figure 3: Estimated Discontinuity in Head Start Funding per 4 year old, National Archives
Panel A: 1968 Head Start funding per 4 year old
Flexible quadratic

0

200

400

600

800

Nonparametric

40

50

60
povrate60

70

80

Panel B: 1972 Head Start funding per 4 year old
Flexible quadratic

0

200

400

600

800

Nonparametric

40

50

60
povrate60

70

80

Note: Panel A Estimated nonparametric discontinuity = 115.22 T-stat = 1.28, bandwidth = 8.
Panel B Estimated nonparametric discontinuity = 89.57 T-stat = 0.89, bandwidth = 8.

Figure 4: Mortality Rates per 100,000 from 1973-83, for Children and Adults, from Causes
Affected by Head Start and from Injuries
Panel A: Children 5-9
Causes susceptible to Head Start
Flexible quadratic

Nonparametric

Flexible quadratic

20

1

25

2

30

3

35

4

40

5

Nonparametric

Injuries

40

50

60
povrate60

70

80

40

50

60
povrate60

70

80

Panel B: Adults 25+
Causes susceptible to Head Start
Flexible quadratic

Nonparametric

Flexible quadratic

110

100

120

120

130

140

140

160

150

Nonparametric

Injuries

40

Note:

50

60
povrate60

70

80

40

50

60
povrate60

70

80

Panel A, Left: Estimated nonparametric discontinuity = 1.22 T-stat = 1.56, bandwidth = 8.
Panel A, Right: Estimated nonparametric discontinuity = 2.31 T-stat = 0.95, bandwidth = 8.
Panel B, Left: Estimated nonparametric discontinuity = 5.92 T-stat = 1.38, bandwidth = 8.
Panel B, Right: Estimated nonparametric discontinuity = 7.34 T-stat = 1.65, bandwidth = 8.

Figure 5: Discontinuity in High School Completion by Age, 1990 Census
High school or more
Flexible quadratic

Nonparametric

Flexible quadratic

.8

.75

Nonparametric

Age
2534

.6

.55

.65

.6

.7

.65

.75

.7

Age
1824

40

3554

50

60
povrate60

80

40

55+

50

60
povrate60

Nonparametric

70

80

Flexible quadratic

.2

.4

.5

.3

.6

.4

.7

.5

Flexible quadratic

.8

Nonparametric

70

40

Note:

50

60
povrate60

70

80

40

50

60
povrate60

Ages 18-24: Estimated nonparametric discontinuity = .029 T-stat = 1.85, bandwidth = 3.
Ages 25-34: Estimated nonparametric discontinuity = .011 T-stat = 0.90, bandwidth = 3.
Ages 35-54: Estimated nonparametric discontinuity = .007 T-stat = 0.56, bandwidth = 3.
Ages 55+: Estimated nonparametric discontinuity = .016 T-stat = 1.11, bandwidth = 3.

70

80

.6

% high school or more
.65
.7
.75

.8

Figure 6
Histogram of High School Graduation Rates, 18-24 Year olds in 1990 Census

45

50

55
County 1960 pov rate

60

65

Notes: Figure presents mean high school graduation rates for 18-24 year olds in the 1990
Census, with means calculated using a bin width of .25.

Figure 7
Discontinuity in Schooling, NELS
Panel A: High school or more (2000 survey)
Flexible quadratic

.5

.6

.7

.8

.9

1

Nonparametric

40

50

60
povrate60

70

80

Panel B: Years of school completed (2000 survey)
Flexible quadratic

12

13

14

15

16

Nonparametric

40

50

60
povrate60

70

80

Note: Panel A Estimated nonparametric discontinuity = .065 T-stat = 1.10, bandwidth = 8.
Panel B Estimated nonparametric discontinuity = .602 T-stat = 1.74, bandwidth = 8.

Figure 8
Endogenous cut-point results

13

13.5

sse
14

14.5

15

a. NELS self reported Head Start participation

30

40

50
povrate

60

70

3.55e+08

3.60e+08

sse

3.65e+08

3.70e+08

b. 1968 NARA Head Start funding per 4-year-old

30

40

50
povrate

60

70

5.10e+08

5.15e+08

sse

5.20e+08

5.25e+08

c. 1972 NARA Head Start funding per 4-year-old

30

40

50
povrate

60

70

Note: Graphs show loss function, derived from estimating regression discontinuity models at
varying potential discontinuity points. See Section VII.C of the text for details.

Figure 9
Discontinuity in Other Federal Social Spending, 1972 National Archives Data
Flexible quadratic

400

450

500

550

600

Nonparametric

40

50

60
povrate60

70

80

Note: Estimated nonparametric discontinuity = 20.00 T-stat = 1.04, bandwidth = 8.

Table 1:
County Characteristics
Counties with 1960
Poverty 49.198% to
59.198%

Variable

Mean

Std. Dev.

Counties with 1960
Poverty 59.1984% to
69.1984%

Mean

Std. Dev.

# observations

349

228

Head Start Spending per 4-year-old 1968

134

(277.00)

288

(915.00)

Head Start Spending per 4-year-old 1972

183

(569.00)

289

(927.00)

Other Social Spending per capita 1972

446

(128.00)

483

(167.00)

Fraction of those 18 to 24 with High school or more

0.67

(0.09)

0.644

(0.07)

Fraction of those 25 to 34 with High school or more

0.74

(0.06)

0.709

(0.06)

Fraction of those 35 to 54 with High school or more

0.693

(0.07)

0.647

(0.07)

Fraction of those 55 and older with High school or more

0.396

(0.09)

0.36

(0.08)

Fraction of those 18 to 24 with some college or more

0.288

(0.12)

0.258

(0.09)

Fraction of those 25 to 34 with some college or more

0.321

(0.09)

0.289

(0.08)

Fraction of those 35 to 54 with some college or more

0.324

(0.08)

0.291

(0.07)

Fraction of those 55 and older with some college or more

0.174

(0.06)

0.16

(0.04)

Fraction of those 18 to 24 with a Bachelor's degree or more

0.0295

(0.02)

0.0257

(0.02)

Fraction of those 25 to 34 with a Bachelor's degree or more

0.0968

(0.05)

0.0847

(0.04)

Fraction of those 35 to 54 with a Bachelor's degree or more

0.124

(0.05)

0.109

(0.04)

Fraction of those 55 and older with a Bachelor's degree or more

0.0714

(0.03)

0.0685

(0.02)

1990 County population

24202

(24054.00)

Fraction ages 18-24

0.0958

(0.03)

0.0954

(0.02)

Fraction ages 25-34

0.148

(0.02)

0.149

(0.02)

Fraction ages 35-54

0.243

(0.02)

0.238

(0.02)

Fraction ages 55 plus

0.243

(0.05)

0.232

(0.05)

1990 Percent Urban

0.0254

(0.12)

0.0172

(0.10)

1990 Percent Black

0.163

(0.16)

0.266

(0.22)

1990 Per capita income

9520

(1537.00)

8488

(1434.00)

21371 (29799.00)

NELS results
# observations

28

17

Head start participation ("by" weights)

0.233

(0.16)

0.388

(0.24)

Head start participation ("f1" weights)

0.244

(0.18)

0.423

(0.24)

Standard deviations in parentheses. All means are unweighted. Data from the 1990 census STF4 file, and from the NELS

Table 2: Regression Discontinuity Estimates of the Effect of Head Start assistance on Head Start Spending and participation
NELS county averages
Porter

Variable

Parametric
Flexible Flexible
linear
quadratic

LHS Mean

Bandwidth
Poverty Range
Number of observations (counties)
with nonzero weight
Head Start participation ("by")
Head Start participation ("f1")

4
43
0.206
0.22

6
64

8
95

10

16

125

281

8

16

43

82

0.168

0.120

0.137

0.144*

0.128**

0.168

0.217

(0.135)

(0.105)

(0.090)

(0.077)

(0.054)

(0.148)

(0.142)

0.238*

0.219**

0.176*

0.169**

0.151**

0.238

0.316**

(0.143)

(0.109)

(0.096)

(0.085)

(0.058)

(0.156)

(0.151)

National Archives Federal spending data
Variable

Porter

Parametric
Flexible Flexible
linear
quadratic

LHS Mean

Bandwidth
Poverty Range
Number of observations (counties)
with nonzero weight

4

1968 Head Start Spending per child

134.379

1972 Head Start Spending, per child

205.64

1972 other social spending, per capita

456.325

6

8

10

16
8

16

524

734

958

1193

2155

484

863

139.041
(125.468)
184.876
(144.428)
5.826
(26.145)

91.053
(104.618)
73.749
(115.090)
17.952
(22.397)

115.224
(89.378)
89.572
(99.617)
20.001
(19.215)

133.84*
(79.295)
106.072
(87.362)
21.020
(17.269)

134.58**
(60.697)
130.452**
(65.584)
13.748
(14.487)

127.389
(120.098)
175.773
(142.363)
-2.361
(25.624)

112.706
(112.603)
155.899
(132.292)
5.659
(27.471)

Note: Standard errors in parentheses. RD estimates of treatment effects estimate the jump in educational outcomes associated with receiving 1965 PMI
assistance. RD methodology based on Porter (2000), locally weighted kernel regression, as discussed in text, with an Epanechnikov kernel. Parametric models
give equal weight to observations within the range of the cutoff. The model the last column includes controls for log(1960 population), 1960 %urban and 1960
%black. For the census data, the last column also includes state fixed effects. * = p<.1; ** = p<.05

Table 3: Regression Discontinuity Estimates of the Effect of Head Start assistance on Mortality
Compressed Mortality files, 1973-1983
Variable

Porter

Parametric
Flexible Flexible
linear
quadratic

LHS Mean
Bandwidth
Poverty Range
Number of observations (counties) with
nonzero weight
MAIN RESULTS
Ages 5-9, Head start related causes

SPECIFICATION CHECKS
Ages 5-9, Injuries
Ages 5-9, All causes
Ages 25+, Head start related causes
Ages 25+, injuries

Whites age 5-9, Head start related causes
Blacks age 5-9, Head start related causes
Infants, Head start related causes

4

3.415

22.091
39.828
132.892
122.046

2.885
3.684
162.257

6

8

10

16
8

16

524

734

958

1193

2155

484

863

-1.842*

-1.711**

-1.222

-1.167*

-1.141**

-2.201**

-2.558**

(0.954)

(0.783)

(0.779)

(0.678)

(0.528)

(1.004)

(1.261)

0.168

3.004

2.314

0.593

0.645

-0.164

0.775

(3.373)

(2.745)

(2.413)

(2.187)

(1.732)

(3.380)

(3.401)

-3.402

0.096

-0.166

-1.372

-1.646

-3.896

-2.927

(4.195)

(3.417)

(3.029)

(2.772)

(2.182)

(4.268)

(4.295)

2.678

3.949

5.916

6.834*

5.703*

2.091

2.574

(5.560)

(4.852)

(4.257)

(4.012)

(3.236)

(5.581)

(6.415)

6.038

6.731

7.343*

5.796

4.315

2.65

4.276

(6.348)

(5.192)

(4.438)

(4.098)

(3.152)

(6.206)

(6.059)

-1.052

-1.351

-0.919

-0.717

-0.774

-1.334

-1.746

(1.029)

(0.868)

(0.842)

(0.732)

(0.600)

(1.061)

(1.332)

-2.169

-2.017

-2.703

-2.746

-1.535

-1.699

-1.93

(3.674)

(2.741)

(2.125)

(1.741)

(1.672)

(4.094)

(3.718)

28.145

9.462

22.623

26.812*

32.512**

22.161

14.987

(21.499)

(18.463)

(16.692)

(14.955)

(11.162)

(21.610)

(22.825)

See note to Table 2 for methodology. Outcome of interest is 1-year mortality rates per 100,000 Head start related causes include deaths due to: tuberculosis, other
infections, diabetes, nutritional causes, anemias, meningitits, and repriratory causes.

Table 4: Regression Discontinuity Estimates of the Effect of Head Start assistance on Educational outcomes, Directly Treated Group
1990 Census
Variable

Porter
LHS Mean

Bandwidth
Poverty Range
Number of observations (counties) with
nonzero weight
ALL RACES
% High School or Equivalent, ages 18-24

0.640

% Some College, ages 18-24

0.227

% College completion, ages 18-24

0.022

% in same state of birth, ages 18-24

0.796

BLACKS ONLY
% High School or Equivalent, ages 18-24

0.559

% Some College, ages 18-24

0.16

% College completion, ages 18-24

0.012

% in same state of birth, ages 18-24

0.9

See note to Table 2

1.5

2.5

3

3.5

6

Parametric
Flexible Flexible
linear
quadratic
3

6

202

343

411

476

734

244

484

0.038*
(0.021)
0.044
(0.027)
0.002
(0.004)
-0.033
(0.031)

0.034**
(0.017)
0.045**
(0.021)
0.002
(0.004)
-0.046*
(0.026)

0.029*
(0.016)
0.037*
(0.020)
0.004
(0.004)
-0.039
(0.024)

0.019
(0.015)
0.029
(0.018)
0.002
(0.003)
-0.033
(0.023)

0.003
(0.012)
0.011
(0.014)
0
(0.003)
-0.023
(0.019)

0.043**
(0.019)
0.051**
(0.024)
0.004
(0.003)
-0.043
(0.028)

0.055**
(0.020)
0.057**
(0.025)
0.004
(0.005)
-0.042
(0.032)

0.057
(0.062)
0.105*
(0.059)
0.002
(0.006)
-0.09*
(0.054)

0.072
(0.046)
0.121**
(0.048)
-0.003
(0.006)
-0.117**
(0.045)

0.038
(0.042)
0.089**
(0.042)
-0.001
(0.005)
-0.111**
(0.040)

0.016
(0.039)
0.057
(0.039)
-0.001
(0.005)
-0.108**
(0.036)

-0.011
(0.031)
0.022
(0.031)
-0.003
(0.004)
-0.069**
(0.029)

0.081
(0.051)
0.127**
(0.050)
0.002
(0.006)
-0.101**
(0.045)

0.118**
(0.053)
0.155**
(0.052)
-0.001
(0.007)
-0.105**
(0.048)

Table 5: Regression Discontinuity Estimates of the Effect of Head Start assistance on Educational outcomes, Older Age Groups
1990 Census
Porter

Variable

Parametric
Flexible Flexible
linear
quadratic

LHS Mean
Bandwidth
Poverty Range
Number of observations (counties) with
nonzero weight
% High School or Equivalent, ages 25-34
% Some College, ages 25-34
% College completion, ages 25-34
% in same state of birth, ages 25-34

0.702
0.206
0.062
0.754

% High School or Equivalent, ages 35-54

0.624

% Some College, ages 35-54

0.181

% College completion, ages 35-54
% in same state of birth, ages 35-54

0.062
0.786

% High School or Eqiuvalent, ages 55+

0.35

% Some College, ages 55+

0.092

% College completion, ages 55+

0.043

% in same state of birth, ages 55+

0.794

See note to Table 2

1.5

2.5

3

3.5

6

202

343

411

476

734

3

6

244

484

0.006

0.009

0.011

0.006

0.005

0.005

0.018

(0.018)

(0.013)

(0.013)

(0.012)

(0.010)

(0.015)

(0.016)

0.005

0.014

0.016

0.011

0.011

0.012

0.014

(0.016)

(0.013)

(0.012)

(0.011)

(0.009)

(0.014)

(0.016)

0.011

0.01

0.01

0.007

-0.001

0.011

0.014*

(0.008)

(0.007)

(0.007)

(0.006)

(0.005)

(0.008)

(0.008)

-0.014

-0.022

-0.009

0.003

0

-0.02

-0.025

(0.032)

(0.027)

(0.024)

(0.023)

(0.019)

(0.028)

(0.032)

-0.011

0.011

0.008

0.001

0.013

-0.004

0.009

(0.019)

(0.015)

(0.014)

(0.013)

(0.011)

(0.016)

(0.018)

0.008

0.019*

0.014

0.007

0.01

0.017

0.021

(0.013)

(0.011)

(0.010)

(0.009)

(0.008)

(0.011)

(0.013)

0.005

0.007

0.008

0.004

0.003

0.008

0.01

(0.007)

(0.006)

(0.005)

(0.005)

(0.004)

(0.006)

(0.007)

-0.009

-0.02

-0.005

0.003

-0.004

-0.014

-0.016

(0.029)

(0.024)

(0.022)

(0.021)

(0.018)

(0.026)

(0.029)

-0.023

-0.007

-0.016

-0.016

0.003

-0.011

-0.008

(0.021)

(0.016)

(0.015)

(0.014)

(0.011)

(0.018)

(0.019)

0.001

0.001

-0.002

-0.003

0.002

0.002

0.002

(0.009)

(0.007)

(0.006)

(0.006)

(0.005)

(0.007)

(0.008)

-0.005

-0.002

-0.002

-0.002

0.001

-0.002

-0.003

(0.005)

(0.004)

(0.004)

(0.003)

(0.003)

(0.004)

(0.005)

0.014

0.001

0.012

0.002

-0.008

0.009

0.027

(0.036)

(0.029)

(0.026)

(0.024)

(0.020)

(0.032)

(0.034)

Table 6: NELS outcomes
NELS
Variable

Porter
LHS Mean

Bandwidth

4

6

8

10

16

43

64

95

125

281

0.171

0.189**

0.12

0.09

0.03

(0.122)

(0.093)

(0.077)

(0.076)

(0.052)

0.134

0.123

0.066

0.072

0.032

(0.103)

(0.075)

(0.059)

(0.055)

(0.035)

0.084

0.257**

0.157*

0.159*

0.098

(0.128)

(0.106)

(0.094)

(0.086)

(0.061)

0.581

1.082**

0.602*

0.462

0.207

(0.414)

(0.372)

(0.345)

(0.324)

(0.227)

0.104

0.148*

0.068

0.072

0.108**

Poverty Range
Number of observations (counties)
with nonzero weight
Completed high school, 2000
High school or equivalent, 2000
Some post-secondary school, 2000
Years of schooling, 2000
Enrolled in school, 2000

0.551
0.731
0.515
12.691
0.086

Table 7: Specification Tests with Census Data
1990 Census
Variable

Porter

Parametric
Flexible Flexible
linear quadratic

LHS Mean
Bandwidth
Poverty Range
Number of observations (counties)
with nonzero weight
Population (1000s), 1950
Population, 1960
Population, 1970
Population, 1980
Population, 1990
Percent non-white, 1950
Percent black, 1960
Percent black, 1970
Percent black, 1980
Percent black, 1990
Percent urban, 1950
Percent urban, 1960
Percent urban, 1970
Percent urban, 1980
Percent urban, 1990

1.5

22.654
23.476
18.977
20.855
21.856
0.25
0.253
0.219
0.217
0.215
0.138
0.164
0.177
0.014
0.016

2.5

3.0

3.5

6.0
3

6

202

343

411

476

734

244

484

-3.202

1.101

1.553

2.543

1.183

-2.389

-2.126

(5.062)

(3.587)

(3.523)

(3.261)

(2.437)

(4.027)

(4.437)

-6.447

-0.848

0.063

0.876

0.425

-4.827

-4.783

(7.480)

(4.753)

(4.515)

(4.067)

(2.885)

(5.861)

(5.679)

-2.175

0.137

0.933

1.835

0.178

-1.494

-2.259

(5.081)

(3.544)

(3.908)

(3.750)

(2.738)

(4.002)

(5.099)

0.988

5.348

4.323

4.362

2.077

3.108

3.148

(6.132)

(4.244)

(4.838)

(4.497)

(3.242)

(4.834)

(6.068)

1.262

5.99

4.02

3.993

1.788

4.043

3.768

(7.105)

(4.909)

(5.964)

(5.505)

(3.935)

(5.641)

(7.397)

-0.007

0.031

0.034

0.017

0.036

-0.002

0.038

(0.062)

(0.050)

(0.046)

(0.042)

(0.034)

(0.052)

(0.058)

-0.026

0.006

0.011

0.003

0.014

-0.019

0.014

(0.060)

(0.048)

(0.044)

(0.041)

(0.033)

(0.051)

(0.055)

-0.021

-0.022

-0.011

-0.017

-0.008

-0.04

0

(0.059)

(0.046)

(0.042)

(0.039)

(0.031)

(0.049)

(0.052)

-0.034

-0.004

0.005

0.005

0.011

-0.036

-0.006

(0.054)

(0.043)

(0.039)

(0.036)

(0.029)

(0.045)

(0.049)

-0.039

-0.009

0.007

0.007

0.013

-0.044

-0.015

(0.054)

(0.043)

(0.039)

(0.036)

(0.029)

(0.045)

(0.049)

0.014

0.015

0.021

0.028

0.003

0.003

0.011

(0.047)

(0.036)

(0.034)

(0.031)

(0.025)

(0.040)

(0.044)

0.028

0.002

0.015

0.024

-0.004

0.011

-0.003

(0.053)

(0.041)

(0.039)

(0.036)

(0.030)

(0.045)

(0.050)

0.041

-0.007

0.011

0.007

-0.015

0.021

0.016

(0.059)

(0.047)

(0.044)

(0.040)

(0.033)

(0.050)

(0.055)

0.002

0.005

0.012

0.006

0.009

0.012

0.008

(0.026)

(0.020)

(0.021)

(0.019)

(0.016)

(0.022)

(0.026)

0.016

0.016

0.022

0.013

0.008

0.025

0.023

(0.028)

(0.023)

(0.024)

(0.021)

(0.018)

(0.024)

(0.029)

Table 8: Specification Tests with NELS Data
NELS
Variable

Porter
LHS Mean

Bandwidth
Poverty Range
Number of observations (counties)
with nonzero weight

4

Maternal schooling (years)

13.088

Black

0.426

Hispanic

0.122

Urban

0.033

See note to Table 2.

6

8

10

16

Parametric
Flexible Flexible
linear
quadratic
8

16

43

64

95

125

281

43

82

-0.068
(0.274)
-0.095
(0.158)
-0.085
(0.140)
-0.103**
(0.045)

0.266
(0.289)
-0.214*
(0.127)
0.03
(0.105)
-0.024
(0.065)

0.267
(0.274)
-0.191*
(0.102)
0.044
(0.088)
-0.004
(0.069)

0.113
(0.231)
-0.117
(0.088)
0.029
(0.079)
0.034
(0.073)

0.045
(0.175)
-0.103*
(0.056)
0.059
(0.060)
0.042
(0.071)

-0.068
(0.312)
-0.095
(0.182)
-0.085
(0.153)
-0.103**
(0.049)

-0.138
(0.553)
-0.146
(0.186)
-0.054
(0.130)
-0.115
(0.159)

Table 9: Regression Discontinuity Estimates, False cutoff (1960 county poverty rate = 40%)
1990 Census
Porter

Variable

Parametric
Flexible Flexible
linear
quadratic

LHS Mean
Mortality outcomes
4
6

Bandwidth
Poverty Range
Number of observations (counties) with
Ages 5-9, Head start related causes

2.7

Ages 5-9, Injuries

22.099

Ages 25+, Head start related causes

138.395

10

16

922

1413

1915

2392

3108

8
825

16
1716

-0.280
(1.052)
-0.054
(2.396)
-1.922
(5.641)

-0.431
(0.765)
-0.050
(1.882)
-4.229
(4.325)

-0.330
(0.612)
0.321
(1.634)
-5.347
(3.632)

-0.226
(0.538)
0.252
(1.499)
-8.931**
(3.173)

0.092
(0.447)
-0.449
(1.201)
-15.818**
(2.461)

-0.251
(1.124)
-0.174
(2.488)
-1.599
(5.849)

-0.371
(0.962)
-1.235
(2.513)
-2.009
(5.654)

3.5

6

1990 Census Educational outcomes
1.5
2.5
3

Bandwidth
Poverty Range
Number of observations (counties) with
% High School or equivalent, ages 18-24

0.69

% High School or equivalent, ages 25-34

0.787

% High School or equivalent, ages 35-54

0.767

% High School or equivalent, ages 55+

0.472

% Some College, ages 18-24

0.313

% Some College, ages 25-34

0.374

% Some College, ages 35-54

0.389

% Some College, ages 55+

8

0.2

% College completion, ages 18-24

0.031

% College completion, ages 25-34

0.115

% College completion, ages 35-54

0.15

% College completion, ages 55+

0.077

328

570

699

811

1422

3
403

6
828

0.026
(0.021)
0.032*
(0.019)
0.019
(0.019)
0.032
(0.021)

0.011
(0.016)
0.016
(0.014)
0.006
(0.014)
0.022
(0.016)

0.008
(0.015)
0.009
(0.013)
-0.001
(0.013)
0.017
(0.015)

0.008
(0.014)
0.014
(0.011)
0.005
(0.012)
0.021
(0.013)

0.011
(0.010)
0.004
(0.008)
0.003
(0.009)
0.009
(0.010)

0.026
(0.018)
0.035**
(0.016)
0.023
(0.016)
0.031*
(0.018)

0.016
(0.019)
0.023
(0.016)
0.013
(0.017)
0.027
(0.019)

0.003
(0.025)
0.039*
(0.023)
0.023
(0.021)
0.014
(0.015)

-0.008
(0.021)
0.014
(0.018)
0.001
(0.017)
0.007
(0.012)

-0.012
(0.019)
0.007
(0.017)
-0.005
(0.016)
0.004
(0.011)

-0.011
(0.018)
0.009
(0.015)
0.000
(0.014)
0.007
(0.010)

-0.008
(0.014)
-0.004
(0.011)
-0.004
(0.011)
-0.001
(0.008)

-0.001
(0.021)
0.04**
(0.019)
0.018
(0.018)
0.015
(0.013)

-0.008
(0.025)
0.024
(0.021)
0.005
(0.020)
0.006
(0.014)

0.011**
(0.005)
0.017
(0.012)
0.005
(0.013)
0.002
(0.008)

0.008**
(0.004)
0.004
(0.010)
-0.001
(0.011)
-0.001
(0.007)

0.009**
(0.004)
0.008
(0.010)
0.000
(0.010)
0.001
(0.006)

0.009**
(0.004)
0.006
(0.009)
0.000
(0.009)
0.000
(0.006)

0.005*
(0.003)
0.000
(0.007)
-0.003
(0.007)
-0.003
(0.005)

0.012**
(0.004)
0.016
(0.010)
0.006
(0.011)
0.002
(0.007)

0.009*
(0.005)
0.011
(0.013)
0.002
(0.013)
-0.001
(0.009)

NELS
Bandwidth
Poverty Range
Number of observations (counties) with
nonzero weight
High school or equivalent, 2000

0.873

Some post-secondary school, 2000

0.789

Years of schooling, 2000

14.04

Still in school, 2000

0.109

See note to Table 2

4

6

8

10

16

126

201

277

349

571

16
111

16
243

-0.195**
(0.069)
-0.044
(0.073)
-0.108
(0.319)
0.011
(0.055)

-0.073
(0.058)
-0.047
(0.059)
-0.01
(0.248)
0.05
(0.046)

-0.017
(0.051)
-0.003
(0.050)
0.174
(0.208)
0.037
(0.039)

-0.016
(0.045)
-0.042
(0.044)
0.007
(0.178)
0.02
(0.034)

-0.024
(0.032)
-0.017
(0.033)
0.096
(0.134)
0.002
(0.026)

-0.214**
(0.068)
-0.056
(0.072)
-0.192
(0.319)
0.027
(0.057)

-0.272**
(0.076)
-0.082
(0.079)
-0.392
(0.333)
0.061
(0.060)

Table 10: Regression Discontinuity Estimates, Voter Registration Rates
Variable

Voter registration data from ICPSR, 1968-1980
Porter
LHS Mean

Bandwidth
Poverty Range
Number of observations (counties)
with nonzero weight

4

6

8

10

16

Parametric
Flexible Flexible
linear
quadratic
8

16

526

738

962

1198

2164

486

867

Voter registration rate, 1968

0.797

-0.051
(0.032)

-0.037
(0.028)

-0.027
(0.024)

-0.04*
(0.023)

-0.028
(0.018)

-0.051
(0.032)

-0.045
(0.035)

Voter registration rate, 1970

0.763

-0.031

-0.016

-0.015

-0.027

-0.008

-0.033

-0.02

(0.029)

(0.025)

(0.022)

(0.021)

(0.016)

(0.030)

(0.032)

-0.004

0.001

0.004

-0.01

0.011

-0.004

0.001

(0.025)

(0.022)

(0.019)

(0.018)

(0.015)

(0.025)

(0.027)

-0.045*

-0.028

-0.011

-0.016

0.016

-0.059**

-0.047

(0.025)

(0.022)

(0.019)

(0.018)

(0.014)

(0.025)

(0.029)

-0.017

0.002

0.004

0.004

0.021

-0.018

-0.006

(0.025)

(0.022)

(0.019)

(0.017)

(0.014)

(0.026)

(0.030)

-0.005

0.001

-0.002

-0.005

0.013

-0.005

0.003

(0.025)

(0.022)

(0.019)

(0.017)

(0.013)

(0.025)

(0.029)

-0.014

0.002

-0.018

-0.021

-0.002

-0.006

0.005

(0.023)

(0.020)

(0.018)

(0.016)

(0.013)

(0.023)

(0.026)

Voter registration rate, 1972
Voter registration rate, 1974
Voter registration rate, 1976
Voter registration rate, 1978
Voter registration rate, 1980

0.785
0.759
0.762
0.726
0.766

Notes: Voter registration rate is defined as the ratio of registered voters to population 18 and older in a county.
States for which county-level voter registration data are available increases over time (see Appendix A).

