                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     THE EFFECTS OF CARDIAC SPECIALTY HOSPITALS
                      ON THE COST AND QUALITY OF MEDICAL CARE

                                             Jason R. Barro
                                           Robert S. Huckman
                                            Daniel P. Kessler

                                         Working Paper 11707
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11707


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2005




We would like to thank Richard Bohmer for helpful comments and advice, Robert McNary for exceptional
research assistance, and the National Institute on Aging through NBER for generous support. Barro and
Huckman also acknowledge support from the Division of Research and Faculty Development at Harvard
Business School. The views expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect those of any of the authors'
institutions. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Jason R. Barro, Robert S. Huckman, and Daniel P. Kessler. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effects of Cardiac Specialty Hospitals on the Cost and Quality of Medical Care
Jason R. Barro, Robert S. Huckman, and Daniel P. Kessler
NBER Working Paper No. 11707
October 2005
JEL No. I1

                                            ABSTRACT

The recent rise of specialty hospitals – typically for-profit firms that are at least partially owned by
physicians – has led to substantial debate about their effects on the cost and quality of care.
Advocates of specialty hospitals claim they improve quality and lower cost; critics contend they
concentrate on providing profitable procedures and attracting relatively healthy patients, leaving
(predominantly nonprofit) general hospitals with a less-remunerative, sicker patient population. We

find support for both sides of this debate. Markets experiencing entry by a cardiac specialty hospital

have lower spending for cardiac care without significantly worse clinical outcomes. In markets with

a specialty hospital, however, specialty hospitals tend to attract healthier patients and provide higher

levels of intensive procedures than general hospitals.

Jason R. Barro
Bain and Company
jason.barro@post.harvard.edu

Robert S. Huckman
435 Morgan Hall
Harvard Business School
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
rhuckman@hbs.edu

Daniel P. Kessler
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
fkessler@stanford.edu
I. INTRODUCTION

        The debate over the welfare implications of specialty hospitals – for-profit,

physician-owned institutions that serve patients with a particular illness, such as cardiac

disease – involves several issues of long-standing interest to economists. Opponents of

specialty hospitals argue that they are a vehicle to disguise kickbacks to physicians for

referrals, and that they thereby contribute to the "medical arms race" of competition

through the provision of medically unnecessary services.1 Opponents also argue that

specialty hospitals “cherry pick” profitable services and healthy patients from general

hospitals. Specialty hospitals, for example, are less likely than general hospitals to have

emergency departments (US GAO, 2003b). In contrast, proponents argue that specialty

hospitals are "focused factories" that not only offer their own patients more efficient

specialized care but also lead neighboring general hospitals to become more responsive

and up-to-date in their practices.

        These opposing views have been manifest in two distinct policy perspectives. If

competition from specialty hospitals has social benefits, then state regulators and public

insurers such as Medicare and Medicaid should allow, and perhaps even facilitate, their

entry. If competition from specialty hospitals has social costs, however, then policy

makers should set regulations and financial incentives to account for the negative external

effects that specialty hospitals create. As a result of this debate, the federal government

imposed an 18-month moratorium in December 2003 on Medicare reimbursement for

care at new specialty hospitals to allow for greater analysis of their impact.




1
 The concept of competition among health care providers leading to higher levels service provision is
noted by Joskow (1980), Held and Pauly (1983), and Robinson and Luft (1985).


                                                                                                        2
       Despite both practical and academic interest in this question, we are not aware of

any existing research that has simultaneously estimated the effects of specialty hospital

entry on health care costs and patient health outcomes; without information on both costs

and outcomes, conclusions about welfare are necessarily speculative. In this paper, we

assess empirically the two main hypotheses about specialty hospitals. We focus on the

treatment of elderly Medicare beneficiaries with cardiac disease at single-specialty

cardiac hospitals. Most of these hospitals are jointly owned by for-profit chains and the

local cardiologists and cardiac surgeons who practice at the facilities.

       First, we estimate how the Medicare expenditures, treatments, and outcomes for

patients in geographic areas that experienced specialty hospital entry between 1996 and

1999 changed over this period. If specialty hospital entry leads to lower expenditures and

better outcomes, we would conclude that it increases welfare. If it leads to higher

expenditures and worse outcomes, we would conclude that it decreases welfare. If it

leads to lower expenditures and worse outcomes (or higher expenditures and better

outcomes), we would calculate the implied cost per life saved of specialty hospital entry

to determine its welfare effects.

       Our approach provides an unbiased assessment of the effects of specialty

hospitals even if specialty hospitals select healthier patients for treatment, because it

estimates the effect of specialty hospital entry by the difference in all patients'

expenditures and outcomes – not just those for patients at specialty hospitals – between

entry and control geographic areas. It identifies the direct plus any spillover effects of

specialty hospitals. The consistency of these estimates depends on the assumption that

trends in the unobservable characteristics of patients and markets in entry versus control



                                                                                             3
areas are uncorrelated with the unobserved determinants of costs and outcomes. We

investigate the validity of this assumption in detail below.

       Second, we examine how the expenditures, treatments, and outcomes of patients

admitted to a specialty hospital differ from those admitted to a general hospital in a 1999

cross-section of geographic areas with an operating specialty hospital. In addition, we

estimate the extent to which differences in observable patient characteristics explain

differences in the care of patients admitted to a specialty versus a general hospital.

Although these estimates can neither prove nor disprove the existence of socially harmful

behavior, they show whether the elderly patient populations at cardiac specialty hospitals

are healthier in observable terms and quantify the importance of these differences for

observed variation in costs and outcomes.

       The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. Section II describes the

specialty hospital industry and discusses its potential implications for social welfare.

Section III presents our empirical models. Section IV describes our data sources and

methods, Section V presents our results, and Section VI concludes.



II. SPECIALTY HOSPITALS: BACKGROUND AND IMPLICATIONS

       Specialty hospitals are not an entirely new phenomenon; hospitals focusing on

treating children and psychiatric patients have existed for decades. However, as a 2003

US GAO report observes, new hospitals of this form differ from their earlier counterparts

in several important ways. The new genre of specialty hospitals includes four types:

cardiac, orthopedic, general surgical, and women's. Orthopedic specialty hospitals are

approximately twice as common as each of the three other types, but cardiac specialty


                                                                                           4
hospitals have much greater aggregate revenues (US GAO, 2003b, Table 2) than any of

the other types.2 Most notably, these specialty hospitals are largely for-profit (93 percent

of the specialty hospitals opened between 1990 and 2003 were for-profit (US GAO,

2003b, Table 1)) and owned at least in part by their admitting physicians. In fact, the

median percentage of admitting physicians at specialty hospitals with ownership in that

hospital was 73 percent in 2003 (US GAO, 2003b, Figure 1).3

         In addition, these specialty hospitals are concentrated geographically in areas

where state policy or local demographic conditions were favorable to hospital growth.

Although 28 states in 2003 had at least one specialty hospital, approximately two-thirds

of all specialty hospitals were located in seven states clustered in the western and

southern portions of the country—Arizona, California, Kansas, Louisiana, Oklahoma,

South Dakota, and Texas (US GAO, 2003b, p. 3). Of these states, Oklahoma was the

only one that had a certificate of need (CON) program at any point after 1988, and that

program did not cover cardiac services (Ho, 2005).

         The debate over specialty hospitals centers around two hypotheses that have

implications for social welfare. Arguments in favor of specialty hospitals focus on the

potential for increased efficiency through either direct or spillover effects. Direct effects

exist to the extent that specialty hospitals treat patients more efficiently than incumbent


2
  A 2005 report from the Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) noted several differences
between cardiac hospitals and orthopedic/surgery hospitals. Relative to orthopedic/surgery hospitals,
cardiac hospitals were characterized by a larger average daily census (40.4 vs. 4.5), a higher percentage of
facilities with an emergency department (71% vs. 4%), a larger percentage of patient days attributable to
Medicare (67% vs. 36%), and a smaller share of physician ownership (49% vs. 80%) (Center for Medicare
& Medicaid Services, 2005).
3
  Federal law, known as the Stark law, generally prohibits physicians from referring Medicare patients to
facilities in which they have a financial interest. The law exempts physicians who have an ownership stake
in an entire hospital from a ban on referrals to that hospital, under the assumption that the largest stake that
a physician could have in this context would be too small to create significant moral hazard.


                                                                                                              5
general hospitals. In this vein, Herzlinger (1997) describes the benefits of specialty

hospitals by viewing them as analogous to Skinner’s (1974) “focused factory."

        The direct benefits of specialty hospitals could stem from three factors. First,

given the substantial fixed investments required to provide services such as cardiac

surgery or orthopedic procedures, specialty hospitals may be better able to exploit

economies of scale by consolidating volume that would have otherwise been allocated

across multiple diversified facilities. Nevertheless, despite compelling theoretical

arguments, empirical evidence of economies of scale in hospitals has been limited.

Dranove and Shanley (1995) find that hospital systems do not appear to have lower costs

than otherwise similar “pseudo systems”—random collections of independent hospitals.

Dranove (1998) finds evidence of scale economies in “non-revenue producing cost

centers” (e.g., administrative services such as public relations, accounting, medical

records, and data processing) for relatively small hospitals, but notes that these

economies are exhausted in hospitals with more than 10,000 annual discharges (or

roughly 280 beds).4

        Second, the aggregation of volume by specialty hospitals may enable them to

benefit from returns to experience that could either reduce cost or improve the quality of

care. According to the GAO, although general hospitals typically have more beds than

specialty hospitals, the focused mission of specialty hospitals often results in their

treating more patients in their given fields of specialization (US GAO, 2003b, p. 5). The

substantial literature on the positive association between volume and outcome (Luft,

Bunker, and Enthoven, 1979; Luft, Hunt, and Maerki, 1987; Hannan et al., 1991, 1997;

4
  Dranove (1998) study does not test for economies of scale in clinical revenue centers on the assumption
that the non-revenue centers represent the most likely source of scale economies.


                                                                                                            6
Huckman and Pisano, 2005) with respect to many surgical procedures suggests that such

benefits may be obtained by single-specialty facilities that are successful in aggregating

volume within a market.

        Third, by allowing physicians to share in the efficiency gains through ownership,

specialty hospitals may create more powerful incentives to achieve these and other cost

and quality improvements. A report prepared by the Lewin Group on behalf of MedCath

Corporation—a chain of specialty hospitals focused on cardiac care—finds support for

these hypotheses, showing that patients at MedCath facilities had lower rates of risk-

adjusted patient mortality and shorter lengths of patient stay than a peer group of 1,192

hospitals performing cardiac surgery in the United States (Dobson, 2003).

        Beyond these direct effects, the presence of specialty hospitals in a market may

force competing general hospitals in the same market to become more efficient by

threatening them with either declining prices or reduced share. Although no previous

work has investigated the spillover benefits of specialty hospitals, Kessler and

McClellan's (2002) finding that the presence of for-profit competitors leads to increased

efficiency at nonprofits suggests that such spillovers may be important.

        Critics of specialty hospitals, in contrast, argue that the same features of specialty

hospitals that have the potential to make them more efficient also make them more likely

to engage in behavior that reduces social welfare. For example, critics argue that

specialty hospitals may be better able than general hospitals to focus on providing the

types of treatments that are the most profitable, even if this is not in society's interest

overall, because specialty hospitals do not care for patients with all types of illnesses.

The fact that specialty hospitals allow admitting physicians to share in the institutions'


                                                                                              7
profits can strengthen physicians' incentives to help pursue this objective, just as it can

strengthen physicians' incentives to reduce costs and improve quality.

       According to this reasoning, cardiac specialty hospitals' focus on technologically-

intensive services such as catheterization, angioplasty, and open-heart surgery is an

example of such inefficient behavior. Although these services are highly profitable

(Horwitz, 2005), the fact that the marginal health benefits of expansions in their supply

are generally modest (McClellan, McNeil, and Newhouse, 1994) suggests that the

welfare consequences of intensive treatments supplied by specialty hospitals may be

questionable.

       Along these lines, critics also argue that specialty hospitals may be better able to

attract the most profitable types of patients. If patients with more severe forms of an

illness are more costly to treat--and reimbursement systems such as Medicare's

Prospective Payment System (PPS) do not fully compensate hospitals for this higher cost-

-then seeking out healthier patients can be a profitable business strategy. By law, no

hospital can turn away an acutely ill patient; but, according to critics, because specialty

hospitals have greater discretion over the types of services they provide, they can shape

their patient populations indirectly by promoting services that healthier patients value

more highly. The effect of patient selection within a given illness on hospital profits can

be quite substantial. In fact, federal policymakers specifically excluded psychiatric

hospitals from the Medicare PPS system on the grounds that psychiatric Diagnosis-

Related Groups (DRGs) were not able to capture adequately the severity and cost

differences among patients (Cromwell et al., 1991).




                                                                                              8
       Although shifting healthy patients from general to specialty hospitals does not, by

itself, change total Medicare expenditures or any patient's actual care, it may have

important implications for welfare in practice. If Medicare reimbursement for sick

patients is less than their average cost, and Medicare must reimburse hospitals enough to

enable all or virtually all of them to break even (e.g., Chalkley and Malcomson, 2000),

then shifting only healthy patients from general to specialty hospitals can lead to

increases in Medicare expenditures in aggregate. At the very least, such a transfer of

resources to specialty hospitals from Medicare must be funded by taxation that imposes a

deadweight loss. If such transfers give general hospitals the incentive to mimic specialty

hospitals in order to compete, then they may distort medical care decisions as well.

       Empirical evidence on the consequences of specialty hospitals shows that there is

a basis for critics' concerns. Based on discharge data from the Healthcare Cost and

Utilization Project from six states, GAO found that specialty hospitals treated a smaller

percentage of severely ill patients relative to general hospitals in their geographic areas

(US GAO, 2003a, figure 9). Cram et al. (2005) find that such differences in patient

health status explain at least part of the difference in mortality rates at specialty and

general hospitals. Consistent with the GAO’s results, Winter (2003) finds that centers

specializing in outpatient surgery serve less-severe patients, on average, than the

outpatient departments of full-service hospitals. Finally, Lynk and Longley (2002)

present evidence suggesting that full-service hospitals suffer a decline in admissions of

potentially profitable patients when ambulatory surgery centers, a close relative of

specialty hospitals, enter the market.




                                                                                              9
         Yet despite the plausibility of both sides in the specialty-hospital debate, little

work has investigated how specialty hospitals affect the cost of care. In addition,

previous work has neither investigated the importance of spillover effects nor

satisfactorily controlled for selection bias in assessing the effect of specialty hospitals on

quality. By examining the consequences for Medicare expenditures and outcomes in

markets where specialty hospitals have entered versus where they have not -- in addition

to examining the consequences for patients at specialty versus general medical hospitals

in markets with specialty hospitals -- this paper seeks to address both of these limitations.




III. EMPIRICAL MODELS

         We estimate the effects of cardiac specialty hospitals on the expenditures on and

quality of care for elderly Medicare beneficiaries with cardiovascular illness.

Specifically, we examine the impact of specialty hospitals on hospital expenditures, rates

of use of specific intensive procedures, and health outcomes using longitudinal data on

cohorts of elderly Medicare recipients who were hospitalized with incident illness in

1993, 1996, and 1999. We use models of two forms.

         The first set of models investigates how time trends in expenditures and outcomes

in hospital referral regions (HRRs)5 in which a specialty hospital opened in 1997 or 1998




5
  The Dartmouth Atlas of Health Care defines hospital markets at two levels. The finest level is referred to
as the hospital service area (HSA). Most the 3,436 HSAs in the United States contain only one acute-care
hospital; the distribution of total 1996 population across HSAs ranged from 604 to 3,067,356. Each of the
306 hospital referral regions (HRRs) represents a broader grouping of several HSAs; the distribution of
total 1996 population across HRRs from 126,329 to 9,288,694. The Dartmouth Atlas describes the
definition of these broader market areas as follows: “Hospital referral regions (HRRs) represent regional
health care markets for tertiary medical care. Each HRR contained at least one hospital that performed
major cardiovascular procedures and neurosurgery. In a similar fashion, HRRs were defined by assigning
HSAs to the region where the greatest proportion of major cardiovascular procedures were performed, with


                                                                                                         10
(“entry” HRRs) differ from trends in HRRs in which no specialty hospital opened

(“control” HRRs). The objective of these models is to identify the net direct plus

spillover effects of specialty hospital entry on the care of patients in a hospital market. In

1997 or 1998, five cardiac specialty hospitals opened in the United States. These five

hospitals were located in five different HRRs and were owned by three different entities.

        The second set of models investigates how 1999 levels of expenditures and

outcomes within an HRR differ between patients initially admitted to a specialty versus a

general hospital. We estimate these models on HRRs that had an open specialty hospital

as of January 1, 1999. The objective of these models is to identify the extent to which

specialty hospitals treat patients more intensively and the effect of differences in patient

mix between specialty and general hospitals on expenditures, treatments, and outcomes.

In 1999, there were eight open specialty hospitals. These eight hospitals were located in

seven different HRRs and were owned by six different entities.

        In HRR k during year t =1993, 1996, 1999, the observational units in our analysis

are individuals i = 1, …, Nkt who are initially admitted to hospital j with a new

occurrence of illness. Each patient has a vector of characteristics Xit: five age indicator

variables (65-69 years, 70-74 years, 75-79 years, and 80-84 years; 85-89 years; omitted

group 90-99 years), gender, race (black or non-black), and the patient’s hospital

expenditures in the 180 days prior to the onset of the study illness. This final variable

captures the overall status of the patient’s health upon admission to the hospital. We also

include diagnosis-code indicator variables for each of the following conditions: acute


minor modifications to achieve geographic contiguity, a minimum population size of 120,000, and a high
localization index.” (Dartmouth Atlas of Health Care, 2004).




                                                                                                     11
myocardial infarction [AMI] (ICD9=410), ischemic heart disease [IHD] (ICD9=414),

dysrhthmyia (ICD9=427), heart failure (ICD9=428), other heart conditions (ICD9 in 390-

429, except 410, 414, 427, and 428), or circulatory system disorders (ICD9=439-448).

The omitted group among these indicators is that for cerebrovascular disorders

(ICD9=430-438). Finally, each patient has a vector of indicator variables Zjt

characterizing her hospital of initial admission (e.g., for-profit, nonprofit, or public

ownership; system membership status; teaching status; and size).

       We analyze three dependent variables. The individual incurs total Medicare

inpatient hospital expenditures of Yit, where Y is total expenditures in the year after and

including the admission to the hospital for the study illness. The binary variable Cit is

equal to one if the individual receives one or more specific intensive procedures within a

given interval (e.g., one day or one year) after the initial admission to the hospital and

zero otherwise. The patient has health outcome Oit, where O equals one if the patient has

an adverse health outcome within 365 days of the initial hospital admission and zero

otherwise.

       The first set of models is of the following form:
         Cit
         Yit = γk + α(y99t) + β (entry_y99kt) + Xitφ + Zjtδ + εit                      (1)
         Oit

             Cit
             Yit = γk + α1(y99t) + α2(trendt) + α3(entry_trendkt) +
             Oit                  β(entry_99kt) + Xitφ + Zjtδ + εit                    (1a)

where y99t equals one if the year is 1999 and zero otherwise; and γk is an HRR fixed-

effect. The interaction entry_99kt, equals one if HRR k is one of the five HRRs that

experienced entry by a specialty hospital and the year is 1999 and is otherwise equal to

zero. The variable trendt equals zero if the year is 1993 and assumes a value of one or


                                                                                              12
two if the year is 1996 or 1999, respectively. The interaction term, entry_trendkt, equals

one if HRR k experienced specialty hospital entry and the year is 1996; two if HRR k

experienced specialty hospital entry and the year is1999; and zero otherwise. Finally, εikt

is an error term, where E(εikt|…) = 0. Equation (1) is estimated using data for 1996 and

1999 and is again estimated using data for 1993 and 1999 to examine the impact of the

selected base year on our results. Equation (1a) is estimated using data for 1993, 1996,

and 1999.

       The coefficient of interest in these models is β. In (1), β represents the difference

in 1996-99 growth in outcomes between those HRRs that did and did not experience

specialty hospital entry. In (1a), β represents the difference in 1996-99 growth in

outcomes in HRRs that did and did not experience specialty hospital entry, over and

above the constant growth trend for the 1993-99 period. Put another way, model (1a)

controls for preexisting differences in growth rates for entry HRRs in estimating the

effect of specialty hospital entry.

       The second set of models is of the following form:

            Cit
            Yit = α + γk + β(specialty_hospjt) + Xitφ + Zjtδ + εit                    (2)
            Oit

where specialty_hospjt equals one if hospital j was one of the eight specialty hospitals

open in 1999 and zero otherwise. In (2), β represents the difference in 1999 levels of

outcomes for patients initially admitted to a specialty versus a general hospital.




                                                                                            13
IV. DATA AND METHODS

         We analyze patients with a new occurrence of cardiovascular illness in 1993,

1996, and 1999.6 We identified cardiac specialty hospitals (and HRRs that experienced

specialty hospital entry) through a search of the trade press. We included both free-

standing cardiac hospitals and cardiac hospitals-within-a-hospital.7 This broad inclusion

rule should, if anything, bias our results against finding a difference between specialty

and general hospitals. As described above, our search yielded five specialty hospitals that

opened in 1997 or 1998, and eight specialty hospitals that were open as of January 1999.

We define a patient as having had a new occurrence of illness in a given year if that

patient was admitted in 1993, 1996, or 1999 with a diagnosis of cardiovascular illness

without having been admitted with cardiovascular illness in the previous six months.

Additionally, we exclude patients admitted to the hospital between January and June

1996 (because six months of claims data required to ensure the absence of prior

admissions were not available for these individuals), patients who were in HMOs

(because claims data is not available for Medicare HMO patients during our study

period), patients suffering from end-stage renal disease, and non-elderly patients.

         We use data from three principal sources in our analysis. First, we use the 20

percent Medicare Provider Analysis and Review (MEDPAR) file (for 1993) and the 100

percent MEDPAR file (for 1996 and 1999) to construct total Medicare payments

(including patients’ deductibles and copayments) in the year after initial admission for a

new occurrence of illness. Expenditures include all inpatient plus outpatient hospital


6
 We define cardiovascular illness as ICD9 codes 390-448, except 456, 459 and V43.
7
 Hospitals-within-a-hospital are specialty hospitals that are physically located on the campus of a general
hospital but are separately licensed and certified. They generally have independent facilities such as
operating rooms, physical therapy suites, and pharmacies.


                                                                                                          14
reimbursements (including copayments and deductibles not paid by Medicare) from

insurance claims for all hospitalizations in the year following each patient’s initial

admission.8

         The diagnostic procedure used to assess artery status is cardiac catheterization or

angiography (CATH), which may be followed by either coronary artery bypass graft

surgery (CABG) or percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA) to

“revascularize,” or remove blockages, detected by CATH. We construct indicator

variables denoting whether each patient received each of these three intensive procedures

in the day and the year after the onset of illness. We also tabulate each patient’s

expenditures on acute hospital care in the 180 days prior to admission for his study

illness, as a measure of individual health status on entry to the study cohort. We measure

the occurrence of complications with a variable indicating whether the patient was

readmitted within one year with a subsequent episode of AMI or heart failure.9 Data on

patient demographics were obtained from the Health Care Financing Administration’s

HISKEW enrollment files, with death dates based on death reports validated by the

Social Security Administration. We used these death dates to create an indicator variable

for one-year mortality.

         Our second principal data source is comprehensive information on U.S. hospital

characteristics provided by the annual American Hospital Association (AHA) Survey.

We restrict our sample to nonfederal, nonrural hospitals that ever reported providing


8
  Because Medicare’s diagnosis-related group (DRG) payment system for hospitals in theory compensates
hospitals on a fixed-price basis per admission for treatment, hospital expenditures might appear to be a poor
measure of the resources devoted to a course of care. However, this proposition is not true in practice. The
intensity of treatment of most health problems varies enormously, and the DRG system contains important
elements of cost sharing (e.g., McClellan, 1997).
9
  We exclude readmissions within 30 days, which may represent a continuation of the initial course of
treatment.


                                                                                                         15
general or surgical services. From the survey we obtain information on hospital

ownership type, size, teaching status, system membership, and other characteristics that

might affect the incentives of the hospital and its managers. We classify hospitals into

three ownership categories (nonprofit, for-profit, and public (the omitted group)) and two

size categories (small (<100 beds) and large (the omitted group)). We classify hospitals

as teaching hospitals if they report at least twenty full-time residents. We also represent

whether the hospital is a member of a multi-hospital system with an indicator reflecting

system membership (see Madison (2001) for details on the construction of our system

variable). Data on hospital characteristics are matched to individual patients based on the

hospital to which the patient was initially admitted. Our third data source is The

Dartmouth Atlas of Health Care, from which we obtained comprehensive information on

the characteristics of HRRs in 1995-1996, including population; the number of Medicare

enrollees; the number of acute care beds per 1,000 residents; hospital employees per

1,000 residents; number of registered nurses, total, primary care, and specialist physicians

per 1,000 residents; and price-adjusted Medicare reimbursements per enrollee for all non-

capitated, inpatient hospital, professional and laboratory, outpatient, and home health

services.

       We estimate equations (1) and (1a) using OLS on two samples of individuals. We

report heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors that allow for clustering at the HRR

level. First, we estimate the equations using as a control group only patients from a

matched set of control HRRs that are similar to our entry HRRs in terms of their

observable characteristics. To construct this set of control HRRs, we estimate a probit

model that had as its unit of observation an HRR. The dependent variable equals one if




                                                                                              16
the HRR was one of the five HRRs in our study that experienced entry by a cardiac

specialty hospital in 1997 or 1998 and zero otherwise. The independent variables are

from The Dartmouth Atlas of Health Care.10 With the parameter estimates from this

model, we calculate a predicted probability of specialty hospital entry for each HRR, and

include in the set of matched control HRRs every HRR with a predicted probability of

entry that is within 15 percentage points (either above or below) of the entry HRRs'

predicted probabilities. This yields a total of 20 control HRRs.

         Second, we estimate the equations using a broader control group consisting of all

HRRs in which no specialty hospital entered. In both samples, we weight patients

hospitalized in 1996 twice as much as those hospitalized in 1999, because our sample

only includes patients hospitalized from July 1-December 31, 1996, but includes patients

hospitalized from January 1-December 31, 1999.11 We weight patients hospitalized in

1993 five times as much as those hospitalized in 1999, because our 1993 sample is a 20%

random sample of Medicare beneficiaries from the full calendar year.

         Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for patients from entry HRRs, patients from

matched HRRs without specialty hospital entry (matched control HRRs), and patients

from all HRRs without specialty hospital entry (all control HRRs). The first row of Table

1 shows some important differences between entry and control HRRs. First, entry HRRs

start the entry period in 1996 with a higher level of one-year hospital expenditures than

control HRRs ($20,603 versus $18,783 to $19,734, depending on control group).

Second, entry HRRs have faster pre-entry hospital expenditure growth (i.e., during 1993-


10
  The results of this probit are in Appendix Table 1.
11
  Because 100% sample Medicare claims are not available before 1996, we could not obtain an
expenditure history for patients admitted in the first months of that year. We limited the cohort to patients
hospitalized on July 1, 1996 or later in order to obtain 180 days of expenditure history.


                                                                                                           17
96) than do control HRRs over the same period (17.4 percent versus 15.3 or 15.4 percent,

depending on control group). Third, entry HRRs have slower post-entry expenditure

growth (i.e., during 1996-99) than do control HRRs over the same period (-4.9 percent

versus -0.2 or -1.7 percent, depending on control group).

        In addition, entry HRRs have a slightly greater proportion of discretionary cardiac

admissions than other HRRs, both prior to entry and throughout the study period. Under

the assumption that AMI is the only illness we analyze for which admission is entirely

nondiscretionary, entry HRRs had approximately one percentage point fewer

nondiscretionary admissions than control HRRs. In entry HRRs in 1993, 11.8 percent of

patients were admitted with a diagnosis of AMI; in all control HRRs, the comparable

figure is 12.7 percent.12 Finally, entry HRRs have slightly lower pre-entry mortality than

control HRRs. In 1993, one-year mortality for entry HRRs was 22.1 percent; by

comparison, one-year mortality in all control HRRs was 23.2 percent. Otherwise, there is

little systematic evidence of differences between entry and control HRRs.



V. RESULTS

        Table 2 presents estimates of β from equations (1) and (1a), the effect of specialty

hospital entry on treatments and health outcomes for all patients in entry HRRs. Each

number in the table represents a separate regression coefficient from a model with a

different dependent variable, specification, or control group. The first three columns

present estimates from equation (1) and (1a) using the matched control sample; the

second three columns present estimates using the all control sample. The first and fourth

12
  Classifying only IHD admissions as discretionary does not change this conclusion. Entry HRRs had 1.77
times as many IHD as AMI admissions in 1993 (=0.2050 / 0.1160); by comparison, all control HRRs had
1.63 (=0.2036 / 0.1251) times as many.


                                                                                                    18
columns present estimates from equation (1) using 1996 as the base year; the second and

fifth columns present estimates from equation (1) using 1993 as the base year; and the

third and sixth columns present estimates from equation (1a) using all three years.

         The first row confirms the basic finding from Table 1: patients from entry HRRs

experienced statistically significantly slower growth in their hospital expenditures than

patients from control HRRs during the 1996-99 period. Based on the models in Columns

1 and 4, hospital expenditures for patients from entry HRRs grew by $524 to $763 less

(depending on specification) than did patients from control HRRs. Relative to a base of

$18,750 (1999 all-control average expenditures), this amounts to 2.8 to 4.1 percent

slower growth.13

         Differences in health outcomes in entry versus control HRRs are generally small

and statistically insignificant.14 Differences in rates of mortality and readmission with

AMI are 0.2 percentage points or less and statistically insignificant. There is evidence of

a statistically greater rate of readmission for heart failure of approximately 0.3 percentage

points. However, because admission for heart failure is at least partially discretionary,

this may represent a combination of differences in outcomes and differences in treatment

patterns conditional on outcome. In any event, specialty hospital entry improves

efficiency as long as the value of a year without readmission for cardiac complications is

less than $218,000 ($218,000 = $763 expenditure reduction from entry / 0.0035 CHF

readmission increase).




13
  Full results from these regression equations are presented in Appendix Table 2.
14
  Estimating these models as a probit rather than a linear probability model does not change this result.
For example, the estimated marginal effect of specialty hospital entry on mortality at the sample average
was 0.0979 (standard error 0.3012).


                                                                                                            19
       Over a longer time period, however, estimates of the consequences of specialty

hospitals crucially depend on assumptions about what would have happened in entry

HRRs in the absence of specialty hospital entry. Columns 2 and 4 use a base year of

1993 and assume that the levels of expenditures and outcomes in 1993 would have

remained the same in entry HRRs in the absence of entry. Columns 3 and 6 use a base

year of 1993 but assume that 1993-96 trends in expenditures and outcomes would have

remained the same.

       Under the assumption that entry HRRs would have remained at their 1993 levels,

specialty hospital entry does not significantly affect cost, but reduces quality of care.

Patients in entry versus control HRRs have 1.1 to 1.3 percentage points greater one-year

mortality post-entry than they do pre-entry, without consistent offsetting decreases in

readmission for AMI or CHF. On a base of 22.5 percent 1996 all-control mortality

(Table 1), this amounts to a 4.9 to 5.8 percent increase. However, because 1996 is the

most recent year immediately before the entry events in our sample, we believe that 1996

is the most appropriate base year, at least for models that assume that entry HRRs would

have retained their levels in the absence of entry.

       In contrast, under the assumption that entry HRRs would have retained their

1993-96 trend in expenditures and outcomes in the absence of entry, specialty hospital

entry leads to both a reduction in expenditures and a decrease in mortality. According to

Columns 3 and 6, entry reduces expenditures by $1,277 to $1,653 (depending on

specification), or 6.8 to 8.8 percent (1,277 / 18,750 to 1,653 / 18,750) and mortality by

0.9 to 1.1 percentage points, or 4.0 to 4.9 percent (0.9 / 22.5 to 1.1 / 22.5). This reduction




                                                                                            20
in mortality is generally accompanied by an increase in readmission with complications,

however, indicating that the additional survivors have worse overall cardiac health.

       The estimated expenditure consequences of specialty hospital entry are not driven

by any obviously spurious factors. They are not driven by any particular HRR.

Unpublished estimates of the effect of specialty hospital entry by HRR show that entry

has a statistically significant negative expenditure effect in four of the five entry HRRs

(the positive effect in the fifth HRR is small and statistically insignificant). Differential

changes in Medicare reimbursement rates also do not explain observed expenditure

effects. The most important geographic determinant of Medicare payments to acute-care

PPS hospitals is the Medicare wage index (see Hackbarth (2002) for discussion), which is

constructed so that its average value nationwide is always one. The average Medicare

wage index for entry HRRs was 1.016 in 1993, 1.011 in 1996 and 1.005 in 1999

(unpublished calculation based on Medicare wage indices by MSA weighted by the

number of admissions from the MSA's analogous HRR in 1996).

       Differences in trends in reported diagnosis mix and intensive procedure use also

account for virtually none of the gap in expenditures between entry and control HRRs.

Omitting controls for diagnosis mix from the regression models underlying Table 2

results in an estimated expenditure effect of entry of -$530 (with a standard error of 309)

for the matched-control sample. Including controls for procedure use (365-day CATH,

PTCA, and CABG indicator variables) in the regression models underlying Table 2

results in an estimated entry effect of -$514 (with a standard error of 164) for this sample.

       To investigate whether differential admissions practices account for the estimated

differences in expenditures, we estimated β from equations (1) and (1a) on a sample of




                                                                                             21
AMI patients only; these estimates appear in Table 3. In particular, because admissions

for AMI are generally mandatory, any apparently cost-saving effect of specialty hospitals

in Table 2 that was due to discretionary admission of healthier patients in entry HRRs

would not appear in Table 3. According to Table 3, the estimated expenditure effects of

entry among AMI patients are similar in magnitude to (although less precise than) the

effects in the population of cardiac patients as a whole. Along these lines, the estimated

outcome effects of entry among AMI patients are not statistically distinguishable from

the effects in the population of cardiac patients as a whole.

       Table 4 presents additional descriptive statistics and estimates of the effect of

admission to a specialty hospital in 1999 on expenditures, intensive procedure use, and

health outcomes. The results in this table are based only on patients from the eight HRRs

with an open specialty hospital as of January 1, 1999. The first two columns of the table

present the average values of treatment intensity, health outcomes, and patient

characteristics for patients admitted to specialty and general medical hospitals,

respectively. The third column presents the raw difference between the specialty and

general hospital populations, and the fourth contains regression estimates of β from

equation (2).

       The descriptive statistics in Table 4 show that specialty hospitals account for a

small but significant share of admissions (5.7 percent=4,520/(75,000+4,520)) in HRRs

where they operate. In addition, consistent with the findings in Table 1, HRRs with a

specialty hospital open in 1999 have higher average 1-year cardiac expenditures than

other HRRs. This figure—$20,124 (=20,578*.06 + 20,095*.94)—is even higher than the

average for the five entry HRRs ($19,595 [Table 1, Column 3]).




                                                                                           22
       There are substantial differences in the characteristics and outcomes of patients

admitted to the two types of hospitals. Patients admitted to a specialty hospital are much

more likely to receive an intensive cardiac procedure. They also have substantially better

health outcomes. They are much less likely to die within one year (14 percent versus

23.9 percent), and have lower rates of cardiac complications. However, patients initially

admitted to specialty versus general hospitals also have very different characteristics on

admission. They are younger (by 2.5 years), are much less likely to be female or black,

have much lower 180-day prior expenditures ($1,244 versus $2,077), and are much more

likely to be admitted with a diagnosis of IHD (40.3 percent versus 18.3 percent), one of

the less-severe illnesses in our sample in terms of expected hospital expenditures. To

investigate whether these differences in characteristics could be explained by differences

in the diagnosis mix and the types of treatments provided at specialty hospitals, we ran

regressions of age, gender, race, and 180-day prior expenditures on an indicator variable

for specialty hospital admission and a set of 71 DRG indicator variables (DRGs are a

function of diagnosis, severity, and type of treatment, and form the basis for a patient's

Medicare reimbursement). These unpublished results show that even controlling for

DRGs, patients admitted to specialty hospitals were significantly younger, healthier, and

more likely to be white and male.

       On net, these effects lead patients admitted to a specialty hospital to have raw 1-

year hospital expenditures that are $483 higher than those for patients at general

hospitals. Controlling for observable hospital and patient characteristics does not reduce

the estimated magnitude of this effect; β is estimated to be $610, though it is not

significantly different from zero at conventional levels of significance. Controlling for




                                                                                             23
observable characteristics does reduce differences in procedure rates and health outcomes

between specialty and general hospitals by one-half to two-thirds, but eliminates none of

them.



VI. CONCLUSION

        What are the effects of specialty hospitals on the costs and quality of care of

Medicare beneficiaries? Advocates of these hospitals contend that their focused mission

improves quality and lowers costs. Critics contend that these (predominantly for-profit)

hospitals concentrate on providing profitable procedures and attracting relatively healthy

patients--leaving (predominantly nonprofit) general hospitals with a less-remunerative,

sicker patient population.

        We find evidence in support of both of these hypotheses. Between 1996 and

1999, patients in HRRs with specialty-hospital entry experienced lower growth in

expenditures than patients in control HRRs. This finding is robust to different

specifications of the control group, and for AMI as well as other cardiac illnesses. The

expenditure savings from entry is not driven by any particular HRR, by differential trends

in Medicare reimbursement rates, or by changes in procedure or diagnosis mix. There is

only weak evidence of differences in trends in health outcomes in entry versus control

HRRs.

        Over a longer period, estimates of the efficiency benefits of specialty hospital

entry are more dependent on assumptions about what would have happened in entry

HRRs in the absence of entry. Under the assumption that entry HRRs would have

remained at the same level of expenditures and outcomes as in 1993, entry reduces




                                                                                           24
efficiency: entry does not affect cost, but leads to an increase in mortality. Under the

assumption that entry HRRs would have retained their 1993-96 trend in expenditures and

outcomes in the absence of entry, entry improves efficiency: entry leads to both a

reduction in expenditures and a decrease in mortality.

       Balancing this, there is evidence that specialty hospitals choose to enter markets

with healthier patients, to provide additional intensive treatments of questionable cost-

effectiveness, and to treat healthier patients within markets -- behaviors that, under

reasonable assumptions, may reduce social welfare. Specialty hospitals enter markets

that have slightly lower pre-entry levels of mortality. In HRRs with a specialty hospital,

those who attend specialty hospitals are much more likely to receive a profitable

intensive cardiac procedure in the year after their onset of illness than those who do not,

even controlling for demographic characteristics, diagnosis, and Medicare claims history.

In addition, specialty hospitals have patient populations that are younger, more likely to

be non-black and male, and healthier than their counterparts at general hospitals --

characteristics that may be positively correlated with profitability. However, because we

do not observe all of the determinants of costs, treatments, and health outcomes, we can

not definitively apportion the observed cross-sectional effect of specialty hospital

admission into socially-constructive versus socially-harmful effects.

       These seemingly-conflicting findings are consistent with other research by one of

us presenting a similarly mixed view of for-profit hospitals. For-profits increase market-

wide efficiency by improving the performance of competing nonprofits (Kessler and

McClellan, 2002) even though they themselves provide additional treatment that has only

marginal medical benefit (Becker, Kessler, and McClellan, 2005). Our study reaches a




                                                                                            25
similar conclusion. Because the share of specialty hospitals in markets with a specialty

hospital is only six percent, market-wide increases in efficiency from specialty hospital

entry must come from entry-induced increases in efficiency at general hospitals, even

though specialty hospitals engage in behavior that has the potential to reduce social

welfare.

       Identifying the mechanism through which specialty hospitals improve general

hospital performance is an important topic for future research. Future research might also

focus on ways to alter the incentives provided by the Medicare reimbursement system to

maximize the efficiency benefits from specialty hospitals while minimizing their costs.

In addition, further analysis could investigate whether the entry of specialty hospitals

impacts the provision of less-remunerative, non-cardiac services by general hospitals.

Understanding the impact of specialty hospitals on other aspects of hospitals' decision-

making will allow for a broader assessment of the implications of specialty hospitals for

social welfare.




                                                                                            26
                                     REFERENCES

American Hospital Association, 2002. Annual Survey of Hospitals database.

Becker, D., Kessler, D., McClellan, M., 2005. Detecting Medicare abuse. Journal of
Health Economics 24(1), 189-210.

Casalino, L., Devers, K., Brewster, L., 2003. Focused factories? Physician-owned
specialty facilities. Health Affairs 22(6), 56-67.

Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services, 2005. Study of physician-owned specialty
hospitals required in Section 507(c)(2) of the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement,
and Modernization Act of 2003, mimeograph.

Chalkley, M. and Malcomson, J., 2000. Government Purchasing of Health Services in
A.J. Culyer and J.P. Newhouse, eds., Handbook of Health Economics, Volume 1A,
Chapter 15, North-Holland: Amsterdam.

Cram, P., Rosenthal, G., Vaughan-Sarrazin, M., 2005. Cardiac revascularization in
specialty and general hospitals. New England Journal of Medicine 352(14), 1454-1462.

Cromwell, J., Harrow, B., McGuire, T., Ellis, R., 1991. Medicare payment to psychiatric
facilities: Unfair and inefficient? Health Affairs 10(2), 124-134.

Dartmouth Atlas of Health Care, 2004. Website,
http://www.dartmouthatlas.org/faq.php#hsa_hrr, accessed November 15, 2004.

Dobson, A., 2003. A Comparative Study of Patient Severity, Quality of Care, and
Community Impact at MedCath Heart Hospitals. Lewin Group: Falls Church, VA.

Dranove, D., 1998. Economies of scale in non-revenue producing cost centers:
implications for hospital merger. Journal of Health Economics 17(1), 69-83.

Dranove, D., Shanley, M., 1995. Cost reductions or reputation enhancement as motives
for mergers: the logic of multihospital systems. Strategic Management Journal 16, 55-74.

Hackbarth, Glenn M. 2002. Adjusting Medicare Payments for Local Market Input
Prices. Testimony before the Subcommittee on Health, Committee on Ways and Means,
U.S. House of Representatives, July 23, 2002,
http://www.medpac.gov/publications/congressional_testimony/072302(WM)local_input_
prices.pdf.

Hannan, E., Kilburn, H., Bernard, H., O’Donnell, J., Lukacik, G., Shields, E., 1991.
Coronary artery bypass graft surgery: The relationship between inhospital mortality rate
and surgical volume after controlling for clinical risk factors. Medical Care 29(11), 1094-
1107.



                                                                                        27
Hannan, E., Racz, M., Ryan, T., McCallister, B., Johnson, L., Arani, D., Guerci, A. Sosa,
J., Topol, E., 1997. Coronary angioplasty volume-outcome relationships for hospitals and
cardiologists. Journal of the American Medical Association 277(11), 892-898.

Hansmann, H., Kessler, D., McClellan, M., 2003. “Ownership Form and Trapped Capital
in the Hospital Industry,” in Edward Glaeser, ed., The Governance of Not-for-Profit
Firms, University of Chicago Press: Chicago, IL.

Herzlinger, R., 1997. Market Driven Health Care, Addison Wesley, Reading, MA.

Held, P., Pauly, M., 1983. Competition and efficiency in the end stage renal disease
program. Journal of Health Economics 2(2), 95-118.

Ho, V., 2005. Does certificate of need affect cardiac outcomes and costs, working paper.

Horwitz, J., 2005. Making profits and providing care: comparing non-profit, for-profit,
and government hospitals. Health Affairs 24(3), 790-801.

Huckman, R., Pisano, G., 2005. The firm specificity of individual performance: Evidence
from cardiac surgery. Management Science, forthcoming.

Joskow, P., 1980. The effects of competition and regulation on hospital bed supply and
the reservation quality of the hospital. Bell Journal of Economics 11(2), 421-447.

Kessler, D., McClellan, M., 2002. “The Effects of Hospital Ownership on Medical
Productivity,” RAND Journal of Economics 33(3) 488-506.

Luft, H., Bunker, J., Enthoven, A., 1979. Should operations be regionalized? The
empirical relation between surgical volume and mortality. New England Journal of
Medicine 301(25), 1364-1369.

Luft, H., Hunt, S., Maerki, S., 1987. The volume-outcome relationship: Practice-makes-
perfect or selective-referral patterns? Health Services Research 22(2), 157-182.

Lynk, W., Longley, C., 2002. The effect of physician-owned surgicenters on hospital
outpatient surgery. Health Affairs 21(4), 215-221.

Madison, K., “The Relationship Between Multihospital System Membership and
Treatments, Costs, and Outcomes of Medicare Patients with Acute Myocardial
Infarction,” PhD. Thesis, Stanford University, 2001.

McClellan, M., 1997. Hospital reimbursement incentives: An empirical approach. Journal
of Economics and Management Strategy 6(1), 91-128.




                                                                                         28
McClellan, M., McNeil, B., Newhouse, J., 1994. Does more intensive treatment of acute
myocardial infarction in the elderly reduce mortality? Journal of the American Medical
Association 272(1994), 859-866.

Robinson, J., Luft, H., 1985. The impact of hospital market structure on patient volume,
average length of stay, and the cost of care. Journal of Health Economics 4(4), 333-356.

Skinner, W., 1974. The focused factory. Harvard Business Review, May-June, 113-120.

United States General Accounting Office, 2003a. Specialty Hospitals: Information on
National Market Share, Physician Ownership, and Patients Served, Washington, D.C.

United States General Accounting Office, 2003b. Specialty Hospitals: Geographic
Location, Services Provided, and Financial Performance, Washington, D.C.

Winter, A., 2003. Comparing the mix of patients in various outpatient surgery settngs.
Health Affairs 22(6), 68-75.




                                                                                         29
          Table 1: Average Treatment Intensity, Health Outcomes, and Patient Characteristics in HRRs With and Without Specialty Hospital
                                                          Entry Between 1996 and 1999


                                            HRRs with Specialty Hospital Entry                  All US Without Specialty Hospital Entry           Matched HRRs Without Specialty Hospital Entry

                                     1993      1996      1999     % change % change      1993       1996       1999       % change % change       1993     1996     1999      % change % change
                                                                  1993-96 1996-99                                         1993-96 1996-99                                     1993-96 1996-99
                                     (1)        (2)      (3)         (4)      (5)        (6)         (7)        (8)          (9)     (10)         (11)     (12)     (13)        (14)     (15)
Measures of treatment intensity
1-year hospital expenditures         17,549     20,603   19,595       17.4%      -4.9%    16,292     18,783      18,750       15.3%       -0.2%   17,101   19,734    19,406       15.4%     -1.7%
1-day CATH                           0.0781     0.1048   0.1207        2.7%       1.6%    0.0738     0.1000      0.1205        2.6%        2.1%   0.0631   0.0901    0.1063        2.7%      1.6%
365-day CATH                         0.2116     0.2412   0.2533        3.0%       1.2%    0.2157     0.2428      0.2601        2.7%        1.7%   0.2097   0.2369    0.2522        2.7%      1.5%
1-day PTCA                           0.0190     0.0359   0.0524        1.7%       1.7%    0.0253     0.0419      0.0592        1.7%        1.7%   0.0242   0.0417    0.0548        1.8%      1.3%
365-day PTCA                         0.0596     0.0826   0.1036        2.3%       2.1%    0.0692     0.0912      0.1116        2.2%        2.0%   0.0679   0.0917    0.1094        2.4%      1.8%
1-day CABG                           0.0138     0.0256   0.0256        1.2%       0.0%    0.0193     0.0289      0.0303        1.0%        0.1%   0.0175   0.0262    0.0267        0.9%      0.1%
365-day CABG                         0.0708     0.0867   0.0792        1.6%      -0.7%    0.0780     0.0902      0.0856        1.2%       -0.5%   0.0725   0.0823    0.0776        1.0%     -0.5%

Measures of health outcomes
365-day mortality                    0.2205     0.2341   0.2348        1.4%      0.1%     0.2318     0.2311      0.2295       -0.1%       -0.2%   0.2326   0.2335    0.2350       0.1%      0.1%
365-day CHF readmission              0.0974     0.0945   0.0966       -0.3%      0.2%     0.0895     0.0888      0.0886       -0.1%        0.0%   0.0970   0.0995    0.1013       0.3%      0.2%
365-day AMI readmission              0.0238     0.0229   0.0242       -0.1%      0.1%     0.0249     0.0252      0.0271        0.0%        0.2%   0.0260   0.0264    0.0288       0.0%      0.2%

Patient characteristics
Age                                   77.29      77.79    78.35        0.6%       0.7%     77.09      77.48       77.95        0.5%        0.6%    77.21    77.77     78.29        0.7%      0.7%
Percent female                       0.5532     0.5573   0.5618        0.4%       0.4%    0.5431     0.5459      0.5473        0.3%        0.1%   0.5520   0.5636    0.5631        1.2%      0.0%
Percent black                        0.1126     0.1055   0.1026       -0.7%      -0.3%    0.0798     0.0780      0.0790       -0.2%        0.1%   0.0852   0.0888    0.0898        0.4%      0.1%
180-day prior hospital expenditure    1,665      1,931    2,006       16.0%       3.9%     1,439      1,651       1,752       14.7%        6.1%    1,634    1,927     1,992       17.9%      3.4%
Diagnosis of AMI                     0.1175     0.1094   0.1076       -0.8%      -0.2%    0.1265     0.1219      0.1238       -0.5%        0.2%   0.1215   0.1191    0.1188       -0.2%      0.0%
Diagnosis of IHD                     0.2054     0.2019   0.1944       -0.4%      -0.8%    0.2050     0.2047      0.1986        0.0%       -0.6%   0.2048   0.2054    0.1941        0.1%     -1.1%
Diagnosis of dysrythmia              0.1238     0.1230   0.1383       -0.1%       1.5%    0.1138     0.1154      0.1260        0.2%        1.1%   0.1103   0.1133    0.1251        0.3%      1.2%
Diagnosis of heart failure           0.1951     0.1826   0.1834       -1.3%       0.1%    0.1939     0.1758      0.1810       -1.8%        0.5%   0.2078   0.1854    0.1934       -2.2%      0.8%
Diagnosis of other heart condition   0.0654     0.0718   0.0780        0.6%       0.6%    0.0709     0.0728      0.0767        0.2%        0.4%   0.0679   0.0719    0.0787        0.4%      0.7%
Diagnosis of circulatory sys cond    0.0594     0.0611   0.0623        0.2%       0.1%    0.0565     0.0614      0.0604        0.5%       -0.1%   0.0564   0.0585    0.0569        0.2%     -0.2%
Diagnosis of cerebrovascular         0.2335     0.2502   0.2360        1.7%      -1.4%    0.2334     0.2481      0.2335        1.5%       -1.5%   0.2312   0.2465    0.2330        1.5%     -1.4%
Number of observations               11,843     28,170   55,109                          311,453    816,390   1,697,166                           29,369   73,812   145,964
          Table 2: Estimated Effect of Specialty Hospital Entry on Expenditures, Treatments, and Outcomes, Elderly Medicare Beneficiaries
                                                                 with Cardiac Illness
                                                          Matched Control HRRs                                                 All Control HRRs
                                                                                  93, 96, and 99                                                     93, 96, and 99
                                        1996 and               1993 and           data w/control           1996 and              1993 and            data w/control
                                        1999 data              1999 data          for linear trend         1999 data             1999 data           for linear trend
                                           (1)                    (2)                    (3)                  (4)                   (5)                     (6)
Measures of treatment intensity
1-year hospital expenditures                     -524 *                 194                -1,277 **                -763 ***               101                -1,653    ***
                                                (306)                 (468)                  (510)                 (246)                 (453)                  (405)
1-day CATH                                   -0.2122               -0.0364                -0.3131               -0.4447               -0.1344                -0.7531    *
                                            (0.3307)              (0.5739)               (0.6518)              (0.2791)              (0.4597)               (0.4233)
365-day CATH                                 -0.4659                0.0331                -0.8819               -0.3090                0.3975                -0.9599    *
                                            (0.4439)              (0.7182)               (0.7894)              (0.3572)              (0.6030)               (0.5395)
1-day PTCA                                    0.2569                0.2879                 0.2739               -0.0393                0.0870                -0.1692
                                            (0.2445)              (0.5125)               (0.4561)              (0.1679)              (0.4809)               (0.2875)
365-day PTCA                                  0.2622                0.3267                 0.2784                0.1897                0.4872                -0.0663
                                            (0.4307)              (0.4980)               (0.7925)              (0.1653)              (0.4094)               (0.5111)
1-day CABG                                   -0.1038                0.2097                -0.3942               -0.1480 *              0.0902                -0.3968    **
                                            (0.1529)              (0.2529)               (0.2592)              (0.0871)              (0.0851)               (0.1879)
365-day CABG                                 -0.3963                0.3016                -0.9989 **            -0.2299                0.2944                -0.7233    ***
                                            (0.2589)              (0.5723)               (0.4493)              (0.1475)              (0.2789)               (0.2156)
Measures of health outcomes
365-day mortality                            -0.0111                1.1154 **             -1.1425 **             0.1721                1.2652 ***            -0.8912 ***
                                            (0.2413)              (0.4331)               (0.5227)              (0.1398)              (0.3435)               (0.1807)
365-day CHF readmission                       0.1862               -0.4885 **              0.8361 **             0.3471 ***            0.0580                 0.6337 ***
                                            (0.1662)              (0.2234)               (0.3301)              (0.0879)              (0.1998)               (0.2273)
365-day AMI readmission                      -0.0846               -0.2116                 0.0118               -0.0352               -0.1403                 0.0817
                                            (0.1642)              (0.2229)               (0.2218)              (0.1321)              (0.1845)               (0.1717)

Number of observations                      303,055               242,285                344,267             2,596,835             2,075,571              2,920,131



Note: ***,**, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. Coefficients from models with discrete dependent variables multiplied by 100 for
ease of interpretation.
              Table 3: Estimated Effect of Specialty Hospital Entry on Expenditures, Treatments, and Outcomes, Elderly Medicare
                                                        Beneficiaries with AMI, 1993-99
                                                      Matched Control HRRs                                                All Control HRRs
                                                                               93, 96, and 99                                                      93, 96, and 99
                                      1996 and             1993 and            data w/control        1996 and                   1993 and           data w/control
                                      1999 data            1999 data           for linear trend      1999 data                  1999 data          for linear trend
                                         (1)                  (2)                     (3)               (4)                        (5)                    (6)
Measures of treatment intensity
1-year hospital expenditures                   -499                 -352                 -654              -1,011 **                    -312               -1,740 **
                                              (597)                (453)               (1002)                (425)                     (334)                 (778)
1-day CATH                                 -0.9145              -0.2517               -1.1682             -0.3883                   -0.4041               -0.3578
                                          (0.7347)             (1.5993)              (1.8619)            (0.4796)                  (0.9237)              (0.9898)
365-day CATH                               -0.0444              -2.1522                2.2761              0.4004                   -1.9614                3.0149 **
                                          (0.9392)             (1.8258)              (1.8750)            (0.7723)                  (1.5364)              (1.5316)
1-day PTCA                                 -0.7978               0.5121               -1.9482             -0.8299 *                  0.3754               -1.9377
                                          (0.6782)             (1.4482)              (1.7771)            (0.4439)                  (1.2249)              (1.2723)
365-day PTCA                                0.0641               0.6300               -0.5847              0.3485                    1.2341               -0.6108
                                          (1.2163)             (1.6317)              (2.0259)            (0.4694)                  (1.2996)              (0.6049)
1-day CABG                                 -0.4943              -0.0329               -0.8939             -0.5487                   -0.1755               -0.9364
                                          (0.4761)             (0.3810)              (0.8564)            (0.4258)                  (0.2306)              (0.7884)
365-day CABG                               -1.2821              -1.8013               -0.5246             -0.6091                   -1.6780                0.5337
                                          (1.2976)             (1.5610)              (1.5227)            (1.1101)                  (1.1543)              (1.2173)
Measures of health outcomes
365-day mortality                          -1.1014               0.3320               -2.7772             -0.5590                    1.2489               -2.3911 *
                                          (1.1136)             (1.9069)              (2.0229)            (0.6589)                  (1.6560)              (1.3624)
365-day CHF readmission                     1.7659 ***          -0.3871                4.1933 ***          1.0035 ***                0.1943                2.0285 **
                                          (0.5150)             (0.6142)              (1.1466)            (0.3541)                  (0.4223)              (0.9172)
365-day AMI readmission                     1.1393 *            -0.6965                2.8770 ***          0.7667                   -0.6149                2.2103 ***
                                          (0.6790)             (0.8443)              (0.9254)            (0.5779)                  (0.6491)              (0.8157)

Number of observations                      35,143              28,230                 40,104            318,669                    256,839               359,453

Note: ***,**, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. Coefficients from models with discrete dependent variables multiplied by 100 for
ease of interpretation.
            Table 4: Unadjusted and Regression-Adjusted Differences in Expenditures,
             Treatments, and Outcomes for Patients Admitted to Specialty and General
         Hospitals, Elderly Medicare Beneficiaries with Cardiac Illness Who Live in an HRR
                                   with a Specialty Hospital, 1999
                                                                                                       Effect of Specialty
                                                                                                            Hospital
                                                                                                        (Controlling for
                                                                                     Raw Difference       Hospital and
                                                       Speciality      General         (Specialty-           Patient
                                                     Hospital Mean   Hosptial Mean      General)        Characteristics)
                                                          (1)             (2)             (3)                  (4)
                Measures of treatment intensity
                1-year hospital expenditures                20,578          20,095              483                    610
                                                                                                                     (627)
                1-day CATH                                  0.3201          0.1009           0.2192                0.0996    ***
                                                                                                                 (0.0283)
                365-day CATH                                0.4681          0.2390           0.2291                0.0733    ***
                                                                                                                 (0.0279)
                1-day PTCA                                  0.1564          0.0417           0.1147                0.0636    **
                                                                                                                 (0.0254)
                365-day PTCA                                0.2206          0.0938           0.1268                0.0549    ***
                                                                                                                 (0.0207)
                1-day CABG                                  0.1027          0.0201           0.0826                0.0574    ***
                                                                                                                 (0.0160)
                365-day CABG                                0.2064          0.0704           0.1360                0.0784    ***
                                                                                                                 (0.0236)
                Measures of health outcomes
                365-day mortality                           0.1403          0.2387          -0.0984               -0.0337 **
                                                                                                                 (0.0138)
                365-day CHF readmission                     0.0772          0.0993          -0.0221               -0.0020
                                                                                                                 (0.0060)
                365-day AMI readmission                     0.0206          0.0260          -0.0054               -0.0031
                                                                                                                 (0.0025)

                Patient characteristics
                Age                                          76.04           78.53             -2.49
                Percent female                              0.4591          0.5632          -0.1041
                Percent black                               0.0303          0.0916          -0.0613
                180-day prior hospital expenditure            1244            2077              -833
                Diagnosis of AMI                            0.0823          0.1104          -0.0281
                Diagnosis of IHD                            0.4033          0.1830           0.2203
                Diagnosis of dysrythmia                     0.1232          0.1387          -0.0155
                Diagnosis of heart failure                  0.0973          0.1896          -0.0923
                Diagnosis of other heart condition          0.0918          0.0818           0.0100
                Diagnosis of circulatory sys cond           0.0896          0.0578           0.0318
                Diagnosis of cerebrovascular                0.1124          0.2388          -0.1264
                Number of observations                       4,520          75,000
Note: ***,**, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. Coefficients from models with
discrete dependent variables multiplied by 100 for ease of interpretation.
  Appendix Table 1: Probit Estimates of the Effect of HRR Characteristics on the
                     Probability of Specialty Hospital Entry

                                               Parameter   Standard Error
Medicare enrollees ('000)                           0.0051         0.0038

Population ('000,000)                              -0.0836         0.3270

Acute care beds/1000 residents                     -0.4055         0.7455

Hospital employees/1000 residents                   0.4016         0.2753

RNs/1000 residents                                 -0.8506         1.0313

Medicare total noncapitated payment/enrollee        0.0057         0.0025

Medicare inpatient hospital payment/enrollee       -0.0062         0.0030

Medicare professional/lab payment/enrollee         -0.0059         0.0031

Medicare outpatient payment/enrollee               -0.0138         0.0070

Medicare home health payment/enrollee              -0.0060         0.0031

MDs/1000 residents                                  0.3782         1.3379

Primary care MDs/1000 residents                    -0.3517         1.3352

Specialist MDs/1000 residents                      -0.3877         1.3398

Number of observations                                 306
 Appendix Table 2: Regression Estimates of the Effect of Specialty Hospital Entry,
      Patient Characteristics, and Hospital Characteristics on Expenditures
                                      Matched Control HRRs            All Control HRRs
                                    Parameter    Standard Error   Parameter     Standard Error

Coefficient estimate
Entry HRR                                   -524            306           -763             246

age 65-69                                  3172             193          3386               79

age 70-74                                  3436             219          3637               73

age 75-79                                  3358             270          3544               65

age 80-84                                  2621             169          2744               52

age 85-89                                  1482             141          1622               47

female                                      -878            102           -927              41

black                                      1813             265          1180              110

diagnosis of AMI                           4006             429          3910              118

diagnosis of IHD                           1751             292          2231               95

diagnosis of dysrythmia                   -2845             181          -2679              66

diagnosis of heart failure                  823             307           675               87

diagnosis of other heart cond              2149             321          2589              135

diagnosis of circulatory disorder          6297             419          6359              115

for-profit hospital                        1007             337           719              149

nonprofit hospital                          -291            316           -138             106

system hospital                             601             205           328               86

large hospital                             1392             268           1285              89

teaching hospital                          1781             424           2303             154

year=1999                                   -243            187             48              63

180day prior hospital expenditure           206              13            189               4
('000)

Number of observations                  303,055




                                                                                                 35
