                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        A RE-EXAMINATION OF THE BORDER EFFECT

                                          Yuriy Gorodnichenko
                                              Linda Tesar

                                          Working Paper 11706
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11706


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2005




We are grateful to Olivier Coibion, Andrew Coleman, Kathryn Dominguez, Charles Engel, Lutz Kilian,
Serena Ng, David Parsley, John Rogers, Barbara Rossi, Matthew Shapiro, Gary Solon, and participants of
the international seminar at the University of Michigan for helpful comments. The usual disclaimer applies.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Yuriy Gorodnichenko and Linda Tesar. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
A Re-Examination of the Border Effect
Yuriy Gorodnichenko and Linda Tesar
NBER Working Paper No. 11706
October 2005
JEL No. F3, F40, F41

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper reexamines the evidence on the border effect, the finding that the border drives a wedge
between domestic and foreign prices. We argue that the border effect can be inflated by the volatility
and persistence of the nominal exchange rate and by the cross-country heterogeneity in the
distribution of within-country price differentials. We develop a simple framework to separate the
border effect from these confounding factors. Using price data from Engel and Rogers (1996) and
Parsley and Wei (2001), we show that after controlling for the confounding factors the border effect
between the U.S. and Canada and the U.S. and Japan is negligible.

Yuriy Gorodnichenko
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 49109-1220
ygorodni@umich.edu

Linda Tesar
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 49109-1220
and NBER
ltesar@umich.edu
1. Introduction
One of the salient findings in empirical international economics is that an administrative border
between geographical regions reduces the volume of trade and leads to a price discrepancy
across these regions. This regularity has been called the border effect and has been documented
in numerous studies. In an influential set of papers, Engel and Rogers (1996, 2000, 2001) find
that even after controlling for distance, there is a substantial difference in prices across the
U.S.-Canadian border. Parsley and Wei (2001) perform a similar exercise on U.S.-Japanese
data and find a large border effect. Using data on quantities, McCallum (1995) finds that
intranational trade flows are, ceteris paribus, 22 times larger than international trade flows. In a
similar vein, provincial borders in Canada (Helliwell and Verdier, 2001) and state borders in
the U.S.A. (Wolf, 2000) account for a significant fraction of the decreased trade flows across
provinces and states relative to trade flows within states and provinces. Furthermore,
Ceglowski (2003) finds that provincial borders in Canada account for a significant fraction of
the discrepancy of prices across provinces. This has important welfare implications and
Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000) include the border effect in their list of the major puzzles in
international economics.
           The presence of a border effect in and of itself is not surprising. However, the
magnitude of the estimated border effect is surprisingly – many would say unbelievably –
large. The border between the U.S. and Canada, after controlling for distance and other
characteristics, is equivalent to 75,000 miles (Table 3, p. 1117, Engel and Rogers (1996)).
Parsley and Wei (2001) find the border between the U.S. and Japan is equivalent to 43,000
trillion miles (note that the distance to the Moon is a mere 238,900 miles). Likewise, there are
few reasons to believe that impediments to trade between states or provinces are large enough
to affect trade flows.1 Finding a significant border effect where it should not be found, and
finding coefficients that are orders of magnitude larger than one can plausibly defend, raises
doubts about the validity of the empirical methodology used to isolate the border effect.
           The key innovation of Engel and Rogers (1996) was to use city-level price information
to estimate the quantitative importance of an international border on price differentials. Their
insight was that n-city prices could be transformed into n(n-1)/2 city-pair combinations, so that


1
    For example, there are explicit legal norms (e.g., U.S. constitution) prohibiting limitation of intranational trade.

                                                           -1-
the border effect could be measured as the difference observed in the sample of cross-border
pairs relative to the within-country pairs. One difficulty with this approach, however, is that
significant differences in the distribution of within-country prices across countries can
confound the border effect. We call this the country heterogeneity effect. We show below that
in the U.S.-Canada case, correcting for differences in the within-country volatility of price
differentials alone eliminates the border effect.
       The second important difference between cross-border and within-country pairs is that
the exchange rate affects only the cross-border pairs. This has two implications for cross-border
pairs relative to within-country pairs. First, because nominal exchange rates are highly volatile,
cross-border pairs are automatically more volatile relative to within-country pairs (the
exchange rate effect). Second, movements in the nominal exchange rate are highly persistent.
Holding the variance of the innovations to the nominal exchange rate constant, the more
persistent the shocks, the higher the variance of the real exchange rate (the persistence effect).
Hence, the border effect is confounded with the volatility and persistence of nominal exchange
rates. We are not the first to identify this issue. For example, Engel and Rogers (2001) discuss
possible ways of correcting for the exchange rate effect when more than two countries are
analyzed. Our contribution is to introduce a unified framework to decompose and estimate the
border effect, correcting for these possible biases in the border coefficient, even in the two-
country case.
       We use price data from Engel and Rogers (1996) and Parsley and Wei (2001) to
estimate the border effect for U.S./Canadian and U.S./Japanese cities, respectively. In contrast
to previous studies, we show that the border effect is economically and statistically negligible
after accounting for factors that confound the border effect. In the U.S.-Canada sample,
correction for cross-country heterogeneity alone reduces the border effect from over 71,000 km
to 47 km. In the case of the U.S. and Japan, the role of exchange rate volatility is more
important. After correcting for the exchange rate effect and the persistence effect, we find that
the half-life of price differentials between U.S.-U.S. city pairs and between U.S.-Japan city
pairs is statistically and economically indistinguishable.
       The structure of the paper is as follows. In section 2, we motivate the econometric
specification that is conventionally used to estimate the border effect. In Section 3, we discuss
potential problems in using the standard econometric specification to estimate the border effect.
Specifically, we argue that country heterogeneity, persistence and nominal exchange rate

                                                -2-
effects are likely to upwardly bias estimates of the border effect. Then we present a simple
method to control for these biases. In Section 4, we use U.S./Canada and U.S./Japan price data
sets analyzed in previous studies to re-estimate the border effect after correcting for the biases
we identify. We conclude in Section 5.

2. Trade Costs and Dispersion of Prices
In this section we derive the estimating equation used in much of the literature on border effects
in goods prices. We begin with the law of one price (LOOP) implied by arbitrage in goods
markets. Specifically, the no-arbitrage condition implies that identical goods should sell for the
same price in different locations, after adjusting for trade costs and differences in currency
denomination.2 To fix ideas, define Pitk as the price of good k in location i at time t and St as

the exchange rate that converts prices from location j’s currency to location i’s currency. Tijk is

the (iceberg) cost of trade between locations i and j for per unit of good k, and Qijtk = Pitk St Pjtk

is the real exchange rate. Note that the specification of the trade cost here is very general and
includes the cost of shipping (which could be proportional to distance), tariffs, and any other
administrative barrier that might impede the flow of goods. Then, the law of one price states
that
          1
              ≤ Qijtk ≤ Tijk ,                                                                   (1)
         Tijk

that is, the price differential between two locations cannot exceed the cost of trade between two
locations.3 Equivalently, condition (1) can be stated as −tijk ≤ qijtk ≤ tijk , where (here and

henceforth) small letters denote logs of the respective variables. Observe that qijtk are

constrained to the interval [ −tijk , tijk ] , which is called the band of inaction, and σ ( qijtk ) , the time

series standard deviation of qijtk , is a function of the trade cost tijk .




2
  Anderson and van Wincoop (2004) and Coleman (2005) discuss possible pitfalls of this approach to measuring
trade costs.
3
  We assume that the trade costs are symmetric going from i to j and j to i. This need not be the case, and the
empirical tests below will not impose symmetry.

                                                      -3-
                   To pin down the connection between the real exchange rate and trade costs, assume that
qijtk is uniformly distributed in [ −tijk , tijk ] 4 and the cost of trade has the specific form

Tijk = exp ( const + β1 ln d ij + β 2 Borderij + φk + α i + α j + ε ijk ) , where dij is the distance between

locations i and j, Borderij is a dummy variable equal to one if locations are separated by a
border and zero otherwise, αi is the cost of trade specific to location i, φk is the cost of trade

specific to good k, ε ij is a random time-invariant component in the cost of trade between

locations i and j. Here distance proxies for shipping costs, costs of acquiring information, etc.
Then, the standard deviation of the real exchange rate is proportional to the log of the trade
costs:
                   σ ( qijtk ) ∝ tijk = const + β1 ln d ij + β 2 Borderij + φk + α i + α j + ε ijk .              (2)

The distance equivalent of the border—that is, the border effect—is equal to exp( β 2 / β1 ) .5 Note

that this is a cross-sectional regression because σ ( qijtk ) collapses time series observations of qijtk

into a single number. Importantly, σ ( qijtk ) is scale invariant (that is, Pitk , Pjtk , St can be in

arbitrary measurement units and E ( qijtk ) does not have to be zero) and thus σ ( qijtk ) can be used

for price indices which are normalized averages of prices for different goods.6
                   Engel and Rogers (1996, 2000, 2001) and the subsequent literature use the standard
deviation of changes in the real exchange rate as the dependant variable in (2). Taking the
difference of the real exchange rate helps reduce the persistence of the real exchange. We


4
 We follow the literature in making this assumption, however, it is not at all obvious that the real exchange rate
would generally exhibit such a distribution. See Coleman (2005) for a discussion of the behavior of the real
exchange rate with storage and capacity constraints on transport.
5
    Parsley and Wei (2001) suggest an alternative measure of the border effect: d × exp( β 2 / β1 − 1) where d is the
average distance between cities. Since this measure is a monotonic transformation of exp( β 2 / β1 ) , our qualitative
conclusions do not change if we use this alternative measure.
6
  Under stronger assumptions, one can infer trade costs directly from price differentials. Specifically, if
Pit = Tij S t Pjt holds, then the deviation of real exchange rate from unity reveals the size of the trade cost, that is,
     k     k          k




qij ,t = tij . Thus, to estimate the border effect on price differentials, it is enough to consider a specification like:
     k     k




    qij ,t = tij = const + φk + α i + α j + β1 ln d ij + β 2 Borderij + ε ijt . This avenue is pursued by Crucini, Telmer and
     k         k                                                          k



Zachariadis (2000), Parsley and Wei (2002) and others. Alternatively, Obstfeld and Taylor (1997) use TAR
models to estimate directly inaction bounds tij from time series of qij ,t . They regress the estimates of tij on
                                                           k                         k                                  k



variables like distance, nominal exchange rate, etc. These two approaches can be used only for prices of identical
goods across locations and cannot be applied to price indices because the real exchange rate is not scale-invariant.

                                                                      -4-
follow the literature and use specification (2) to estimate the border effect. In the tests below
we use the standard deviation of both level and changes in the real exchange rate.

3. Potential Problems in Isolating the Border Effect

3.1 Country heterogeneity effect
The first problem that arises in estimating (2) stems from possible differences in within-country
price dispersion that become confounded with the border effect. For concreteness, suppose that
the two countries are Canada and the U.S. and cities are the relevant geographical units. We
denote pairs of cities by UU (US-US), UC (US-Canada) and CC (Canada-Canada). The border
effect in (2) measures by how much a ceteris paribus transition from an intra-national city pair
(UU or CC) to an international city pair (UC) raises the average volatility of the price
differential. Intuitively, the border effect should reflect factors that are specific to UC pairs, and
should not include factors that stem from differences between UU and CC pairs. To put this in
the language of the program evaluation/treatment effects literature, the border coefficient
should pick up the effect associated with the treatment of crossing the border. If, in the absence
of the border treatment, city-pairs differ for other (non-border related) reasons (e.g. more
competition or more variety could yield greater price dispersion across US city pairs relative to
Canadian city pairs), one should condition on this heterogeneity to isolate the effect of the
treatment. Smith (2004) discusses the consequences of ignoring such heterogeneity in the
benchmark group.
       In practice, there is heterogeneity across cities as well as countries. As we show below,
it turns out to be important how the dispersion for each city pair is decomposed into a city and
country contribution. To simplify exposition, we omit for now the error term and controls for
distance and commodities. For all pairs, the volatility of the real exchange rate is described by:

        σ ij = β UCij + γ UUU ij + γ C CCij + ∑ s =1α s Ds ,
                                                  N
                                                                                               (3)

where UC, UU, CC are dummy variables for UC, UU, and CC city pairs, Ds is a city dummy
equal to one if s=i or s=j and zero otherwise and N is the number of cities. Without loss of
generality, suppose that 1,…,k cities are in Canada. The average volatility for types of city pairs
is then given by:
       US-Canada:             σ UC = β + αU + αC ,                                             (4)


                                                      -5-
          US-US:                       σ UU = γ U + 2αU ,                                                                         (5)

          Canada-Canada: σ CC = γ C + 2αC ,                                                                                       (6)

where αC =           ∑          α s is the average city effect for Canadian cities and αU =                      ∑              α s is
                         k                                                                                           N
                 1                                                                                         1
                 k       s =1                                                                             N −k       s = k +1


the average city effect for US cities. The coefficients β , γ U , γ C measure the contribution to
volatility of being a US-Canada pair, a US-US pair and a Canada-Canada respectively. For
example, if γ U < 0 —i.e., the country component of volatility net of the average U.S. city
effect is negative—the volatility of the real exchange rate for US-US pairs is less than the sum
of the volatilities of US cities. Coefficients β , γ U , γ C can take negative and positive values.
          Unfortunately, while (3) provides an exact decomposition of variance in theory, we
cannot estimate (3) in practice because the UU and CC dummies are collinear with the set of
city dummies and the UC dummy.7 Specifically,

          CCij = − 12 UCij + 12 ∑ s =1 Ds ,
                                          k
                                                                                                                                  (7)

          UU ij = − 12 UCij + 12 ∑ s =k +1 Ds .
                                          N
                                                                                                                                  (8)

          One possible identification strategy is to follow Engel and Rogers (1996). ER
effectively substitute (7) and (8) into (3) to eliminate CCij and UUij so that (see Appendix for
derivations):

σ ij       = βUCij + γ UUU ij + γ C CCij + ∑ s =1α s Ds
                                                      N



           = [ β − 12 (γ U + γ C )]UCij + ∑ s =k +1 ( 12 γ U + α s ) Ds + ∑ s =1 ( 12 γ C + α s ) Ds .
                                                 N                              k
                                                                                                                                  (9)

The country heterogeneity is now absorbed in the city-fixed effects. The coefficients on the
border dummy in the ER specification measures the increase in the volatility relative to the
average volatility for intracountry pairs. The implicit assumption is that γ U = γ C , i.e., country-
specific contributions to volatility are identical. The problem, as we show below, is that in the
U.S-Canada case, in particular, country effects are quite different. When this happens, using the
average intranational volatility as the benchmark can be confusing because [ β − 12 (γ U + γ C )]

can be greater than zero (i.e. one finds a border effect) even when γ C < β < γ U . In other words,

7
  This means that {β , γ U , γ C } and {αU , α C } are not identified separately. For example, an alternative set of
parameter values is {β , γU , γC , α C , αU } where β = β + αU + α C , γU = γ U + 2αU , γC = γ C + 2α C , α C = 0 and
α = 0 .
    U




                                                               -6-
one finds a border effect even when from the U.S. perspective crossing the border effectively
reduces the variance of the real exchange rate. In the absence of a structural model, we do not
know if the arithmetic average, or any other combination of within-country variances, is the
appropriate benchmark for evaluating the effect of the border.
        We propose an alternative decomposition into country and city effects. One can
rearrange terms in (3) as follows (see Appendix for derivations):

σ ij     = β UCij + γ UUU ij + γ C CCij + ∑ s =1 α s Ds =
                                              N



         = ( β + αC + αU )UCij + (γ U + 2αU )UU ij + (γ C + 2α C )CCij + ∑ s =1α s Ds + ∑ s =k +1αˆ s Ds =
                                                                                    k             N



         = bUCUCij + bCC CCij + bUUUU ij + ∑ s =1α s Ds + ∑ s =k +1αˆ s Ds ,
                                                  k                  N
                                                                                                      (10)

where αˆ s = α s − αU if s is a US city (i.e., deviation of the city effect from the national mean),

α s = α s − αC if s is a Canadian city. Because      ∑          α s = ∑ s =k +1αˆ s = 0 , dummies CCij and UUij
                                                          k              N
                                                          s =1


are not collinear with other right-hand side variables.8 The implicit assumption for
identification of the border effect is that the average city effect is the same across countries.
Without loss of generality the average city effect is normalized to zero.
        The first advantage of our approach is that bUC, bUU, and bCC—the coefficients on UC,
UU and CC— now measure the average volatility for US-Canada, US-US, and Canada-Canada
city pairs so that the estimated coefficients are directly related to the objects of interest in
equations (4)-(6). Therefore, the differences bUC − bCC and bUC − bUU give meaningful estimates
of increases in the volatility of the real exchange rate when one goes from an intra-national city
pair to an international city pair. The second advantage is that we can separately estimate the
border effect for each country provided αU = αC : that is, we can estimate bUC − bCC = β − γ C

and bUC − bUU = β − γ U . Because rearrangement in (10) and (9) is purely algebraic, (10) and (9)
have the same explanatory power (e.g., the same R2) and one can back out coefficients in
specification (10) from specification (9) and vice versa.9
        To get further intuition, abstract from city-specific effects by setting α s = 0 for all s. In

the ER specification (9), the border effect is equal to σ UC − 12 (σ UU + σ CC ) . The border

coefficient captures the variance of cross-border pairs net of the variance of within-country

8
 Under this restriction, the addition of the CC dummy does not require that we drop an arbitrary city dummy.
9
 One can also rearrange (3) so that the right-hand side variables are border dummy, country and city dummies.
This rearrangement yields a specification similar to (9).

                                                      -7-
pairs. When intracountry variances are similar (in the extreme case σ UU = σ CC ) the border
coefficient tells us exactly what intuitively we understand it should – it reflects the variation of
cross-border pairs that exceeds the variance of within-country pairs. However, suppose that
there is no difference between the variances of U.S. and cross-border pairs (and therefore no
border effect from the U.S. perspective) and that the within-country variance in Canada is
smaller than in the U.S. Setting σ UC = σ UU > σ CC shows that the border coefficient in (9) mixes
the border effect with differences in the average volatility of price differentials for intranational
pairs across countries. Intuitively, the international price differentials reflect both the effect of
crossing the border – the object of interest – and the effect of trading with cities located in a
country with greater (or lesser) price dispersion.10
         The implications are easy to grasp. First, treating UU and CC pairs as a homogenous
group when they are not can produce misleading results. Second, to identify correctly the
border effect, one has to control for within-country differences by introducing country-specific
dummies as in (10).11 Third, if the border effect measured by the coefficient on the UC dummy
is between the estimates of the coefficients on the UU and CC dummies, one cannot claim to
have found a significant border effect. Hence, the border dummy UC must be statistically (and
economically) greater than the coefficients on the UU and CC dummies. Of course, if UU is the
omitted category, then the Border coefficient must be statistically greater than zero and greater
than the coefficient on the CC dummy. The upshot is that the researcher needs to augment (2)
with the CC dummy as follows:
         σ ( qijk ,t ) = const + φk + αi + α j + β1 ln d ij + β 2 Borderij + β 3CCij + ε ijk ,     (11)

where Border is the dummy variable for US-Canada pairs, city-specific effects are constrained
as in (10), β 2 measures the increase in the dispersion in the transition from a US-US pair to

US-Canada pair and β 2 − β 3 measures the increase for the transition from a Canada-Canada
pair to a US-Canada pair holding everything else constant. In general, the benchmark
(untreated) group is heterogeneous (i.e., β 3 ≠ 0 ) and, therefore, the researcher should compute


10
   If we had powers to conduct a controlled experiment, we would take two cities in the same country, draw a
border between them and measure how the border changes the volatility of the price differential. In reality, one has
to rely on specifications like (9) or (10) to compute the counterfactual.
11
   If it were clear why price-differentials systematically differ across cities and across countries, one could
condition on the precise factors that explain those differences. In the absence of such a theory, however, a
combination of city- and country-dummies must be used to proxy for those effects.

                                                          -8-
the border effect relative to the US-US and Canada-Canada benchmark. We suggest using a
conservative estimate of the border effect:

                      {
         BE = min exp ( β 2 / β1 ) , exp ([ β 2 − β 3 ] / β1 ) ,}                                          (12)

so that the border effect measures the minimal increase in the transition from an intranational to
an international pairs of locations.12
         We show below that there is a significant difference between within-country volatility
measures for the Canada and the U.S., and failing to account for that difference dramatically
increases the estimated border coefficient.

3.2 The persistence effect
In the case we considered above, arbitrage is assumed to be instantaneous, that is, the arbitrager
can reallocate any quantity of any good within an arbitrarily small time period. Furthermore,
the implicit but critical assumption in deriving (2) is that the analyzed real exchange rates have
the same persistence and volatility of innovations. In practice, it is far more likely that
adjustment costs prevent instantaneous arbitrage and that there is gradual convergence of the
real exchange rate back to and perhaps within the inaction band. Because of this gradual
adjustment, Taylor and Taylor (2004) observe that it is important to know how much the real
exchange rate deviates from its steady state and how quickly it reverts to equilibrium. Put
differently, it is interesting to divide the variance of the real exchange rate into innovation
variance and propagation. The relevant objects are then the size of the shocks to the real
exchange rate and the speed at which those shocks are dissipated.
         Measures of volatility such as σ ( qijk ,t ) cannot reveal this information because they

combine the persistence of qijk ,t and the volatility of the innovations to qijk ,t into a single

number. In fact, σ ( qijk ,t ) increases in the volatility and persistence of innovations.13 Thus, real


12
   It is true that in reporting the minimum of the two values in (12) we pick the smallest border coefficient and the
alternative estimate of the border may be dramatically larger. However, without a structural model, it is impossible
to reconcile two different estimates of the same border. Therefore, we report the more conservative estimate.
13
   To see the point, consider the following example where the real exchange rate follows the process
qt = α qt −1 + ε t where the innovations are ε t ~ iid (0, σ ) and α measures the persistence of the real exchange
                                                          2



rate. Provided α < 1 , the variance of the respective real exchange rates is σ ( qt ) = σ       (1 − α 2 ) . Hence, an
                                                                               2            2



increase in the persistence of the series increases the variance of the real exchange rate. See Appendix for
derivations for AR(l) processes.

                                                         -9-
exchange rates with the same band [-t,t] can have different variances because some of the real
exchange rates are more persistent or have more volatile innovations than other real exchange
rates. To illustrate the point, consider two real exchange rates which have the same band [-t,t]
and all other characteristics but have different persistence. If a more persistent real exchange
rate happens to be associated with international pairs of locations, then a greater variance of the
real exchange rate would be attributed to the border when in fact there is no genuine border
effect in going from one country to another. Hence, it is important to control for differences in
the persistence of real exchange rates.14
         Persistence in the real exchange rate is interesting in itself as a measure of market
integration. Empirical work suggests that those factors that one might expect to result in a
breakdown of the law of one price also contribute to higher persistence in real exchange rate
differentials. For example, Parsley and Wei (1996), Ceglowski (2003), Imbs et al (2003) and
others find that distance increases the persistence of real exchange rates. Crucini and Shintani
(2002) find that the persistence of the real exchange rate is systematically different across intra-
and international city pairs.
         In summary, the border coefficient in equations (2) and (4) reflects the extent to which
the variance of international price differentials differs from the variance of intra-national price
differentials. The variances are a function of the persistence in the price differentials as well as
the size of the shocks to the price differentials (the innovations). Thus, it will be important to
disentangle these effects both within and across countries to understand the sources of the
border effect. In what follows, we use the half-life (HL) of an innovation to the real exchange
rate as a measure of persistence and the standard deviations of innovations to the real exchange
rate as a measure of the size of the shocks to the real exchange rate.15

3.3 The nominal exchange rate effect
         A final problem with interpreting the border effect based on differences in the volatility
of real exchange rates is that the behavior of international price pairs is confounded with
14
   Engel and Rogers (1996) examine the variance of differences in the real exchange rate. If the real exchange rate
were to follow a random walk, this would eliminate the persistence effect. However, as we show below,
differencing does not fully purge the persistence and exchange rate effects.
15
   The largest root of the companion matrix associated with lag polynomial in (16) is another possible measure of
persistence. The main drawback of this alternative measure is that it ignores short run dynamics captured by other
roots. This can be particularly important when there is a root close to the largest root. See Kilian and Zha (2002)
for a discussion of the half-life as a measure of persistence. We also considered interquantile range of innovations
to the real exchange rate but qualitative conclusions do not change.

                                                       - 10 -
nominal exchange rate volatility. In effect, intracountry city pairs have a fixed exchange rate
while intercountry city pairs face floating exchange rates. Since volatile nominal exchange rate
affects only international city pairs, the volatility of the real exchange rate induced by changes
in the nominal exchange rate is fully attributed to the border effect. Moreover, the nominal
exchange rate is not only volatile, it is also highly persistent (e.g., Meese and Rogoff 1983),
which further increases the volatility of the real exchange rate for international city pairs.
Hence, there is an overlap between the persistence effect and the nominal exchange rate effect.
To identify the border effect, one has to control for the nominal exchange rate when comparing
intra- and international city pairs.
            Engel and Rogers (2001) use multiple countries to separate the border effect from the
volatility of nominal exchange rates.16 We suggest an alternative procedure that is applicable to
two-country cases. Specifically, we condition the log ratio of prices on the nominal exchange
rate and consider variation in the log ratio of prices that is unrelated to movements in the
nominal exchange rate. Our econometric specification is:

                 pijtk = ∑ m =1ψ m ,ijk pijk ,t −m + ∑ m =0 ϕ m ,ijk st −m + ωijtk ,
                             l                           l
                                                                                                           (13)

where st = ln( St ) , pijtk = ln( Pitk / Pjtk ) , ωijtk is an innovation in pijtk that is uncorrelated with

changes in the nominal exchange rate. Note that we include the current value of the nominal
exchange rate in the right-hand side of (13), which may introduce simultaneity bias in the
estimates of the coefficients. On the other hand, if the current value is not included in the list of
regressors, ωijtk includes variation that stems from innovations in the nominal exchange rate

and, hence, using the standard deviation of ωijtk should bias the estimate of the border effect

upwards. In our applications we find that in either case the qualitative results are similar, which
is not surprising given stickiness of prices. Of course, for intranational city pairs (13) reduces to

pijtk = ∑ m =1ψ m ,ijk pijk ,t −m + ωijtk .
             l



            Note that if cities are small relative to the economy, each city takes the exchange rate as
given, i.e., there is no feedback from discrepancy in prices between any two cities to the
exchange rate. Indeed, it is unlikely that price discrepancy for any good in any city pair


16
     Specifically, Engel and Rogers include σ ( sijt ) as a regressor in (2). Note that this does not fix the persistence
and country heterogeneity effects and, hence, these authors still find a significant border effect.

                                                                       - 11 -
influences bilateral trade in such a way so as to affect the exchange rate between two
nations.17,18
              Importantly, in (13) we control for the persistence and size of innovations in the
nominal exchange rate. Specifically, σ (ωijtk ) measures the size of innovations to price

differentials and coefficients {ψ 1,ijk ,...,ψ l ,ijk } capture the dynamics of the price differentials

holding the nominal exchange rate constant. Thus, σ (ωijtk ) is the counterfactual volatility of

innovations to the price differential for international pairs that would have been if observed
exchange rate were fixed. In a similar way, we can construct the counterfactual persistence of
price differentials for international pairs. To do this, we hit (13) with a unit shock ωijtk and use

the estimated {ψ 1,ijk ,...,ψ l ,ijk } to find the impulse response of pijtk to the shock. Because ωijtk is

orthogonal to st by construction and there is not feedback from pijtk to st , the impulse response

shows the dynamics of pijtk when the exchange rate is held constant. Then we use the impulse

response to find the half-life, which is the last period when the impulse response is greater than
0.5 in absolute value. Now we can compare the constructed counterfactuals for international
pairs with actual counterparts for intranational pairs because the actual data and counterfactuals
operate under the same fixed exchange rate regime.
           Analogously to (11), we can now estimate the effect of the border on the persistence of
the real exchange rate and the volatility of innovations to the real exchange rate from
            m ijk = β + β ln d + β Border + β CC + φ + α + α + ξ k ,
            HL                                                                                         (14)
                     0   1    ij  2      ij  3  ij  k   i   j   ij


            σˆ (ωijtk ) = β 0 + β1 ln d ij + β 2 Borderij + β 3CCij + φk + αi + α j + ζ ijk ,          (15)

      m ijk and σˆ (ω k ) are estimated according to the procedure we describe above.19 Note
where HL             ijt


that in (15) there is no bias from the persistence effect because ωijtk are uncorrelated innovations



17
  Of course, this argument holds only if cities are small relative to the country. For example, this would not hold if
we consider Prague of the Czech Republic or Vienna of Austria. Here we assume implicitly that the share of
variation in prices at the city level due to macroeconomic shocks is small. In our data, the share is tiny (about 5-
10%) and thus macroeconomic shocks are relatively unimportant and our quantitative and qualitative conclusions
should not be sensitive to the relaxing this assumption.
18
     We test if the assumption of no dynamic feedback holds in the data and we cannot reject the null that lags of pijt
                                                                                                                      k



are jointly zero in a regression analogous to (13) with nominal exchange rate as the dependent variable.

                                                            - 12 -
to real exchange rate. Thus, this approach solves all the problems we have identified above. It
controls for the volatility of the nominal exchange rate for international city pairs in the two-
country case. It separates the persistence and volatility of innovations in price differentials.
              To illustrate the importance of the nominal exchange rate volatility, we also compute
half-lives and variance of innovations from:

              qijtk = ∑ m =1 γ m ,ijk qijk ,t −m + ηijtk ,
                           l
                                                                                                        (16)

where we do not control for the nominal exchange rate effect. By re-estimating (14) and (15)
     m ijk and σˆ (η k ) obtained from (16) and comparing the obtained results with the results in
with HL             ijt


the original (14) and (15), we can assess the effect of the nominal exchange rate on the
estimates of the border effect.
           Observe that, in contrast to other studies, we do not restrict intercepts and slopes in (13)
or (16) to be the same across i, j, and k because imposing the same {ψ 1 ,...,ψ l } for all i, j, and k
can produce misleading results if the underlying adjustment processes are heterogeneous
(Pesaran and Smith 1995). For example, Imbs et al (2005) show that this restriction biases
upwards estimated half-lives of the real exchange rate.

3.4 Discussion
In summary, we have identified three problems with using price dispersion to estimate the
border effect. First, to identify the border effect one has to control for cross-country
heterogeneity in the distribution of prices within countries. Second, the volatility of the nominal
exchange rate will in and of itself bias the border coefficient upward since it only affects cross-
border city pairs. Finally, equation (2) can be justified by instantaneous arbitrage while the
adjustment of real exchange rate is likely to be gradual. Thus, in estimating the border effect
one has to control for the persistence of the real exchange rate.


19
     Note that we use estimates of half-lives and σ (ωijt ) as right-hand side variables in (14) and (15). This may be
                                                             k



especially important for half-lives as the estimates of slopes in (16) are biased in finite samples. If the error in
estimates of HL is classical, this does not affect the estimates of parameters in (14) and (15). To verify the
importance of the bias for our conclusions, we use bootstrap as in Kilian (1998) and Inoue and Kilian (2002) to
correct for the finite sample bias in the estimates of HL even for integrated series. Specifically, we resample
residuals from the model (13) combined with sijt = sij ,t + ε ij ,t (for example, Meese and Rogoff (1983) motivate this
process for the nominal exchange rate) and then use this model to construct bootstrap replications of the data. This
approach is similar to Kilian (1999). The qualitative results do not change for bias-corrected estimates of the half-
lives.

                                                                 - 13 -
         To address these three issues, we suggest that the persistence of real exchange rates and
the volatility of innovations to real exchange rates should be considered separately as in
specifications (14) and (15) even in the two-country case. In particular, specification (15)
measures the effect of the border on the size of innovations to price differentials after
controlling for the nominal exchange rate and country heterogeneity effects. Likewise,
specification (14) measures the effect of the border on the speed of adjustment in prices after
controlling for the country heterogeneity, persistence and nominal exchange rate effects. This
approach provides a unified framework to control/correct for the identified biases (country
heterogeneity, persistence, nominal exchange rate) and to investigate how the border affects
volatility and persistence of price differentials.

4 A Re-estimation of the Border Effect for Canada-U.S. and Japan-U.S. Pairs
In this section we apply our method to estimate the border effect on the volatility and speed of
convergence of price differentials. To contrast the results with previous findings, we use the
data collected by Engel and Rogers (1996) and Parsley and Wei (2001) who find large border
effects for U.S./Canada and U.S./Japan respectively.

4.1      U.S.-Canada
We start with the U.S./Canada case. ER’s data covers 14 categories of goods, nine Canadian
cities and 14 U.S. cities. The time span for each city pair varies from 1978-1992 at minimum to
1976-1995 at maximum.20 Because for some cities the price data are released bimonthly, ER
focus on differences over two-month intervals and their dependent variable is σ ( ∆ 2 qijtk ) where

∆ 2 xt = xt − xt −2 . Panel A of Table 1 presents descriptive statistics of σ ( ∆ 2 qijtk ) and σ ( qijk ,t ) for

UU, UC, and CC city pairs.21 Examination of the table immediately indicates that, on average,
CC pairs are considerably less volatile than UU pairs and treating these two groups as
homogenous may be inappropriate. For example, σ ( ∆ 2 qijtk ) , which is the focus of ER’s

analysis, equals 0.031 for UU pairs and 0.016 for CC pairs.


20
   Detailed discussion of the data can be found in Engel and Rogers (1996). The data are available at Charles
Engel's website: http://www.ssc.wisc.edu/~cengel/Data/Border/BorderData.htm.
21
   Panel unit root tests (Appendix Table A2) reject the null of unit root for real exchange rates in UU, CC, UC
pairs so that σ ( qijt ) is a well-defined measure of volatility.
                  k




                                                           - 14 -
         Because distance is an independent variable in the border effect regressions, we also
illustrate the distribution of σ ( ∆ 2 qijtk ) for each type of city pair, conditional on distance (Figure

1).22 We depict the distribution using a box plot, which shows the median (the bar in the middle
of the rectangle), 25th and 75th percentiles (the base and top of the rectangle) as well as the
range of the data (the length of the line). Note that the standard deviation conditional on
distance need not be positive. Several features of the data are immediately apparent. First, the
medians of the UU pairs and UC pairs are similar, while the median of the CC pairs is lower.
Second, UU pairs have much greater dispersion relative to CC pairs, in fact, greater than UC
pairs. The figure suggests that the border effect arises from differences between CC and UC
pairs.
         In contrast to σ ( ∆ 2 qijtk ) , the difference in σ ( qijk ,t ) between UU and UC pairs is large

while the difference is less apparent in σ ( ∆ 2 qijtk ) (see the second row of Table 1). A possible

explanation is that qijtk for UC pairs is more persistent than qijtk for intranational pairs and,

because differencing reduces persistence, the volatility of ∆ 2 qijtk is inhibited relative to the

volatility of qijtk .23 We explore the implications of this below.

         Table 2 follows ER’s procedure for estimating the border effect (see Table 3 in Engel
and Rogers (1996)). In the first column of panel A we estimate equation (2) with ER’s
dependent variable σ ( ∆ 2 qijtk ) . The estimation is repeated in the second panel (first column)

using σ ( qijtk ) as the dependent variable. To preserve space and keep the analysis focused, in

what follows we report only results for regressions pooling across goods.24 We find that that the
coefficients on the border dummy and distance are all positive. Specifically, in the first panel
the estimates are β1 =1.076 and β 2 =12.026 so that the border effect is exp( β 2 / β1 ) = 71,438
km, consistent with ER’s estimates.25

22
   Since the dispersion is conditional on distance, it may take negative values.
23
   Engel and Rogers (footnote 8, p. 1116, 1996) note that the dispersion of price differentials is different for the
U.S. and Canada. They, however, do not elaborate on possible implications of such a difference.
24
   Results are similar when regressions are estimated for separate good categories and alternative measures of price
differentials such as the relative exchange rate.
25
   Our point estimates of β 2 , β1 are close to ER’s. However, because the border effect is BE = exp( β 2 / β1 ) , even
a minor variation in estimates of β 2 , β1 can result in large changes in the estimates of the border effect. In any
case, the order of magnitude is the same.

                                                         - 15 -
        The effect of within-country differences (the country heterogeneity effect) on the
estimated border effect can be seen by adding the CC dummy to the regression (2) using the
identification strategy in equation (10). Our conjecture is that by pooling UU and CC pairs, the
researcher overstates the border effect. To confirm this intuition, we estimate (11) and report
the results in the second column. We find that the key coefficient β 2 in (2) is sensitive to the

inclusion of the CC dummy while β1 remains essentially unchanged. In panel A, using ER’s

dependent variable, the coefficient β 2 for the pooled regression remains statistically significant
but drops from 12.026 to 4.148 thus making the border effect fall from 71,438 km to 47 km. In
panel B, inclusion of the CC dummy causes the border coefficient to fall from 503 billion km to
100 million km.
        As we argue in Section 3.1, the difference in the estimate of the border effect is driven
by the country heterogeneity effect. In particular, under the ER specification differences in the
volatility of real exchange rate for UU and CC pairs are absorbed by the city dummies. This
conjecture is confirmed by inspection of coefficients on the city dummies in Table 3. Canadian
cities (the shaded rows) are systematically negative while the coefficients on city dummies for
U.S. cities are systematically positive. Once we control for the differences across countries
(specification (11); Table 3, column 2), the volatility of UC and CC pairs is measured by the
coefficient on the Border and CC dummy and the coefficients on city dummies do not have any
pattern. We should note that there is no economic theory to help us distinguish between the ER
specification and the one we propose. We believe that our specification is the most sensible
approach given the nature of the country-specific variation in the data, but at a minimum, our
results suggest that the border coefficient is highly sensitive to the assumption one makes about
the source of variation and the relevant benchmark for measuring the border effect.
        The enormous border effect that remains in σ ( qijtk ) (i.e. in levels rather than

differences) is consistent with the fact that price differentials between international pairs
include the nominal exchange rate, which is highly persistent and volatile. Since half-lives are
directly related to the variance of the series, persistence of the nominal exchange rate translates
into high volatility of price differentials for international city pairs. In contrast, variance of
changes in real exchange rate σ ( ∆ 2 qijtk ) is inhibited for persistent series and, hence, the border

effect measured on the basis of σ ( ∆ 2 qijtk ) is smaller than that based on σ ( qijtk ) .


                                                    - 16 -
         To assess this conjecture, we estimate (16) with l=6 to generate estimates of half-lives
and σ (ηijtk ) .26 Note that in (16) we do not control for the volatility of the nominal exchange rate

and we want to verify that the half-life is significantly larger for international city pairs than for
intranational city pairs. The average estimated half-lives and standard deviations of innovations
in the real exchange rate are reported in Appendix Table A1. Consistent with the studies that
analyze prices or disaggregated price indices (e.g., Parsley and Wei 1996, Crucini and Shintani
2002, Ceglowski 2003) or allow heterogeneity in the dynamics of real exchange rate across
pairs of locations (Imbs et al 2005), the average half-lives are 20, 23 and 34 months for UU,
CC and UC pairs respectively.27 28 The volatility of innovations is comparable for UU and UC
pairs.    Specifically, the mean of σ (ηijtk ) equals 0.031 and 0.028 for UU and UC pairs

respectively. Innovations for CC pairs are only half as volatile as those for UU pairs. Hence, in
terms of σ (ηijtk ) and half-lives, UU and CC pairs are different and controlling for this

heterogeneity will be important for the estimates of the border effect.
         To estimate the border effect for the volatility and persistence of innovations to real
exchange rate, we use the estimated σ (ηijtk ) (columns 1 and 2, Panel A, Table 4) and half-lives

(columns 1 and 2, Panel B, Table 4) as the dependent variables in (15) and (14). Estimates of
the coefficients on log distance between cities suggest that, ceteris paribus, larger distance is
associated with increased persistence and volatility of innovations. As we expected, controlling
for intranational heterogeneity (by adding a CC dummy; column 2) reduces the size of the
border effect. In particular, the border effect falls from 14.5 million km to 120 km and from
3,117 km to 1,005 km for σ (ηijtk ) and half-lives respectively.

         The conclusions change dramatically once we control for the volatility of the nominal
exchange rate as in (13) with l=6. Means of the estimated volatility and half-lives of
innovations in the price ratio pijtk are reported in Appendix Table A1. This can be seen by

comparing panels A and B of Figure 2. Panel A shows that the distribution of half-lives of UC

26
   We choose l=6 to keep our results comparable to ER's and to control for seasonal variation. We include monthly
dummies in (16) to control for seasonal factors.
27
   Other studies (e.g., Parsley and Wei 1996) can have different estimates of half-lives because they use alternative
ways to compute the half-lives (e.g., analyze only the largest root of the lag polynomial).
28
   For U.S./Canada case, half-lives greater than 10 years are coded as missing (less than 2% of the sample). The
conclusions we reach here and in the rest of the paper do not change when we explicitly control for censoring of
half-lives using truncated regressions.

                                                       - 17 -
pairs is shifted to the right of intracountry pairs. After controlling for the exchange rate, Panel
B indicates that the UC pairs are now almost indistinguishable from intracountry pairs. Indeed,
the average half-life of innovations for UC pairs falls from 34 months, when we do not control
for volatility and persistence of the nominal exchange rate, to 23 months, which is comparable
to the persistence we observe in intranational pairs. The volatility of innovations, σ (ωijtk ) ,

decreases from 0.031 to 0.029 thus remaining slightly above the volatility of innovations for
UU pairs.
        Using these fixed-exchange-rate counterfactuals, we estimate the border effect on the
volatility of innovations to the real exchange rate (as in (15)) and the persistence of the real
exchange rate (as in (14)). The results are reported in column 3 (no control for country
heterogeneity effect) and column 4 (control for country heterogeneity effect) of Table 4.
Distance continues to be associated with increased persistence and volatility of innovations in
the price ratio as the coefficients on log distance are positive and statistically significant in all
cases. The implied border effect greatly diminishes relative to the case when we do not control
for the nominal exchange rate in the real exchange rate for international city pairs. For
example, the border effect on the half-life decreases from 1,005 km (column 2, panel B) to 1
(column 4, panel B), where in the latter case we control for the volatility of the nominal
exchange rate and differences in within-country heterogeneity. Likewise, the border effect on
the volatility of innovations further falls from 120 km (column 2, panel A) to zero km (column
4, panel A) with the coefficient on the Border dummy changing the sign to negative. Again,
note the importance of the country heterogeneity effect by comparing columns 3 and 4 in Table
4.
        Engel and Rogers (1996) argue that the large border effect cannot be completely
explained by the volatility of the nominal exchange rate. They find that the border effect
remains large when price differentials are measured by the relative exchange rate measured as
RERijtk = ( ( Pitk / Pit ) ( Pjtk / Pjt ) ) where Pitk is the price of good k in city i at time t, Pit is the

Consumer Price Index for city i at time t (descriptive statistics are in Appendix Table A3).
Clearly, RER does not inflate dispersion for international pairs as the real exchange rate does.
We reproduce their large estimate of the border effect for σ ( ∆ 2 RERijtk ) in column 1, Panel A,

Table 5. We show, however, that these findings are also affected by the country heterogeneity



                                                   - 18 -
effect. Indeed, when the CC dummy is included (column 2, Panel B, Table 5), the estimate of
the border effect shrinks from 845 km to zero.29
         These results suggest that after controlling for the country heterogeneity effect (by
including the CC dummy) differences between the cross-border and within-country pairs are
largely driven by exchange rate movements. The results are consistent with Mussa (1986) who
argues that movements in the real exchange rate are driven by the nominal exchange rate since
prices are sticky. The country heterogeneity effect explains most of the border effect when the
dependent variable is the variance of the change in the real exchange rate. When the dependent
variable is the variance of the real exchange rate, nominal exchange rates are the key source of
shocks that cause cross-border pairs to exhibit a “border effect” and the persistence of nominal
exchange rates is the source of persistent cross-border price differentials. After removing the
exchange rate effect, international price differentials behave similar to intranational price
differentials. To the extent a border exists, the border is the nominal exchange rate.

4.2      U.S.-Japan
Now we repeat the exercise for the U.S./Japan sample of Parsley and Wei (2001; henceforth
PW) who collect quarterly information on prices of 27 traded goods (e.g., toothpaste, coffee,
jeans) in 48 Japanese and 48 U.S. cities over 1976:Q1-1997:Q4. We limit their sample to 10
U.S. and 14 Japanese cities, the largest in terms of population.30 Panel B of Table 1 reports
mean values of σ ( ∆qijtk ) and σ ( qijtk ) by types of city pairs and Figure 3 presents a box plot for

σ ( ∆qijtk ) .31 As in the U.S./Canada case, U.S.-U.S. (UU) pairs are different from Japan-Japan

(JJ) pairs. For instance, σ ( ∆qijtk ) is 0.153 and 0.080 for UU and JJ pairs, respectively. Thus,

treating intranational city pairs as homogenous may lead to spuriously large estimates of the


29
   Likewise, controlling for country heterogeneity eliminates the border effect in the volatility of innovations in
and persistence of the relative exchange rate.
30
   U.S. cities are Denver CO, Indianapolis IN, New Orleans LA, St. Louis MO, Omaha NE, New York NY,
Columbus OH, EL Paso TX, Ft. Worth TX, Houston TX. Japanese cities are Sapporo, Sendai, Chiba, Yokohama,
Niigata, Nagoya, Kyoto, Osaka, Kobe, Okayama, Hiroshima, Fukuoka, Kumamoto, Kagoshima. The thresholds
are 300,000 and 500,000 in population for U.S. and Japanese cities respectively. More details can be found in
Parsley     and     Wei      (2001).     The     data     are     available   at     David       Parsley's    website:
http://mba.vanderbilt.edu/david.parsley/Research.htm. The price data analyzed in PW and ER are from different
sources and thus not comparable. PW use price data collected the American Chamber of Commerce, while ER use
price data collected by Bureau of Labor Statistics.
31
   As in the U.S./Canada case, panel unit root tests reject the presence of a stochastic trend in the real exchange
rate (Table A2) so that the variance of real exchange rate is well-defined.

                                                       - 19 -
border effects especially for σ ( qijtk ) . Also note a tremendous increase in σ ( qijtk ) relative to

σ ( ∆qijtk ) for U.S.-Japan (UJ) pairs, which is consistent with real exchange rate being persistent.
         Following the previous analysis of the U.S./Canada case, we estimate equation (2) using
σ ( ∆qijtk ) and σ ( qijtk ) as the dependent variables and show the results in Table 6, Panel A and B.
The border effect implied by the estimates is of a truly cosmic size, which is consistent with
PW’s estimates (Table 1, p. 96): the border is analogous to 43.2 million km for σ ( ∆qijtk ) and

more than 1 trillion km for σ ( qijtk ) .32 In contrast to the U.S./Canada case, controlling for the

country heterogeneity effect (column (2)) reduces the estimate of the border effect but does not
eliminate it. For instance, the border effect falls to 29,080 km for σ ( ∆qijtk ) . Despite this

reduction, it is hardly conceivable that the border can have such a profound effect on the
persistence and volatility of price differentials. The volatility of the nominal exchange rate is a
more likely culprit in the U.S./Japan case because the volatility of USD/Yen exchange rate is
much larger than the volatility of exchange rate for the U.S. and Canada. In fact, differences in
the border effect for σ ( ∆qijtk ) and σ ( qijtk ) already indicate that the border is likely to be

confounded with the volatility and persistence of the nominal exchange rate.
         To verify this hypothesis, we examine the volatility and persistence of innovations in
the real exchange rate. Specifically, we estimate (16) with l=4 and report the means of the
estimated half-lives and σ (ηijtk ) in Appendix Table A1.33 Half-lives for international city pairs

are considerably larger than half-lives for intranational pairs. The differences are particularly
striking for UU (2.2 quarters) and UJ (14.5 quarters) pairs with JJ (5.5 quarters) pairs in
between of these two extremes (see Panel A, Figure 4).34 Volatility of innovations is larger for
international pairs (0.195) than for intranational pairs (0.120 for UU and 0.061 for JJ).


32
   PW report a different estimate because they use polynomial in distance while we use log of distance. Also, we
analyze only a sub-sample of PW’s cities.
33
   We choose l=4 to control for seasonal variation (the data are quarterly). For the same reason we also include
seasonal dummies.
34
   The average half-life for intranational pairs deserves a comment. Observing 4.2 half-life for JJ pairs is generally
consistent with finding half-lives of or under one year (see discussion above). On the other hand, the half-life of
1.5 quarters for UU pairs appears somewhat low. Parsley and Wei (1996) use the similar data and find that the
half-life for tradable goods is in 4-6 quarter range. Parsley and Wei, however, use approximate half-lives based on
the largest root of the lag polynomial. We were able to reproduce their results when we use the approximate half-
life. In contrast, the half-life based on impulse response function takes into account all eigenroots and,
consequently, can lead to different estimates of the half-lives if the short run dynamics is important. This is exactly

                                                        - 20 -
         After regressing half-lives and σ (ηijtk ) on log distance, border dummy and other

controls, we find border effects equivalent to galactic distances. Even after controlling for the
country heterogeneity effect, the border effect is greater than 1 trillion km for half-lives
(column 2, Panel B, Table 7) and the volatility of innovations σ (ηijtk ) (column 2, Panel A,

Table 7). Hence, σ ( qijtk ) is significantly more volatile because the half-life is significantly

longer and innovations are significantly large for international pairs than for intranational pairs.
Again it is hardly plausible that border induces such impediments to elimination of price
differentials and the volatility of the nominal exchange rate is a more likely explanation for
finding enormous border effects.
         Indeed, when we control for the volatility of the nominal exchange rate as in (13),35 the
average fixed-exchange-rate counterfactual for the half-life for international pairs equals 4.1
quarters which is less than the average half-life of JJ pairs (Appendix Table A1; also compare
panels A and B in Figure 4). Likewise, the counterfactual volatility of innovations is 0.146
which is comparable to the volatility of innovations in the price ratio for UU pairs (Appendix
Table A1). This translates into a modest border effect in the volatility of ωijtk (315 km) and no

border effect in the half-lives (column 4, Panels A and B respectively, Table 7). Note that the
coefficient on the Border dummy is not statistically significant in both the half-life and the
σ (ωijtk ) regressions while the distance continues to significantly contribute to explaining the

variation in half-lives and σ (ωijtk ) . Also note the importance of controlling for country

heterogeneity effect, i.e., the border effect is larger in column 3 (no control for the country
heterogeneity effect) than in column 4 (control for the country heterogeneity effect).
         In summary, if the U.S. and Japan had a fixed exchange rate, the half-life of price
differentials in UJ and UU city pairs conditional on distance and other controls would be
statistically equal. The same applies to the volatility of innovations in price differentials. As in
the U.S./Canada case, we conclude that the border effect is confounded with other factors,
notably the volatility of the nominal exchange rate, so that conventional methods to assess the


what happens in our case. For many UU city pairs second largest eigenroot is close to the largest eigenroot in
absolute value and it tends to be of a different sign thus dampening the deviation from steady state more quickly
than the largest eigenroot alone might suggest. Like in U.S./Canada case, half-lives greater than 20 years are coded
as missing (approximately 2% of the sample).
35
   We continue using l=4 for the U.S./Japan case.

                                                      - 21 -
border effect provide overstated estimates because of the country heterogeneity, persistence,
and nominal exchange rate biases with nominal exchange rate effect being particularly
important.

5. Concluding remarks
The border effects estimated from price data are often implausibly large. Moreover, significant
border effects are found where they should not be found. We take these facts as indication that
the commonly applied methodology makes assumptions that do not hold in the data. We show
that the border effect can be confounded with factors that are unrelated to costs of crossing the
border. Specifically, we identify three effects—country heterogeneity, persistence and nominal
exchange rate effects—that can inflate the border effect so that the distance equivalent of the
border can be of cosmic sizes. To address these problems, we develop a simple framework that
separates the border effect from these confounding factors even in two-country cases.
       We apply our approach to price data collected by Engel and Rogers (1996) for a sample
of U.S. and Canadian cities and price data collected by Parsley and Wei (2001) for a sample of
U.S. and Japanese cities. In sharp contrast to Engel and Rogers (1996), Parsley and Wei (2001)
and other studies, we find no evidence of the border effect after controlling for factors
confounding the border effect, i.e., cross-border price differentials behave in statistically and
economically not distinguishable way from within-country price differentials. In the sample of
U.S. and Canadian data, the border effect disappears once country-heterogeneity is taken into
account. In the case of the U.S. and Japan, where exchange rate movements are larger, the
barrier of the border is the exchange rate and the border itself has no significant effect on the
dispersion of price differentials across the two countries.




                                               - 22 -
5 References
Anderson, James E., and Eric van Wincoop, 2004. “Trade Costs,” Journal of Economic
      Literature 42(4), 691-751.
Breitung, Jorg, 2000. "The Local Power of Some Unit Root Tests for Panel Data," in B.
      Baltagi, ed., Advances in Econometrics 15, Amsterdam: JAI Press, p. 161-178.
Ceglowski, Janet, 2003. "The Law of One Price: Intranational Evidence for Canada," Canadian
      Journal of Economics 36(2), 373-400.
Choi, I., 2001. "Unit Root Tests for Panel Data," Journal of International Money and Finance
      20, 249-272.
Coleman, Andrew, 2005. "Endogenous Have we misunderstood the law of one price? A
      reinterpretation based on a trade model with transport capacity constraints," University of
      Michigan mimeo.
Crucini, Mario J. and Mototsugu Shintani, 2002. “Persistence in Law-of-One-Price Deviations:
      Evidence from Micro-Data.,” Mimeo.
Crucini, Mario J., Chris I. Telmer, and Mario Zachariadis, 2000. “Dispersion in Real Exchange
      Rates,” Department of Economics, Vanderbilt University Working paper 00-W13.
Engel, Charles and John H. Rogers, 1996. "How Wide Is the Border?" American Economic
      Review 86(5), 1112-1125.
Engel, Charles and John H. Rogers, 2000. "Relative Price Volatility: What Role Does the
      Border Play?" in Intranational Macroeconomics, G.D. Hess and E. van Wincoop, eds.
      Cambridge University Press.
Engel, Charles and John H. Rogers, 2001. "Deviation form Purchasing Power Parity: Causes
      and Welfare Costs,” Journal of International Economics 55, 29-57.
Helliwell, John, and Genevievve Verdier, 2001. “Measuring Internal Trade Distances: A New
      Method Applied to Estimate Provincial Border Effect in Canada,” Canadian Journal of
      Economics 34, 1024-1041.
Im, K.S., M.H. Pesaran and Y. Shin, 2003. "Testing for Unit Roots in Heterogeneous Panels,"
      Journal of Econometrics 115, 53-74.
Imbs, Jean, Harron Mumtaz, Morten O. Ravn, and Helene Rey, 2003. “Nonlinearities and the
      Real Exchange Rate,” Journal of European Economic Association 1(2-3), 639-649.
Imbs, Jean, Haroon Mumtaz, Morten O. Ravn, and Helene Rey, 2005. “PPP strikes back:
      Aggregation and the Real Exchange Rate,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 70(1) 1-45.
Inoue, Atsushi and Lutz Kilian, 2002. "Bootstrapping Autoregressive Processes with Possible
      Unit Roots", Econometrica 70(1), 377-391.
Kilian, Lutz, 1998. "Small-Sample Confidence Intervals for Impulse Response Functions,"
      Review of Economics and Statistics 80(2), 218-230.
Kilian, Lutz, 1999. "Exchange Rate and Monetary Fundamentals" What Do We Learn form
      Long-Horizon Regressions?" Journal of Applied Econometrics 14, 491-510.
Kilian, Lutz and Tao Zha, 2002. “Quantifying the Uncertainty about the Half-Life of
      Deviations from PPP,” Journal of Applied Econometrics 17, 107-125.
Levin, A. , C.F. Lin , and C. Chu, 2002. "Unit Root Tests in Panel Data: Asymptotic and Finite-
      Sample Properties," Journal of Econometrics 108, 1-24
Maddala, G.S. and S. Wu, 1999. "A Comparative Study of Unit Root Tests with panel Data and
      a New Simple Test," Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 61, 631-652.
Magnus, Jan R. and Heinz Neudecker, 1999. Matrix Differential Calculus. New York: Wiley.


                                             - 23 -
McCallum, John F., 1995. "National Borders matter: Canada-U.S. Regional Trade Patterns,"
      American Economic Review 85, 615-623
Meese, R. and K. Rogoff, 1983. "Empirical exchange rate models of the Seventies: Are any fit
      to Survive?" Journal of International Economics 14, 3-24.
Mussa, Michael. 1986. “Nominal Exchange Rate Regimes and the Behavior of Real Exchange
      Rates: Evidence and Implications,” Carnegie-Rochester Series on Public Policy 26, 117-
      214.
Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff, 2000. “The Six Major Puzzles in International
      Macroeconomics. Is There a Common Cause,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000,
      B.S. Bernanke and K. Rogoff, eds., Cambridge , MA: MIT Press.
Obstsfeld, Maurice, and Alan M. Taylor, 1997. “Non-linear Aspects of Goods-Market
      Arbitrage and Adjustment: Heckscher’s Commodity Points Revisited,” Journal of
      Japanese and International Economies 11, 441-479.
Parsley, David C. and Shang-Jin Wei, 1996. "Convergence of the Law of One Price Without
      Trade Barriers or Currency Fluctuations," Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(4), 1211-
      1236.
Parsley, David C. and Shang-Jin Wei, 2001. "Explaining the Border Effect: The Role of
      Exchange Rate Variability, Shipping Costs, and Geography," Journal of International
      Economics 55, 87-105.
Parsley, David C., and Shang-Jin Wei, 2002. “Currency Arrangements and Goods Market
      Integration: A Price Based Approach,” mimeo.
Pesaran, M. Hashem and Ron Smith. 1995. “Estimating Long-Run Relationships form
      Dynamics Heterogeneous Panels,” Journal of Econometrics 68, 79-113.
Smith, Jeffrey. 2004 “Evaluating Local Economic Development Policies: Theory and Practice.”
      In Alistair Nolan and Ging Wong, eds., Evaluating local economic and employment
      development: How to assess what works among programmes and policies. Paris: OECD,
      287-332.
Taylor, Alan M, Mark P. Taylor, 2004. “The Purchasing Power Parity Debate,” Journal of
      Economic Perspectives 18(4), 135-158.
Wolf, Holger C., 2000. “Intranational Home Bias in Trade,” Review of Economics and
      Statistics 82(4), 555-563.




                                           - 24 -
Figure 1. Distribution of distance-adjusted dispersion of changes in real exchange rate. U.S.-Canada.




Note: Distance-adjusted dispersion is computed as the residual in the regression of dispersion on log
distance between cities.
Figure 2. Estimated half-lives of price differentials. U.S.-Canada.




Note: The figure plot kernel densities of estimated half-lives. Bandwidth is 0.2. Solid line, broken, and
dash/dot lines in panels A and B correspond to UU, CC, and UC pairs respectively. Vertical lines show the
means for the respective group of city pairs. In panel A, half-lives are computed from the estimates of
{ψ 1,ijk ,...,ψ l ,ijk } in (16). In panels B, half-lives are computed from the estimates {ψ 1,ijk ,...,ψ l ,ijk } in (13).
Number of lags to remove short term dynamics in (13) and (16) is 6.




                                                            - 26 -
Figure 3. Distribution of distance-adjusted dispersion of changes in real exchange rate. U.S.-Japan.




Note: Distance-adjusted dispersion is computed as the residual in the regression of dispersion on log
distance between cities.




                                                - 27 -
Figure 4. Estimated half-lives of price differentials. U.S.-Japan.




Note: The figure plot kernel densities of estimated half-lives. Bandwidth is 0.2. Solid line, broken, and
dash/dot lines in panels A and B correspond to UU, JJ, and UJ pairs respectively. Vertical lines show the
means for the respective group of city pairs. In panel A, half-lives are computed from the estimates of
{ψ 1,ijk ,...,ψ l ,ijk } in (16). In panel B, half-lives are computed from the estimates {ψ 1,ijk ,...,ψ l ,ijk } in (13).
Number of lags to remove short term dynamics in (13) and (16) is 4.




                                                            - 28 -
  Table 1. Descriptive statistics for U.S./Canada and U.S./Japan.
                                                 Panel A: U.S./Canada
                                                          US-US            US-CAN   CAN-CAN        All
                                                           (1)               (2)      (3)          (4)

Real exchange rate, qijtk
         Standard deviation of changes in real
                                                           0.031            0.037    0.016        0.032
         exchange rate, σ ( ∆ 2 qijt )
                                      k



         Standard deviation of real exchange rate,
                                                           0.067            0.103    0.040        0.082
         σ ( qijtk )

Log(distance)                                              7.17             7.53      7.21        7.35
N                                                          1140             1764      504         3408

                                                     Panel B: U.S./Japan
                                                          US-US            US-JPN   JPN-JPN        All
                                                           (1)               (2)      (3)          (4)
Real exchange rate, qijtk
         Standard deviation of changes in real
                                                           0.153            0.211    0.080        0.158
         exchange rate, σ ( ∆qijt )
                                  k



         Standard deviation of real exchange rate,
                                                           0.159            0.648    0.103        0.389
         σ ( qijtk )

Log(distance)                                              7.08             9.26     6.07         7.86
N                                                          1215             3780     2457         7452

  Note: the table reports mean values of the presented variables. Average is taken over city pairs. See
  text for the definitions of the variables. Different price indices are used for U.S. in U.S./Canada and
  U.S./Japan cases. σ ( x ) is time series standard deviation of variable x.
Table 2. Estimates of the border effect. Real exchange rate. U.S./Canada.
                                                 No control for         Control for
                                                     country              country
                                                 heterogeneity         heterogeneity
                                                      effect               effect
                                                       (1)                  (2)
                        Panel A: Dependent variable is standard deviation of changes
                                     in real exchange rate, σ ( ∆ 2 q)
                         Ln(dist)                     1.076***            1.076***
                                                     (0.269)             (0.269)
                         Border                      12.026***            4.148***
                                                     (0.363)             (0.393)
                         CC                                             -15.756***
                                                                         (0.529)
                         R2                            0.78               0.78
                         Border effect (km)           71,438               47

                          Panel B: Dependent variable is standard deviation of real
                                          exchange rate, σ ( q)
                         Ln(dist)                     1.749**              1.749**
                                                     (0.856)              (0.856)
                         Border                      47.127***           32.217***
                                                     (1.152)              (1.249)
                         CC                                             -29.821***
                                                                          (1.681)
                         R2                           0.50                 0.50
                         Border effect (km)          503 bln             100 mln

Note: Coefficients in panels A and B are multiplied by 1000. CC is the dummy variable for Canada-Canada city
pairs, Border is the dummy variable for US-Canada pairs (UC dummy). Omitted category is US-US city pairs.
Robust standard errors are in parentheses. *, **, and *** are significant at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively. The
benchmark specification is (11). Border effect is computed according to (12). City and good category dummies
are included but not reported.




                                                   - 30 -
Table 3. Border effect and country/city dummies. U.S.-Canada.
                                           No control for country   Control for country
                                            heterogeneity effect    heterogeneity effect
                                                     (1)                     (2)
                        Ln(dist)                   1.076***                1.076***
                                                  (0.269)                 (0.269)
                        Border                   12.026***                 4.148***
                                                  (0.363)                 (0.393)
                        CC                                               -15.756***
                                                                          (0.529)
                        Baltimore                 5.329***                 2.246***
                                                 (0.606)                  (0.596)
                        Boston                    5.264***                 2.181***
                                                 (0.598)                  (0.587)
                        Calgary                  -4.135***                 0.660
                                                 (0.563)                  (0.539)
                        Chicago                   3.975***                 0.892
                                                 (0.559)                  (0.554)
                        Dallas                    4.620***                 1.538**
                                                 (0.629)                  (0.615)
                        Detroit                   1.309**                 -1.773***
                                                 (0.564)                  (0.558)
                        Edmonton                 -4.854***                -0.059
                                                 (0.564)                  (0.540)
                        Houston                   4.329***                 1.246**
                                                 (0.631)                  (0.618)
                        Los Angeles              -0.637                   -3.719***
                                                 (0.581)                  (0.576)
                        Montreal                 -5.259***                -0.463
                                                 (0.564)                  (0.540)
                        Miami                     3.838***                 0.755
                                                 (0.608)                  (0.598)
                        New York                 -1.468***                -4.550***
                                                 (0.564)                  (0.559)
                        Ottawa                   -5.428***                -0.633
                                                 (0.566)                  (0.543)
                        Philadelphia              3.556***                 0.473
                                                 (0.567)                  (0.562)
                        Pittsburgh                2.135***                -0.948
                                                 (0.632)                  (0.618)
                        Quebec                   -5.297***                -0.501
                                                 (0.559)                  (0.535)
                        Regina                   -2.596***                 2.199***
                                                 (0.559)                  (0.535)
                        San Francisco             1.870***                -1.212**
                                                 (0.584)                  (0.579)
                        St. Louis                 5.767***                 2.684***
                                                 (0.601)                  (0.591)
                        Toronto                  -5.170***                -0.374
                                                 (0.569)                  (0.546)
                        Vancouver                -5.528***                -0.733
                                                 (0.572)                  (0.549)
                        Winnipeg                 -4.891***                -0.096
                                                 (0.558)                  (0.534)
                        Washington, D.C.          3.271***                 0.188
                                                 (0.604)                  (0.594)
                        Constant                 18.337***                24.502***
                                                 (1.954)                  (1.959)
Note: Dependent variable is the standard deviation of changes in the real exchange rate, σ(∆2q). CC is
the dummy variable for Canada-Canada city pairs, Border is the dummy variable for US-Canada pairs (UC
dummy). Omitted category is US-US city pairs. Coefficients are multiplied by 1000. Robust standard errors
are in parentheses. *, **, and *** are significant at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively. Columns 1 and 2
correspond to Table 2, Panel A. See the note for Table 2 and the text for further details.

                                                     - 31 -
Table 4. Estimates of the border effect. Real exchange rate. U.S./Canada.
                                       No control for                             Control for
                                the nominal exchange rate                 the nominal exchange rate
                             No control for       Control for          No control for       Control for
                                country             country               country             country
                             heterogeneity      heterogeneity          heterogeneity      heterogeneity
                                 effect              effect                effect              effect
                                  (1)                 (2)                   (3)                 (4)
                           Panel A: Dependent variable is volatility of innovations
    Ln(dist)                      0.604***            0.604***                0.664***         0.664***
                                 (0.222)             (0.222)                 (0.227)          (0.227)
    Border                        9.978***            2.892***                4.719***        -2.387***
                                 (0.298)             (0.323)                 (0.305)          (0.331)
    CC                                              -14.172***                               -14.212***
                                                     (0.435)                                  (0.445)
    R2                            0.76                0.76                   0.75              0.75
    Border effect (km)          14.5 mln               120                   1,220               0

                                  Panel B: Dependent variable is half-life
    Ln(dist)                      1.572***            1.572***                1.196*           1.196*
                                 (0.560)             (0.560)                 (0.612)          (0.612)
    Border                       12.646***           14.426***                1.904**          3.626***
                                 (0.746)             (0.814)                 (0.834)          (0.904)
    CC                                                3.560***                                 3.444***
                                                     (1.096)                                  (1.192)
    R2                            0.35                0.35                   0.24              0.24
    Border effect (km)            3,117               1,005                    5                 1

Note: Coefficients in panel A are multiplied by 1000. CC is the dummy variable for Canada-Canada city pairs,
Border is the dummy variable for US-Canada pairs (UC dummy). Omitted category is US-US city pairs. Robust
standard errors are in parentheses. *, **, and *** are significant at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively. The
benchmark specification is (11). Border effect is computed according to (12). In Panel A volatility of
innovations is the st. dev. of residuals in (16) (columns 1 and 2) and in (13) (columns 3 and 4). Half-lives in
Panel B are computed from (16) (columns 1 and 2) and (13) (columns 3 and 4). Number of lags to remove short
term dynamics in (13) and (16) is 6 (bimonthly data). City and good category dummies are included but not
reported.




                                                    - 32 -
Table 5. Estimates of the border effect. Relative exchange rate. U.S./Canada.
                                                    No control for        Control for
                                                        country                country
                                                     heterogeneity       heterogeneity
                                                         effect                  effect
                                                          (1)                     (2)
                          Panel A: Dependent variable is standard deviation of changes
                                    in relative exchange rate, σ ( ∆ 2 RERijtk )
                           Ln(dist)                          1.044***            1.044***
                                                            (0.266)             (0.266)
                           Border                            7.036***           -1.161***
                                                            (0.357)             (0.388)
                           CC                                                  -16.393***
                                                                                (0.522)
                           R2                                0.78                0.78
                           Border effect (km)                 845                  0

                          Panel B: Dependent variable is standard deviation of relative
                                         exchange rate, σ ( RERijtk )
                           Ln(dist)                          1.903**             1.903**
                                                            (0.863)             (0.863)
                           Border                           26.067***           11.100***
                                                            (1.161)             (1.260)
                           CC                                                  -29.934***
                                                                                (1.696)
                           R2                                0.45                0.45
                           Border effect (km)               888,994               341


                                                        (                      )
Note: Relative exchange rate is defined as RERijtk = ( Pitk / Pit ) ( Pjtk / Pjt ) where Pitk is the price of good k in
city i at time t, Pit is the Consumer Price Index for city i at time t. Coefficients in panels A and B are
multiplied by 1000. CC is the dummy variable for Canada-Canada city pairs, Border is the dummy variable
for US-Canada pairs (UC dummy). Omitted category is US-US city pairs. Robust standard errors are in
parentheses. *, **, and *** are significant at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively. The benchmark specification is
(11). Border effect is computed according to (12). City and good category dummies are included but not
reported.




                                                        - 33 -
Table 6. Estimates of the border effect. Real exchange rate. U.S./Japan.
                                                 No control for        Control for
                                                    country              country
                                                 heterogeneity        heterogeneity
                                                      effect              effect
                                                       (1)                 (2)
                        Panel A: Dependent variable is standard deviation of changes
                                      in real exchange rate, σ ( ∆q )
                         Ln(dist)                      4.651***            4.651***
                                                      (1.114)             (1.114)
                         Border                       81.777***           47.802***
                                                      (3.168)             (2.829)
                         JJ                                              -67.952***
                                                                          (1.904)
                         R2                            0.83                0.83
                         Border effect (km)          43.2 mln             29,080

                          Panel B: Dependent variable is standard deviation of real
                                          exchange rate, σ ( q)
                         Ln(dist)                     13.812***          13.812***
                                                      (2.423)            (2.423)
                         Border                      480.929***         459.764***
                                                      (6.897)            (6.161)
                         JJ                                             -42.330***
                                                                         (4.160)
                         R2                            0.89               0.89
                         Border effect (km)           >1 trln            >1 trln

Note: Coefficients in panels A-B are multiplied by 1000. JJ is the dummy variable for Japan-Japan city pairs,
Border is the dummy variable for US-Japan pairs (UJ dummy). Omitted category is US-US city pairs. Robust
standard errors are in parentheses. *, **, and *** are significant at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively. The
benchmark specification is (11). Border effect is computed according to (12). City and good category
dummies are included but not reported.




                                                   - 34 -
Table 7. Estimates of the border effect. Real exchange rate. U.S./Japan.
                                       No control for                               Control for
                                the nominal exchange rate                   the nominal exchange rate
                             No control for       Control for            No control for       Control for
                                country             country                 country             country
                             heterogeneity      heterogeneity            heterogeneity      heterogeneity
                                 effect              effect                  effect              effect
                                  (1)                 (2)                     (3)                 (4)
                           Panel A: Dependent variable is volatility of innovations
    Ln(dist)                      2.026**             2.026**                  2.113**            2.113**
                                 (1.008)             (1.008)                  (0.974)            (0.974)
    Border                       96.556***           66.378***                42.313***          12.153***
                                 (2.868)             (2.561)                  (2.775)            (2.478)
    JJ                                              -60.355***                                  -60.320***
                                                     (1.727)                                     (1.667)
    R2                            0.80                0.80                     0.68               0.68
    Border effect (km)           >1 trln             >1 trln                  497 mln              315

                                   Panel B: Dependent variable is half-life
    Ln(dist)                      0.379*              0.379*                   0.266*             0.266*
                                 (0.202)             (0.202)                  (0.144)            (0.144)
    Border                        9.901***           11.622***                -0.241              1.428***
                                 (0.576)             (0.514)                  (0.410)            (0.366)
    JJ                                                3.443***                                    3.338***
                                                     (0.341)                                     (0.244)
    R2                            0.43                0.43                     0.18               0.18
    Border effect (km)           >1 trln             >1 trln                     0                  0

Note: Coefficients in panels A are multiplied by 1000. JJ is the dummy variable for Japan-Japan city pairs,
Border is the dummy variable for US-Japan pairs (UJ dummy). Omitted category is US-US city pairs. Robust
standard errors are in parentheses. *, **, and *** are significant at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively. The
benchmark specification is (11). Border effect is computed according to (12). In Panel A volatility of
innovations is the st. dev. of residuals in (16) (columns 1 and 2) and in (13) (columns 3 and 4). Half-lives in
Panel B are computed from (16) (columns 1 and 2) and (13) (columns 3 and 4). Number of lags to remove
short term dynamics in (16) and (13) is 4 (quarterly data). City and good category dummies are included but
not reported.




                                                    - 35 -
Table A1. Descriptive statistics.
                                                         (1)        (2)            (3)         (4)

                                                                   Panel A: U.S./Canada
                                                        US-US    US-Canada Canada-Canada       All

Volatility of innovations
    σ (η ) , no control for the volatility of nominal
                                                        0.028      0.031          0.014       0.028
    exchange rate, eq. (16)

     σ (ω ) , control for volatility of nominal
                                                        0.028      0.029          0.014       0.025
    exchange rate, eq. (13)


Half-life of price differentials, months
    no control for volatility of nominal ex. rate,
    eq. (16)
                                                        19.8       34.0            23.2       26.6

    control for volatility of nominal exchange rate,
    eq. (13).
                                                        19.8       22.6            23.6       19.0


                                                                    Panel B: U.S./Japan

                                                        US-US    US-Japan      Japan-Japan     All
Volatility of innovations
    σ (η ) , no control for the volatility of nominal
                                                        0.120      0.195          0.061       0.138
    exchange rate, eq. (16)

    σ (ω ) , control for volatility of nominal
                                                        0.120      0.146          0.061       0.115
    exchange rate, eq. (13)


Half-life of price differentials, quarters
    no control for volatility of nominal ex. rate,
    eq. (16)
                                                         2.2       14.5            5.5         9.3

    control for volatility of nominal exchange rate,
                                                         2.2        4.1            5.5         4.2
    eq. (13).



Note: Table reports mean values of the presented variables. Half-life is in the periods at which price
series are available. U.S./Canada and U.S./Japan data are bimonthly and quarterly, respectively. For
U.S./Canada case, half-lives greater than 10 years are coded as missing (less than 2% of the sample).
For U.S./Japan case, half-lives greater than 20 years are coded as missing (less than 2% of the
sample). σ ( x ) is the time series standard deviation of variable x.




                                                        - 36 -
Table A2. Unit root tests of price differentials.
                                                   U.S.-Canada              U.S.-Japan
                                               real exchange rate, q   real exchange rate, q
                         Method
                                                Statistic p-value       Statistic p-value
                                                     (1)     (2)          (3)        (4)
            Null: Unit root (assumes common unit root process)
               Levin, Lin & Chu t-stat       -11.47      0.00           -49.91      0.00
               Breitung t-stat                -6.19      0.00            -6.19      0.00

            Null: Unit root (assumes individual unit root process)
               Im, Pesaran and Shin W-stat      -10.4       0.00       -14.045      0.00
               ADF - Fisher Chi-square         7076.9       0.00       16581.6      0.00
               PP - Fisher Chi-square         13357.0       0.00       52287.4      0.00



Note: tests are for levels with intercept only. Probabilities for Fisher tests are computed using an
asymptotic Chi-square distribution. All other tests assume asymptotic normality. Number of lags to
remove short term dynamics is 6 for U.S.-Canada case (bimonthly data) and 4 for U.S.-Japan
(quarterly data). Bartlett kernel with plug-in Newey-West bandwidth selection is used for PP-Fisher.
See Levin, Lin and Chu (2002), Breitung (2000), Im, Pesaran and Shin (2003), Maddala and Wu
(1999, ADF-Fisher) and Choi (2001, PP-Fisher) for details.




                                                    - 37 -
Table A3. Descriptive statistics for relative exchange rate. U.S.-Canada.
                                                       US-US           US-Canada      Canada-Canada            All
                                                        (1)               (2)              (3)                 (4)

    Standard deviation of changes in relative
                                                        0.032             0.032             0.016            0.029
    exchange rate, σ ( ∆ 2 RERijt )
                                 k


    Standard deviation of relative exchange rate,
                                                        0.069             0.080             0.039            0.070
    σ ( RERijtk )
    Volatility of innovations, σ (ω ) , in relative
                                                        0.028             0.026             0.014            0.025
    exchange rate, eq. (16)

    Half-life of price differentials for relative
    exchange rate, eq. (16), months
                                                         14.6              22.4             20.6              19.4


Note: Table reports mean values of the presented variables. Relative exchange rate is defined as
RERijtk = ( ( Pitk / Pit ) ( Pjtk / Pjt ) ) where Pitk is the price of good k in city i at time t, Pit is the Consumer
Price Index for city i at time t. Half-life is in the bimonthly periods. Half-lives greater than 10 years
are coded as missing (less than 2% of the sample). σ ( x ) is the time series standard deviation of
variable x.




                                                        - 38 -
Appendix

Decomposition of volatility
To derive (9), substitute (7) and (8) into (3) to eliminate CCij and UUij:
σ ij    = β UCij + γ UUU ij + γ C CCij + ∑ s =1α s Ds =
                                                    N



        = β UCij + γ U ( − 12 UCij + 12 ∑ s =k +1 Ds ) + γ C ( − 12 UCij + 12 ∑ s =1 Ds ) + ∑ s =1α s Ds =
                                                N                                                  k       N



        = [ β − 12 (γ U + γ C )]UCij + ∑ s =k +1 ( 12 γ U + α s ) Ds + ∑ s =1 ( 12 γ C + α s ) Ds =
                                             N                                         k



        = [ β − 12 (γ U + γ C )]UCij + ( 12 γ U + αU )U ij + ( 12 γ C + α C )Cij + ∑ s =k +1αˆ s Ds + ∑ s =1α s Ds ,
                                                                                                       N       k



where Uij (Cij) is equal to one if city i or j is in the US (Canada) and zero otherwise.
To derive (10), rearrange terms in (3) as follows:
σ ij    = βUCij + γ UUU ij + γ C CCij + ∑ s =1α s Ds =
                                                    N



        = βUCij + γ UUU ij + γ C CCij + ∑ s =1α s Ds + ∑ s =k +1α s Ds
                                                    k              N



        = βUCij + γ UUU ij + γ C CCij + ∑ s =1α s Ds + α C
                                                    k
                                                                   (∑        k
                                                                             s =1
                                                                                       Ds +    )
                                      + ∑ s =k +1 αˆ s Ds + αU
                                            N
                                                                  (∑   N
                                                                       s = k +1
                                                                                  Ds =     )
        = βUCij + γ UUU ij + γ C CCij + ∑ s =1α s Ds + α C ( 2 ⋅ CCij + UCij ) +
                                                    k



                                      + ∑ s =k +1 αˆ s Ds + αU ( 2 ⋅ UU ij + UCij ) =
                                            N



        = ( β + αC + αU )UCij + (γ U + 2αU )UU ij + (γ C + 2α C )CCij + ∑ s =1α s Ds + ∑ s =k +1αˆ s Ds =
                                                                                                       k       N



        = bUCUCij + bCC CCij + bUUUU ij + ∑ s =1 α s Ds + ∑ s =k +1αˆ s Ds .
                                                        k                  N




Persistence and variance
Consider qt that follows an AR(l) process. Then the covariance matrix for Qt = [ qt ,..., qt −l ]′ is given
by Γ0 ≡ E (QtQt′) = AΓ0 A′ + E ( εt εt′) = AΓ 0 A′ + Ω , where A is the companion matrix for the process.
Thus,      vec( Γ0 ) = ( I − A ⊗ A) −1 vec(Ω)               and    σ 2 ( qt ) ≡ γ 1,1 = e1vec( Γ 0 ) .         Let   us   denote
B ≡ ( I − A ⊗ A) −1 , Σ ≡ vec(Ω) . Then σ 2 ( qt ) ≡ γ 1,1 = ∑ i =1 B1,i Σi = B1,1σ ε2 . Observe that σ 2 ( qt ) is
                                                                                  l2



strictly increasing in B1,1 and σ ε2 . Eigenvalues of A ⊗ A are products of eigenvalues of A (see
Magnus and Neudecker, 1999, p. 28-29). Since persistence is directly related to the absolute size of
eigenvalues, we conclude that the larger the eigenvalues (i.e., larger B), the larger is the half-life.
Hence, holding everything else constant, a series with a long half-life HL has a larger variance.
           Analysis of the frequency domain helps to understand why σ ( ∆qt ) is attenuated for
persistent qt. Operator ∆ is a filter that eliminates or under-weighs low frequency variation. Thus if
most variation of the series comes from low frequency portion of the spectrum (high persistence),
σ ( ∆qt ) should be less than σ ( qt ) if qt is persistent. Note that differencing series does no make series
have the same persistence unless qt is a random walk.


                                                              - 39 -
