NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTERNATIONAL CAPITAL FLOWS RETURNS
AND WORLD FINANCIAL INTEGRATION
Martin D. D. Evans
Viktoria Hnatkovska
Working Paper 11701
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11701
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2005

We thank the National Science Foundation for financial support. Viktoria Hnatkovska would like to thank
Jonathan Heathcote for valuable discussions. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Martin D. D. Evans and Viktoria Hnatkovska. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

International Capital Flows, Returns and World Financial Integration
Martin D. D. Evans and Viktoria Hnatkovska
NBER Working Paper No. 11701
October 2005
JEL No. D52, F36, G11
ABSTRACT
International capital flows have increased dramatically since the 1980s, with much of the increase
being due to trade in equity and debt markets. Such developments are often attributed to the
increased integration of world financial markets. We present a model that allows us to examine how
greater integration in world financial markets affects the behavior of international capital flows and
financial returns. Our model predicts that international capital flows are large (in absolute value) and
very volatile during the early stages of financial integration when international asset trading is
concentrated in bonds. As integration progresses and households gain access to world equity
markets, the size and volatility of international bond flows fall dramatically but continue to exceed
the size and volatility of international equity flows. This is the natural outcome of greater risk sharing
facilitated by increased integration. We find that the equilibrium flows in bonds and stocks are larger
than their empirical counterparts, and are largely driven by variations in equity risk premia. The
paper also makes a methodological contribution to the literature on dynamic general equilibrium
asset-pricing. We implement a new technique for solving a dynamic general equilibrium model with
production, portfolio choice and incomplete markets.
Martin D. D. Evans
Georgetown University
Department of Economics
Washington, DC 20057
and NBER
evansm1@georgetown.edu
Viktoria Hnatkovska
Georgetown University
Department of Economics
Washington, DC 20057
vh6@georgetown.edu

Introduction
International capital flows have increased dramatically since the 1980s. During the 1990s gross
capital flows between industrial countries rose by 300 per cent, while trade flows increased by 63
percent and real GDP by a comparatively modest 26 percent. Much of the increase in capital
flows is due to trade in equity and debt markets, with the result that the international pattern
of asset ownership looks very diﬀerent today than it did a decade ago. These developments are
often attributed to the increased integration of world financial markets. Easier access to foreign
financial markets, so the story goes, has led to the changing pattern of asset ownership as investors
have sought to realize the benefits from international diversification. It is much less clear how the
growth in the size and volatility of capital flows fits into this story. If the benefits of diversification
were well-known, the integration of debt and equity markets should have been accompanied by a
short period of large capital flows as investors re-allocated their portfolios towards foreign debt and
equity. After this adjustment period is over, there seems little reason to suspect that international
portfolio flows will be either large or volatile. With this perspective, the prolonged increase in
the size and volatility of capital flows we observe suggests that the adjustment to greater financial
integration is taking a very long time, or that integration has little to do with the recent behavior
of capital flows.
In this paper we present a model that allows us to examine how greater integration in world
financial markets aﬀects the structure of asset ownership and the behavior of international capital
flows. We use the model to address three main questions:
(i) How is the size and volatility of international capital flows aﬀected by greater financial integration in world debt and equity markets?
(ii) What factors drive international portfolio flows, and does their influence change with the
degree of integration?
(iii) How does the degree of financial integration aﬀect the behavior of equity prices and returns?
To the best of our knowledge, these questions have yet to be addressed in the literature.
The model we present captures the eﬀects of financial integration in the simplest possible
way. We consider a symmetric two-country model with production for traded and nontraded
goods. Firms in both the traded and nontraded sectors issue equity on domestic stock markets.
We examine the impact of financial integration in this world by considering three configurations:
Financial Autarky (fa), Partial Integration (pi), and Full Financial Integration (fi). Under fa,
households only have access to the domestic stock market and so can only hold their wealth in the
1

form of the equity of domestic firms producing traded and nontraded goods. The equilibrium in
this economy serves as a benchmark for gauging the eﬀects of financial integration. Under pi, we
open a world bond market. Now households can allocate their wealth between domestic equity and
international bonds. This configuration roughly corresponds the state of world financial markets
before the mid-1980’s where bonds are the main medium for international financial transactions.
The third configuration, fi, corresponds to the current state of world financial markets. Under fi,
households have access to international bonds, equity issued by domestic firms, and equity issued
by foreign firms producing traded goods.
Two aspects of our model deserve special note. First, in all three market configurations we
consider, international risk-sharing among households is less than perfect. In other words, we only
consider international capital flows in equilibria where markets are incomplete. As we move from
the fa to pi and then to fi configurations of the model, the degree of risk-sharing increases, but
households never have access to a rich enough array of financial assets to make markets complete.
We view this as an important feature of the model. There is ample evidence that incomplete risksharing persists even with the high degree of financial integration we see today (see, Backus and
Smith 1993, Kollman 1995 and many others). This observation precludes us from characterizing
our fi configuration as an equilibrium with complete markets.
The second important feature of the model concerns information. The equilibria we study are
derived under the assumption that all households and firms have access to the same information
regarding the current state of the world economy. While this common-knowledge assumption is
standard in international macro models, it does have important implications for the role played by
international capital flows. Specifically, capital flows in our model do not result from diﬀerences
of opinion concerning the future returns or risks associated with diﬀerent assets. As such, capital
flows do not convey any information to firms and households that is unavailable from other sources.
We do not view this common-knowledge framework as necessarily the best one for analyzing capital
flows. Nevertheless we adopt it here to establish a theoretical benchmark for how greater financial
integration aﬀects capital flows when information about risks and returns is common-knowledge.
By contrast, Evans and Lyons (2004) present a model where information about the state of the
economy is dispersed internationally, and as a result capital flows convey information that is not
available elsewhere. That paper does not undertake the task of analyzing the eﬀects of increased
financial integration.
Our analysis is related to three major strands of research. The first strand studies the eﬀects of
financial liberalization on capital flows and returns. Examples of theoretical research with this focus

2

include Obstfeld (1994), Bacchetta and van Wincoop (1998), and Martin and Rey (2002), while
empirical assessments can be found in Bekaert, Harvey and Lumsdaine (2002a,b), Henry (2000),
Bekaert and Harvey (1995, 2000), Albuquerque, Loayza and Serven (2003) and many others. The
second strand of research focuses on the joint determination of capital flows and equity returns.
Representative papers in this area include Bohn and Tesar (1996), Froot and Teo (2004), Stulz
(1999), and Froot, O’Connell and Seasholes (1998). Hau and Rey (2004a,b) extend the analysis
of equity return-capital flow interaction to include the real exchange rate. The third strand of
the literature studies the macroeconomic implications of financial integration. Baxter and Crucini
(1995) and Heathcote and Perri (2002) compare the equilibrium of models with restricted asset
trade against an equilibrium with complete markets. The comparative approach adopted by these
papers is closest to the methodology we adopt, but our model does not equate financial integration
with complete markets. An alternative view of integration is that it reduces the frictions that
inhibit asset trade. Examples of this approach include Buch and Pierdzioch (2003), Sutherland
(1996), and Senay (1998).
Although the model we develop has a relatively simple structure, several technical problems
need to be solved in order to find the equilibrium associated with any of our market configurations.
The first of these problems concerns portfolio choice. We interpret increased financial integration
as giving households a wider array of assets in which to hold their wealth. How households choose
to allocate their wealth among these assets is key to understanding how financial integration aﬀects
international capital flows, so there is no way to side-step portfolio allocation decisions. We model
the portfolio problem as part of the intertemporal optimization problem of the households allowing
for the fact that returns do not follow i.i.d. processes in equilibrium. The second problem relates
to market incompleteness. Since markets are incomplete in all the configurations we study, we
cannot find the equilibrium allocations by solving an appropriate planning problem. Instead, the
equilibrium allocations must be established by directly checking the market clearing conditions
implied by the decisions of households and firms. This paper uses a new solution methodology,
developed in Evans and Hnatkovska (2005), to compute equilibrium allocations and prices in this
decentralized setting. The methodology also incorporates the complications of portfolio choice
in an intertemporal setting. The third problem concerns non-stationarity. In the equilibria we
study, temporary productivity shocks have permanent eﬀects on a number of state-variables. This
general feature of models with incomplete markets arises because the shocks permanently aﬀect
the distribution of wealth. Recognizing this aspect of our model, the solution method provides us
with equilibrium dynamics for the economy in a large neighborhood of a specified initial wealth

3

distribution.
A comparison of the equilibria associated with our three market configurations provides us
with several striking results. First, in the pi configuration where all international asset trading
takes place via the bond market, international capital flows are large (in absolute value) and very
volatile. Second, when households gain access to foreign equity markets, the size and volatility of
international bond flows falls dramatically. Third, the size and volatility of bond flows remains
above the size and volatility of equity portfolio flows under fi. The standard deviation of quarterly
bond flows measured relative to GDP is approximately 1.6 percent, while the corresponding value
for equity is 0.88 percent, figures that exceed the estimates from the data. Thus, our analysis
overturns the conventional view that actual capital flows are excessively volatile. Our fourth main
finding concerns the factors driving capital flows. In our model, variations in the equity risk premia
account for almost all of the international portfolio flows in bonds and equities. Changes in the risk
premia arise endogenously as productivity shocks aﬀect the distribution of wealth, with the result
that households are continually adjusting their portfolios. Although these portfolio adjustments are
small, their implications for international capital flows are large relative to GDP. Our model also
makes a number of predictions concerning the behavior of asset prices and returns. In particular,
we find that as integration rises the volatility of returns falls and global risk factors become more
important in the determination of expected returns. We also show that international equity price
diﬀerentials can be used as reliable measures of financial integration.
The paper is organized as follows. The next section documents how the international ownership
of assets and the behavior of capital flows has evolved over the past thirty years. The model is
presented in Section 3. Section 4 describes the solution to the model. Our comparison of the
equilibria under the three market configurations is presented in Section 5. Section 6 concludes.

1

The Globalization of Financial Markets

The large increase in international capital flows represents one of the most striking developments in
the world economy over the past thirty years. In recent years, the rise in international capital flows
has been particularly dramatic. IMF data indicates that gross capital flows between industrialized
countries (the sum of absolute value of capital inflows and outflows) expanded 300 percent between
1991 and 20002 . Much of this increase was attributable to the rise in foreign direct investment
and portfolio equity flows, which both rose by roughly 600 percent. By contrast, gross bond
2

The numbers on capital flows and its components are calculated using Balance of Payments Statistics Yearbook
(2003), IMF.

4

flows increased by a comparatively modest 130 percent. The expansion in all these flows vastly
exceeds the growth in the real economy or the growth in international trade. During 1991-2000
period, real GDP in industrialized countries increased by 26 percent, and international trade rose
by 63 percent3 . So while the growth in international trade is often cited as indicating greater
interdependence between national economies, the growth in international capital flows suggests
that the integration of world financial markets has proceeded even more rapidly.
Figure 1b. Foreign-owned assets in US, %GDP

Figure 1a. U.S.-owned assets abroad, %GDP

20

25

20

15

15

10
10

5

5

0

0
76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02
bonds

equity

76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02

FDI

bonds

equity

FDI

Source: BEA (2005). US International investment porisiton at yearend (at market costs).

Greater financial integration is manifested in both asset holdings and capital flows. Figures 1a
and 1b show how the scale and composition of foreign asset holdings have changed between 1976
and 2003. US ownership of foreign equity, bonds and capital (accumulated FDI) is plotted in Figure
1a, while foreign ownership of US corporate bonds, equity, and capital are shown in Figure 1b. All
the series are shown as a fraction of US GDP. Before the mid-1980s, capital accounted for the
majority of foreign assets held by US residents, followed by bonds. US ownership of foreign equity
was below 1% of GDP. The size and composition of these asset holdings began to change in the
mid-1980s when the fraction of foreign equity surpassed bonds. Thereafter, US ownership of foreign
equity increased rapidly peeking at roughly 22 percent of GDP in 1999. US ownership of foreign
capital and bonds also increased during this period but to a lesser extent. In short, foreign equities
have become a much more important component of US financial wealth in the last decade or so.
Foreign ownership of US assets has also risen significantly. As Figure 1b shows, foreign ownership
of corporate bonds, equity and capital have steadily increased as a fraction of US GDP over the
3
Trade volume is calculated as exports plus imports using International Finance Statistics database, IMF. GDP
data comes from World Development Indicators database, World Bank.

5

past thirty years. By 2003, foreign ownership of debt, equity and capital totalled 45 percent of US
GDP.
The pattern of asset ownership depicted in Figures 1a and 1b is consistent with increased international portfolio diversification by both US and non-US residents. More precisely, the plots show
changes in ownership similar to those that would be necessary to reap the benefits of diversification.
This is most evident in the pattern of equity holdings. Foreign ownership of equities has been at
historically high levels over the past five years.
Figure 2b. US portfolio investment, inflows, %GDP

Figure 2a. US portfolio investment, outflows, %GDP

2.0

0.4
0.2

1.5
0.0

1.0

-0.2
-0.4

0.5

-0.6

0.0
-0.8

-0.5

-1.0
75

80

85
debt

90

95

75

00

80

85
debt

equity

90

95

00

equity

Source: IMF (2005). International Finance Statistics, Balance of Payments statistics

The change in asset ownership has been accompanied by a marked change in international
capital flows. Figures 2a and 2b plot the quarterly capital flows associated with transactions in
US assets and liabilities as a fraction of GDP. Negative outflows represent US net purchases of
foreign assets, while positive inflows represent foreign net purchases of US assets. Two features of
these plots stand out. First, capital flows were a small fraction of GDP before the mid-1980s. On
average, annual gross capital flows accounted for only 1 percent of US GDP until the mid 1980s,
but by 2003 amounted to almost 6 percent of GDP. Second, the volatility of capital inflows and
outflows increased markedly in the 1990s. This is most clearly seen in Figures 3a and 3b where we
plot the standard deviation of the capital flows over a rolling window of 58 quarters. The increased
volatility of equity outflows is particularly noticeable: between 1987 and 2004 volatility increased
eleven-fold as a fraction of GDP.

6

Figure 3a. Volatility of portfolio investment, outflows, %GDP

Figure 3b. Volatility of portfolio investment, inflows %GDP

0.20

0.5

0.4

0.15

0.3

0.10
0.2

0.05
0.1

0.00

0.0

86

88

90

92

94

96

vol(debt)

98

00

02

04

86

88

90

vol(equity)

92

94

96

vol(debt)

98

00

02

04

vol(equity)

Source: Authors’ calculations.

Increased financial integration has also coincided with changes in the behavior of equity returns.
Figures 4a and 4b depict the volatility of equity returns in U.S. and U.K. Both volatilities are
calculated as a standard deviation over the 58 quarters rolling window. As the plots clearly indicate,
there has been a general downward trend in the volatility of equity returns in both countries over
the past twenty years.

Figure 4b. Volatility of U.K. equity return, %

Figure 4a. Volatility of U.S. equity return, %

16

9.5
9.0

14

8.5

12
8.0

10
7.5

8

7.0
6.5

6
84

86

88

90

92

94

96

98

00

02

04

84

86

88

90

92

94

96

98

00

02

04

Source: Authors’ calculations using total return indices, MSCI.

We will focus on the three outstanding features of the data in our analysis below: (i) the increase
in the size of portfolio flows, (ii) the rise in the volatility of portfolio flows, and (iii) the decline in
7

the volatility of equity returns. In particular, we will investigate whether all three features arise as
natural consequences of greater integration in world financial markets.

2

The Model

We consider a world economy consisting of two identical countries, called home (h) and foreign
(f). Each country is populated by a continuum of identical households who supply their labor
inelastically to domestic firms in the traded and nontraded goods sectors. Firms in both sectors
are perfectly competitive, and issue equity that is traded on the domestic stock market. Our
model is designed to study how the degree of financial integration aﬀects international capital flows
and returns. For this purpose, we focus on three equilibria. First we consider the benchmark
case of financial autarky (fa). In this environment, households allocate their portfolios between
equity in domestic firms producing traded and nontraded goods. Second, we consider a world
with partial integration (pi) where households allocate their portfolios between domestic equity
and an international bond. Finally, we allow for financial integration of equity markets (fi). Here
households can hold shares issued by foreign traded-good firms as well as domestic equities and the
international bond. This is not to say that markets are complete. In all three cases {i.e., fa, pi,
fi}, the array of assets available to households is insuﬃcient to provide complete risk-sharing.
Below we first describe the production of traded and nontraded goods. Next we present the
consumption, saving and portfolio choice problems facing households. Finally, we characterize the
market clearing conditions that apply under diﬀerent degrees of financial market integration.

2.1

Production

The traded goods sector in each country is populated by a continuum of identical firms. Each firm
owns its own capital and issues equity on the domestic stock market. Period t production by a
representative firm in the traded goods sector of the h country is
Ytt = Ztt Ktθ ,

(1)

with θ > 0, where Kt denotes the stock of physical capital at the start of the period, and Ztt is the
exogenous state of productivity. The output of traded goods in the f country, Ŷtt , is given by an
identical production function using foreign capital K̂t , and productivity Ẑtt . Hereafter we use “ˆ ”
to denote foreign variables. The traded goods produced by h and f firms are identical and can be
costlessly transported between countries. Under these conditions, the law of one price must prevail
8

for traded goods to eliminate arbitrage opportunities.
At the beginning of each period, traded goods firms observe the current state of productivity, and
then decide how to allocate output between consumption and investment goods. Output allocated
to consumption is supplied competitively to domestic and foreign households and the proceeds
are used to finance dividend payments to the owner’s of the firm’s equity. Output allocated to
investment adds to the stock of physical capital available for production next period. We assume
that firms allocate output to maximize the value of the firm to its shareholders.
Let Ptt denote the ex-dividend price of a share in the representative h firm producing tradedgoods at the start of period t, and let Dtt be the dividend per share paid at period t. Ptt and
Dtt are measured in terms of h traded goods. We normalize the number of shares issued by the
representative traded-good firm to unity so the value of the firm at the start of period t is Ptt + Dtt .
h firms allocate output to investment, It , by solving
max (Dtt + Ptt ) ,
It

subject to

(2)

Kt+1 = (1 − δ)Kt + It ,
Dtt = Ztt Ktθ − It ,

where δ > 0 is the depreciation rate on physical capital. The representative firm in the f traded
goods sector choose investment Iˆt to solve an analogous problem. Notice that firms do not have the
option of financing additional investment through the issuance of additional equity or corporate
debt. Additional investment can only be undertaken at the expense of current dividends.
The production of nontraded goods does not require any capital. The output of nontraded
goods by representative firms in countries h and f is given by
Ytn = κZtn ,

(3a)

Ŷtn = κẐtn ,

(3b)

where κ > 0 is a constant. Ztn and Ẑtn denote the period t state of nontraded good productivity in
countries h and f respectively. The output of nontraded goods can only be consumed by domestic
households. The resulting proceeds are then distributed in the form of dividends to owners of
equity. As above, we normalize the number of shares issued by the representative firms to unity,
so period t dividends for h firms are Dtn = Ytn , and for f firms are D̂tn = Ŷtn . We denote the
ex-dividend price of a share in the representative h and f firm, measured in terms of nontraded
9

goods, as Ptn and P̂tn respectively.
Productivity in the traded and nontraded good sectors is governed by an exogenous productivity
process. In particular, we assume that the vector zt ≡ [ln Ztt , ln Ẑtt , ln Ztn , ln Ẑtn ]0 follows an AR(1)
process:

zt = azt−1 + et ,

(4)

where et is a (4 × 1) vector of i.i.d. normally distributed, mean zero shocks with covariance Ωe .

2.2

Households

Each country is populated by a continuum of households who have identical preferences over the
consumption of traded and nontraded goods. The preferences of a representative household in
country h are given by
Ut = Et

∞
X

t
n
β i U (Ct+i
, Ct+i
),

(5)

i=0

where 0 < β < 1 is the discount factor, and U(.) is a concave sub-utility function defined over the
consumption of traded and nontraded goods, Ctt and Ctn :
U (C t , C n ) =

i
1 h 1−φ t φ
ln λt (C ) + λ1−φ
(C n )φ ,
n
φ

with φ < 1. λt and λn are the weights the household assigns to tradable and nontradable consumption respectively. The elasticity of substitution between tradable and nontradable consumption is
(1 − φ)−1 > 0. Preferences for households in country f are similarly defined in terms of foreign
consumption of tradables and nontradables, Ĉtt and Ĉtn .

The array of financial assets available to households diﬀers according to the degree of financial
integration. Under financial autarky (fa), households can hold their wealth in the form of equity
issued by domestic firms in the traded and nontraded goods sectors. Under partial integration (pi),
households can hold internationally traded bonds in addition to their domestic equity holdings. The
third case we consider is that of full integration (fi). Here households can hold domestic equity,
international bonds and equity issued by firms in the foreign traded-goods sector.
The household budget constraint associated with each of these diﬀerent financial structures can
be written in a simple common form. In the case of the representative h household, we write
w
(Wt − Ctt − Qnt Ctn ) ,
Wt+1 = Rt+1

(6)

w is the (gross) return on
where Qnt is the relative price of h nontradables in terms of tradables. Rt+1

10

wealth between period t and t + 1, where wealth, Wt , is measured in terms of tradables. The return
on wealth depends on how the household allocates wealth across the available array of financial
assets, and on the realized return on those assets. In the fi case, the return is given by
t̂
w
t
n
= Rt + αtt (Rt+1
− Rt ) + αt̂t (Rt+1
− Rt ) + αnt (Rt+1
− Rt ),
Rt+1

(7)

t̂
t
where Rt is the return on bonds, Rt+1
and Rt+1
are the returns on h and f tradable equity, and
n
is the return on h nontradable equity. The fraction of wealth held in h and f tradable equity
Rt+1

and h nontradable equity are αtt , αt̂t and αnt respectively. In the pi case, h households cannot hold
f tradable equity, so αt̂t = 0. Under fa, households can only hold domestic equity, so αt̂t = 0 and
αtt + αnt = 1.
The budget constraint for f households is similarly represented by

with

w
(Ŵt − Ĉtt − Q̂nt Ĉtn ),
Ŵt+1 = R̂t+1

(8)

t̂
n̂
w
t
= Rt + α̂tt (R̂t+1
− Rt ) + α̂t̂t (R̂t+1
− Rt ) + α̂n̂t (R̂t+1
− Rt ),
R̂t+1

(9)

n̂
t , and R̂t̂
where R̂t+1
t+1 denote the return on h and f tradable equity, and R̂t+1 is the return on

f nontradable equity. Although these returns are also measured in terms of tradables, they can
diﬀer from the returns available to h households. In particular, the returns on nontradable equity
n̂ , will in general diﬀer from the returns received by h households
received by f households, R̂t+1

because the assets are not internationally traded. Arbitrage will equalize returns in other cases. In
particular, if bonds are traded, the interest received by h and f households must be the same as
(7) and (9) show. Similarly, arbitrage will equalize the returns on tradable equity in the case of pi
t̂
t̂ .
t
t
= R̂t+1
and Rt+1
= R̂t+1
and fi so that Rt+1

2.3

Market Clearing

The market clearing requirements of the model are most easily stated if we normalize the national
populations to unity, as well as the population of firms in the tradable and nontradable sectors.
Output and consumption of traded and nontraded goods can now be represented by the output and
consumption of representative households and firms. In particular, the market clearing conditions
in the nontradable sector of each country are given by
Ctn = Ytn ,

and

11

Ĉtn = Ŷtn .

(10)

Recall that firms in the nontraded sector pay dividends to their shareholders with the proceeds
from the sale of nontradables to households. Thus, market clearing in the nontraded sector also
implies that
Dtn = Ytn ,

and

D̂tn = Ŷtn .

(11)

The market clearing conditions in the tradable goods market are equally straightforward. Recall
that the traded goods produced by h and f firms are identical and can be costlessly transported
between countries. Market clearing therefore requires that the world demand for tradables equals
world output less the amount allocated to investment:
Ctt + Ĉtt = Ytt + Ŷtt − It − Iˆt .

(12)

Next, we turn to market clearing in financial markets. Let Att , At̂t and Ant denote the number of
shares of h tradable, f tradable and h nontradable firms held by h households between the end of
periods t and t + 1. f household share holdings in h tradable, f tradable and f nontradable firms
are represented by Âtt , Ât̂t and Ân̂t . h and f household holdings of bonds between the end of periods
t and t + 1 are denoted by Bt and B̂t . Household demand for equity and bonds are determined by
their optimal choice of portfolio shares (i.e., αtt , αt̂t and αnt for h households, and α̂tt , α̂t̂t and α̂n̂t for
f households) described below. We assume that bonds are in zero net supply. We also normalized
the number of outstanding shares issued by firms in each sector to unity.
The market clearing conditions in financial markets vary according to the degree of financial
integration. Under fa, households can only hold the equity issued by domestically located firms,
so the equity market clearing conditions are
home:

1 = Att ,

0 = At̂t ,

and

1 = Ant ,

(13a)

foreign:

0 = Âtt ,

1 = Ât̂t ,

and

1 = Ân̂t ,

(13b)

while bond market clearing requires that
0 = Bt ,

and

0 = B̂t .

(14)

Notice that fa rules out the possibility of international borrowing or lending, so neither country
can run at positive or negative trade balance. Domestic consumption of tradables must therefore
equal the fraction of tradable output not allocated to investment. Hence, market clearing under fa

12

also implies that
Dtt = Ctt ,

and

D̂tt = Ĉtt .

(15)

Under pi, households can hold bonds in addition to domestic equity holdings. In this case,
equity market clearing requires the conditions in (13), but the bond market clearing condition
becomes
0 = Bt + B̂t .

(16)

The bond market can now act as the medium for international borrowing and lending, so there is
no longer a balanced trade requirement restricting dividends. Instead, the goods market clearing
condition in (12) implies that
Dtt + D̂tt = Ctt + Ĉtt .

(17)

Under fi, households have access to domestic equity, international bonds and equity issued by
firms in the foreign tradable sector. In this case market clearing in equity markets requires that
tradable :
nontradable :

1 = Att + Âtt ,
1 = Ant ,

and
and

1 = At̂t + Ât̂t ,
1 = Ân̂t .

(18a)
(18b)

Market clearing in the bond market continues to require condition (16) so tradable dividends satisfy
(17). In this case international borrowing and lending takes place via trade in international bonds
and the equity of h and f firms producing tradable goods.

3

Equilibrium

An equilibrium in our world comprises a set of asset prices and relative goods prices that clear
markets given the state of productivity, the optimal investment decisions of firms producing tradable
goods, and the optimal consumption, savings and portfolios decisions of households. Since markets
are incomplete under all three levels of financial integration we consider, an equilibrium can only
be found by solving the firm and households’ problems for a conjectured set of equilibrium price
processes, and then checking that resulting decisions are indeed consistent with market clearing.
In this section, we first characterize the solutions to the optimization problems facing households
and firms. We then describe a procedure for finding the equilibrium price processes.

13

3.1

Consumption, Portfolio and Dividend Choices

Consider the problem facing a h household under fa. In this case the h household chooses consumption of tradable and nontradable goods, Ctt and Ctn , and portfolio shares for equity in h and
f firms producing tradables and h firms producing nontradables, αtt , αt̂t and αnt , to maximize expected utility (5) subject to (6) and (7) given current equity prices, {Ptt Ptt̂ , Ptn }, the interest rate

on bonds, Rt , and the relative price of nontradables Qnt . The first order conditions for this problem
are
∂U/∂Ctn
,
∂U/∂Ctt
£
¤
t
1 = Et Mt+1 Rt+1
,
£
¤
n
,
1 = Et Mt+1 Rt+1

Qnt =

1 = Et [Mt+1 Rt ] ,
h
i
t̂
1 = Et Mt+1 Rt+1
,

(19a)
(19b)
(19c)
(19d)
(19e)

¡
¢
t
/ (∂U/∂Ctt ) is the discounted intertemporal marginal rate of substiwhere Mt+1 ≡ β ∂U/∂Ct+1
tution (IMRS) between the consumption of tradables in period t and period t + 1. Condition (19a)

equates the relative price of nontradables to the marginal rate of substitution between the consumption of tradables and nontradables. Under fa, consumption and portfolio decisions are completely
characterized by (19a) - (19c). When households are given access to international bonds under pi,
there is an extra dimension to the portfolio choice problem facing households so (19d) is added
to the set of first order conditions. Under fi, all the conditions in (19) are needed to characterize optimal h household behavior. An analogous set of conditions characterize the behavior of f
households.
It is important to note that all the returns in (19) are measured in terms of tradables. In
particular, the return on the equity of firms producing tradable goods in the h and f counties held
by h investors are
¡ t
¢ t
t
t
= Pt+1
+ Dt+1
/Pt ,
Rt+1

and

´
³
t̂
t
t
/P̂tt .
Rt+1
= P̂t+1
+ D̂t+1

(20)

Because the law of one price applies to tradable goods, these equations also define the return f
households receive on their equity holdings in h and f firms producing tradable goods. In other
t̂
t̂ . The law of one price similarly implies that the return on
t
t
= Rt+1
and R̂t+1
= Rt+1
words, R̂t+1

bonds Rt is the same for all households.
14

The returns on equity producing nontradable goods diﬀer across countries. In particular, the
return on equity for h households is
n
=
Rt+1

©¡

¢ nª © n
ª
n
n
Pt+1
+ Dt+1
/Pt
Qt+1 /Qnt ,

(21)

while for f households the return is
n̂
R̂t+1
=

´
on
o
n³
n
n
/P̂tn
+ D̂t+1
Q̂nt+1 /Q̂nt ,
P̂t+1

(22)

where Q̂nt is the relative price of nontradables in country f.
n̂
n
and R̂t+1
diﬀer from each other for two reasons: First, international producThe returns Rt+1

tivity diﬀerentials in the nontradable sectors will create diﬀerences in returns measured in terms of
nontradables. These diﬀerences will aﬀect returns via the first term on the right hand side of (21)
and (22). Second, international diﬀerences in the dynamics of relative prices Qnt and Q̂nt will aﬀect
returns via the second term in each equation. These diﬀerences arise quite naturally in equilibrium
as the result of productivity shocks in either the tradable or nontradable sectors.
Variations in the relative prices of nontraded goods also drive the real exchange rate, which is
defined as the ratio of price indices in the two countries:

Qt =

(

φ

λT + λN (Qnt ) φ−1
φ

λ̂T + λ̂N (Q̂nt ) φ−1

) φ−1
φ

.

(23)

The returns on equity shown in (20) - (22) are functions of equity prices, the relative price
of nontradables, and the dividends paid by firms. The requirements of market clearing and our
n
n
and D̂t+1
are
specification for the production of nontraded goods implies that dividends Dt+1

exogenous. By contrast, the dividends paid by firms producing tradable goods are determined
optimally. Recall that h firms choose real investment It in period t to maximize the current value
t
in (20) implies that
of the firm, Dtt + Ptt . Combining (19b) with the definition of returns Rt+1
£
¡
¢¤
t
t
t
Pt = Et Mt+1 Pt+1 + Dt+1 . This equation identifies the price a h household would pay for

equity in the firm (after period t dividends have been paid). Using this expression to substitute for
Ptt in the h firm’s investment problem (2) gives the following first order condition:
h
³
´i
t
1 = Et Mt+1 θZt+1
(Kt+1 )θ−1 + (1 − δ) .

(24)

This condition implicitly identifies the optimal level of dividends in period t because next period’s

15

capital depends on current capital, productivity and dividend payments: Kt+1 = (1 − δ)Kt +

Ztt Ktθ − Dtt . Dividends on the equity of f firms producing tradable goods is similarly determined
by

h
³
´i
t
(K̂t+1 )θ−1 + (1 − δ) ,
1 = Et M̂t+1 θẐt+1

(25)

where M̂t+1 is the IMRS for tradable goods in country f, and K̂t+1 = (1 − δ)K̂t + Ẑtt K̂tθ − D̂tt .

The dividend policies implied by (24) and (25) maximize the value of each firm from the per-

spective of domestic shareholders. For example, the stream of dividends implied by (24) maximizes
the value of h firms producing traded goods for households in country h because the firm uses Mt+1
to value future dividends. This is an innocuous assumption under financial autarky and partial
integration because domestic households must hold all the firm’s equity. Under full integration,
however, foreign households have the opportunity to hold the h firm’s equity so the firm’s dividend
policy need not maximize the value of equity to all shareholders. In particular, since markets are
incomplete even under full integration, the IMRS for h and f households will diﬀer, so f households
holding domestic equity will generally prefer a diﬀerent dividend stream from the one implied by
(24). In short, the dividend streams implied by (24) and (25) incorporate a form of home bias
because they focus exclusively on the interests of domestic shareholders.
We can now summarize the equilibrium actions of firms and households. At the beginning of
period t, firms in the traded-goods sector observe the new level of productivity and decide on the
amount of real investment to undertake. This decision determines dividend payments Dtt and D̂tt
as a function of existing productivity, physical capital, expectations regarding future productivity
and the IMRS of domestic shareholders. Firms in the nontradable sectors have no real investment
decision to make so in equilibrium Dtn and D̂tn depend only on current productivity. At the same
time, households begin period t with a portfolio of financial assets. Under fa the menu of assets
is restricted to domestic equities, under pi households may hold domestic equities and bonds, and
under fi the menu may contain domestic equity, foreign equity and bonds. Households receive
dividend payments from firms according to the composition of their portfolios. They then make
consumption and new portfolio decisions based on the market clearing relative price for nontradables, and the market-clearing prices for equity. The first-order conditions in (19) implicitly identify
the decisions made by h households. The decisions made by f households are characterized by an
analogous set of equations. The portfolio shares determined in this manner will depend on household expectations concerning future returns and the IMRS. As equations (20) - (22) show, equity
returns are a function of current equity prices and future dividends and prices, so expectations
regarding the latter will be important for determining how households choose portfolios in period t.
16

Current and future consumption decisions also aﬀect period t portfolio shares through the IMRS.
Households’ demand for financial assets in period t follows from decisions on consumption and the
portfolio shares in a straightforward manner. In the case of fi, the demand for each asset from h
and f households is

h tradable equity:
f tradable equity:
nontradable equity:
bonds

h households

f households

Att
At̂t
Ant

Âtt = α̂tt Ŵtc /Ptt ,

= αtt Wtc /Ptt ,
= αt̂t Wtc /P̂tt ,
= αnt Wtc /Qnt Ptn ,
Bt = αbt Wtc Rt ,

Ât̂t = α̂t̂t Ŵtc /P̂tt ,

(26)

= α̂nt Ŵtc /Q̂nt P̂tn ,
B̂t = α̂bt Ŵtc Rt ,
Ânt

where Wtc ≡ Wt −Ctt −Qnt Ctn and Ŵtc ≡ Ŵt − Ĉtt − Q̂nt Ĉtn denote period t wealth net of consumption

expenditure with αbt ≡ 1 − αtt − αt̂t − αnt and α̂bt ≡ 1 − α̂tt − α̂t̂t − α̂nt . Equation (26) shows that

asset demands depend on expected future returns and risk via optimally chosen portfolio shares,
αt , accumulated net wealth Wtc and Ŵtc , and current asset prices (i.e., Ptt , P̂tt , Ptn and P̂tn for

equity, and 1/Rt for bonds).

3.2

Equilibrium Dynamics

Finding an equilibrium in this model is conceptually straightforward. All that is required are the
time series processes for equity prices {Ptt , P̂tt , Ptn and P̂tn }, the relative prices of nontradables {Qnt

and Q̂nt }, and interest rate on bonds Rt , that clear markets given the optimal behavior of firms

and households. Finding these time series in practice is complicated by the need to completely
characterize how firms and households behave. When markets are complete, this complication can
be circumvented by finding the equilibrium allocations as the solution of an appropriate social planning problem and then deriving the price and interest rates processes that support these allocations
when decision—making is decentralized. This solution method is inapplicable in our model. When
markets are incomplete, as they under fa, pi, and fi, there is no way to formulate a social planning
problem that will provide the equilibrium allocation of the decentralized market economy. To solve
the model, we must therefore characterize the optimal behavior of firms and households for a wide
class of price and interest rate processes, and then use the implied allocations in conjunction with
the market clearing conditions to find the particular set of price and interest rate processes that
clear markets. We implement this solution procedure as follows.
Our first step is to conjecture the form of the vector of state variables that characterize the
³
´
equilibrium dynamics of the economy. For this purpose, let kt ≡ ln (Kt /K) and k̂t = ln K̂t /K
17

where K is the steady state capital stock for firms producing tradable goods. We posit that the
state vector is given by
xt = [zt , kt , k̂t , wt , ŵt ]0 ,
where wt ≡ ln(Wt /W0 ), ŵt ≡ ln(Ŵt /Ŵ0 ) and zt ≡ [ln Ztt , ln Ẑtt , ln Ztn , ln Ẑtn ]0 . Our conjecture for xt

contains the current state of productivity, the capital stocks in the h and f traded-goods sectors
relative to their steady state levels, and the wealth of h and f households relative to their initial
levels W0 and Ŵ0 . All eight variables are needed to characterize period t decisions and market—
clearing prices.
The next step is to characterize the dynamics of xt . Nonlinearities in our model make it im-

possible to describe the dynamics of xt using just its own lagged values. When households face
portfolio choice problems, wealth in period t will depend on the first and second moments of returns
conditioned on period t − 1 information. In general, these moments will be high order polynomials

2 , ŵ 2 , w
3
in the elements of xt−1 (e.g., wt−1
t−1 ŵt−1 , ..., wt−1 , ...), so elements of xt will depend on
t−1

not just xt−1 but also elements in xt−1 x0t−1 and so on. We consider an approximate solution to
the model that ignores the impact of third and higher order terms. Under this assumption, we
conjecture that the dynamics of the economy can be summarized by
Xt+1 = AXt + Ut+1 ,

(27)

¡
¢
where Xt+1 ≡ [ 1 x0t+1 x̃0t+1 ]0 , x̃t+1 ≡ vec xt+1 x0t+1 and Ut+1 is a vector of shocks with
£
¤
0 |X = S(X ). Equation (27) describes the approximate dynamics
E [Ut+1 |Xt ] = 0, and E Ut+1 Ut+1
t
t
of the augmented state vector Xt that contains a constant, the original state vector xt and all the

cross-products of xt in x̃t . Notice that Xt+1 depends linearly on lagged Xt so forecasting future
states of the economy is straightforward: E [Xt+1 |Xt ] = AXt . Since firms and households based

their period t decisions on expectations concerning variables in t + 1, this aspect of (27) is useful

when checking the optimality of decision-making. Equation (27) also introduces conditional heteroskedasticity into the state variables via the S(.) function. Heteroskedasticity arises endogenously
in our model if households change the composition of their portfolios, so our conjecture for the equilibrium dynamics of the state variables must allow the covariance of Ut+1 to vary with elements of
Xt .
The final step is to find the elements of the A matrix and the covariance function S(.) implied
by the equilibrium of the model. Some elements of A and S(.) are simple functions of the model’s
parameters, others depend on the decisions made by households and firms. To find these elements,

18

we use the method of undetermined coeﬃcients. Specifically, we posit that the log dividend, log
consumption and portfolio shares in period t can be written as particular linear functions of the
augmented state vector, Xt . With these functions we can then characterize the dynamics of capital
and wealth from period to period, and hence fill in all the unknown elements of the A matrix and
the covariance function S(.). We also use the assumed form of period t decisions in conjunction
with the market clearing conditions to derive expressions for equilibrium equity prices, relative
prices and the interest rate as log linear functions of Xt . Lastly, we verify that the assumed form
of the period t decisions are consistent with the firm and household first order conditions given the
equilibrium price and return dynamics implied by (27). Evans and Hnatkovska (2005) provides a
detailed description of this procedure.
Two further aspects of this solution procedure deserve emphasis. First, it does not make
any assumption about the stationarity of individual state variables. In the calibrated version of
the model we examine below, productivity is assumed to follow a stationary process, but capital
and wealth are free for follow unit root processes in equilibrium. This turns out to be a useful
feature of the procedure. As we discuss in detail below, there are good economic reasons for
transitory shocks to productivity to have permanent eﬀects on equilibrium wealth in our model. So
a solution procedure that imposed stationarity on wealth would be inappropriate. Our procedure
allows for these permanent wealth eﬀects but in a limited manner. The limitation arises from the
second important aspect of our procedure, namely its use of (27). This equation approximates the
equilibrium dynamics of the economy under the assumption that terms involving third and higher
order powers of the state variables have negligible impact on the elements of xt . This is reasonable
along a sample path where all the elements of xt are small. However, our specification for xt
contains the log deviation of household wealth from its initial level, wt and ŵt , so a sequence of
transitory productivity shocks could push wt and ŵt permanently far from zero. At this point the
dynamics of Xt are poorly approximated by (27) and our characterization of the equilibrium would
be unreliable. In this sense (27) approximates the dynamics of the economy in a neighborhood
of the initial distribution of wealth. We are cognizant of this fact when studying the equilibrium
dynamics below. In particular, when simulating the model we check that the sample paths for
wealth and capital remain in a neighborhood of their initial distributions so that third order terms
are unimportant.
Our solutions to the model use the parameter values summarized in Table 1. We assume that
household preferences and firm technologies are symmetric across the two countries, and calibrate
the model for a period equalling one quarter. The value for φ is chosen to set the intratemporal

19

elasticity of substitution between tradables and nontradables at 0.74, consistent with the value in
Corsetti, Dedola and Leduc (2003). The share parameters for traded and nontraded goods, λt and
λn , are both set to 0.5, and the discount factor β equals 0.99. On the production side, we set the
capital share in tradable production θ to 0.36, and the depreciation rate δ to 0.02. These values are
consistent with the estimates in Backus, Kehoe and Kydland (1995). The only other parameters in
the model govern the productivity process. We assume that each of the four productivity processes
(i.e. ln Ztt , ln Ẑtt , ln Ztn , and ln Ẑtn ) follow AR(1) processes with independent shocks. The AR(1)
coeﬃcients in the processes for tradable—goods productivity, ln Ztt and ln Ẑtt , are 0.78, while the
coeﬃcients for nontradable productivity, ln Ztn , and ln Ẑtn , are 0.99. Shocks to all four productivity
process have a variance of 0.0001. This specification implies that all shocks have persistent but
temporary aﬀects on productivity. Any permanent eﬀects they have on other variables must arise
endogenously from the structure of the model.

Table 1: Model Parameters

Preferences

Production

Productivity

4

β

λt

λn

0.99

0.5

0.5

θ

δ

0.36

0.02

atii

anii

Ωe

0.78

0.99

0.0001

1/(1 − φ)
0.74

Results

We analyze the equilibrium properties of our model in three steps. First, we examine how the
economy responds to productivity shocks. Next, we study the behavior of international capital
flows. Finally, we examine the implications of diﬀering degrees of integration for the behavior of
asset prices and returns.

4.1

Risk-Sharing and Financial Integration

The consequences of greater financial integration are most easily understood by considering how
the economy responds to productivity shocks. With this in mind, consider how a positive produc20

tivity shock to domestic firms producing traded goods aﬀects real output and consumption in both
countries under our three market configurations. The eﬀects on the current account and the relative
price of tradables are shown in the left hand panels of Figure 5a4 . Recall that productivity shocks
only have temporary aﬀects on the marginal product of capital. Thus, a positive productivity shock
in the domestic traded-goods sector will induce an immediate one-period rise in real investment as
firms in that sector take advantage of the temporarily high marginal product of capital. In short,
there is an investment boom in the domestic tradable goods sector. Because the equity issued by
these firms represents a claim on the future dividend stream sustained by the firm’s capital stock,
one eﬀect of the investment boom is to increase the equilibrium price of tradable equity Ptt . Under
fa, this capital gain raises the wealth of h households so the domestic demand for both tradable
and nontradable goods increase. While increased domestic output can accommodate the rise in
demand for tradables, there is no change in the output of nontradables, so the relative price of
nontradables, Qnt , must rise to clear domestic goods markets.
A similar adjustment pattern occurs under pi. The capital gain enjoyed by h households again
translates into increased demand for tradables and nontradables, but now the demand for tradables
can be accommodated by both h and f firms producing tradables. As a result, the productivity
shock is accompanied by a trade deficit in the h country and a smaller rise in Qnt than under
fa. Once the investment boom is over, the domestic supply of tradables available for consumption
rises sharply above domestic consumption. From this point on, the h country runs a trade surplus.
Initially, this surplus is used to pay oﬀ the foreign debt incurred during the investment boom. Once
this is done, h households start lending to f households by buying bonds. This allows h households
to smooth the consumption gains from the productive shock far beyond the point where its direct
eﬀects on domestic output disappear. As a consequence, the temporary shock to productivity has
permanent eﬀects on the international distribution of wealth.
In the case of fi, the increase in Ptt represents a capital gain to both h and f households because
everyone diversifies their international equity holdings (i.e., all households hold equity issued by h
and f firms producing tradable goods). As a result, the demand for tradables and nontradables rise
in both countries. At the same time, by taking a fully diversified positions in t equities, households
in both countries can finance higher tradable consumption without borrowing from abroad. As the
trade deficit is exactly oﬀset by the positive net foreign income, the current account remains in
4

The current account in country h is calculated from the individual’s budget constraint as the sum of net exports
and net foreign income: CAt = Dtt − Ctt + (D̂tt At̂t−1 − Dtt Âtt−1 ). The current account is also identically equal to the
change in net foreign asset position: CAt = P̂tt ∆At̂t − Ptt ∆Âtt + ( R1t Bt − Bt−1 ). Under pi, the current account is
equal to the trade balance, which in turn equals the change in bond holdings: CAt = Dtt − Ctt = R1t Bt − Bt−1 .

21

balance.5 Market clearing in the nontradable markets raises relative prices (i.e. Qnt and Q̂nt ), but
less than under pi.

Figure 5a. Real eﬀects of productivity shocks
The right hand panels of Figure 5a show the eﬀects of positive productivity shock in the h
nontradable sector. Once again, the shock produces a trade and current account deficits under pi,
but it is much smaller and persists for much longer than the deficit associated with productivity
shocks in the tradable sector. The reason for this diﬀerence arises from the absence of an investment
boom. A positive productivity shock in h nontradables increases the supply of nontradable output
available for domestic consumption. This has two equilibrium eﬀects. First, it lowers the relative
price of nontradables, Qnt , so that the h market for nontradables clears. This is clearly seen in the
lower right hand panel of Figure 5a. Second, it raises the h demand for tradables because tradables
and nontradables are complementary. The result is a persistent trade and current account deficit.
Under fi, a productivity increase in n sector leads to a current account deficit. On impact, the
size of the deficit is comparable with that under pi, and likewise is financed by borrowing from
5

The size of the trade deficit is approximately the same under pi and fi. However, under fi the current account
also includes net foreign income. For the h country, net foreign income is D̂tt At̂t−1 − Dtt Âtt−1 .

22

abroad. However, the amount of such borrowing under fi is much larger as it is used to finance
both consumption demand and purchases of a diversified portfolio of t equity shares. Immediately
after the shock, the current account deficit falls by more than 50% as dividends on foreign equities
flow in. Thereafter, it slowly reverts back to zero.
To summarize, the current account dynamics displayed in Figure 5a are readily understood in
terms of intertemporal consumption smoothing once we recognize that shocks to tradable productivity induce domestic investment booms. In addition, these dynamics diﬀer under the pi and fi
configurations. When given a choice between international bonds and equity, households choose to
take fully diversified positions in stocks allowing them to share country specific risks internationally. Then, depending on the productivity shock, bonds are either used to finance the purchases
of equity, or become redundant. When equity is not available, bonds must be used to smooth
consumption.

Figure 5b. Portfolio eﬀects of productivity shocks
We are now ready to think about capital flows, the dynamics of which are presented in Figure 5b.
Under pi, capital flows only take place through the bond market and can be easily inferred from the
dynamics of the trade balance. In particular, the sharp reversal in the trade balance immediately
23

following a shock to productivity in the tradable sector will be matched by a sharp outflow and
then inflow of bonds into the h country. In contrast, productivity shocks in the nontradables induce
a much smaller initial outflow that persists until the trade balance eventually moves into surplus.
In sum, our model generates high volatility in capital flows under pi because shocks to tradable
productivity create short-lived investment booms that necessitate large changes in international
bond holdings if households are to intertemporally smooth consumption.
Under fi the story is quite diﬀerent. The left panel of Figure 5b tells us that the traded
productivity shocks do not induce any borrowing or lending as households are able to share the
country specific risks using equity markets. In eﬀect, households choose to follow a buy-and-hold
strategy for their diversified t equity portfolio and to passively consume t dividends every period.
Such behavior is characteristic of an equilibrium with complete markets. By contrast, immediately
following a nontraded productivity shock households borrow enough to finance increased demand
for t consumption and t equities. As the eﬀect of the shock dies out, agents start selling oﬀ some
of their equity holdings. These proceeds and dividend receipts are used to finance still higher t
consumption and to pay back their debt with interest. The equity holdings are run down until the
current account balance is restored.

4.2

International Capital Flows

Figure 5 shows us how the response of the economy to productivity shocks diﬀers with the degree
of financial integration. We now examine how these diﬀering responses show up in the dynamics of
international capital flows and returns. For this purpose, we simulate the model over 400 quarters
for each financial configuration {i.e., fa, pi, fi} . The innovations to equilibrium wealth are small
enough to keep h and f wealth close to its initial levels over this span so the approximation error
in (27) remains very small. The statistics we report below are derived from 100 simulations for
each financial configuration and so are based on 10,000 years of simulated quarterly data in the
neighborhood of the initial wealth distribution.6
Table 2 compares the behavior of the bond and equity flows between countries in the pi and fi
configurations. The bond flows are computed as

1
Rt Bt − Bt−1 (=

− R1t B̂t + B̂t−1 ) and equity flows as

Ptt ∆Att from the equilibrium portfolio shares and wealth as shown in (26). We study their behavior
measured relative to GDP, (Bt − Rt Bt−1 ) /Rt Yt and Ptt ∆Att /Yt , where Yt denotes GDP defined as
6

The results reported here are based on an initial equal distribution of wealth between h and f households. We
have also examined solutions with uneven initial distributions. As the appendix explains, the implications of these
solutions for the capital flow dynamics are very similar to those presented here. In all cases, we discard the first 100
quarters of each simulated sample spanning 500 quarters.

24

Ytt + Qnt Ytn . Column (i) of Table 2 shows that bond flows are extremely volatile under partial
financial integration. In this configuration, bonds serve two purposes. First, they allow households
to share risks. Second, they provide the only medium through which international borrowing and
lending takes place. Under fa, the cross-country correlation in marginal utility is zero because the
productivity shocks hitting each sector are independent. Under pi, this correlation rises to 0.52,
so the creation of an international bond market facilitates a lot of risk-sharing. Columns (ii) and
(iii) show how the volatility of capital flows is aﬀected by opening both bond and foreign equity
markets. It is important to remember that these flows are computed from the equilibrium in which
fi is established and do not include any of the adjustment flows that would accompany the opening
of foreign equity markets. Two features stand out: First, bond flows are much less volatile than
they were under pi. Second, bond and equity flows display diﬀerent degrees of volatility, with bond
flows being almost twice as large and as volatile as equity flows. As one would expect, the degree
of risk-sharing in this configuration is higher than in the pi case - the cross-country correlation in
marginal utility is 0.67. Access to foreign equity allows households to share more risk, but markets
are still incomplete.

Table 2: International Portfolio Flows (quarterly, % GDP)
Partial Integration pi
bonds
(i)
std.
min
max
mean abs

6.06%
-29.23%
30.99%
4.83%

Full Integration fi
bonds
equity
(ii)
(iii)
1.64%
-6.26%
6.10%
1.30%

0.88%
-4.02%
4.23%
0.70%

The statistics in Table 2 reveal a distinct relation between the degree of financial integration and
the volatility of international capital flows. During the early stages of integration, characterized
here by the move from the fa to pi equilibrium, the volatility of international capital flows rises
significantly. Then, as integration proceeds further, volatility declines.
Our model also predicts that international capital flows should be facilitated by trade in both
bonds and equity at high levels of financial integration. To see this, Table 3 reports the variance
decomposition of the current account under fi. (Recall that all international financial transactions
take place via the bond market under pi.) The first row reports the standard deviation of the
current account measured relative to GDP. This measure of volatility is very much lower than in
25

the case of pi where we compute the standard deviation to be 128%. The next three rows show how
bond and equity flows contribute to the current account volatility. Bond flows are far more volatile
than equity flows and all asset flows are much more volatile than the current account. In particular,
the statistics indicated that a productivity shock inducing a one per cent current account surplus
(relative to GDP) is typically accompanied by an inflow of bonds equal to approximately 18.4 per
cent, and an outflow of equity in both h and f firms producing traded goods amounting to 17.4 per
cent of GDP. Although greater financial integration reduces the volatility to the current account
by facilitating greater risk-sharing, the financial flows accompanying current account imbalances
remain sizable.
Table 3: Variance Decomposition of Current Account

Std. of Current Account
∆ net debt,

1
B
Rt1 t

0.293%

− Bt−1

18.3711

∆ t equity assets, P̂tT ∆At̂t
∆ t equity liabilities, −PtT ∆Âtt

-8.6783
-8.6875

We can gain further insight into the origins of the international equity and bond flows by
decomposing each flow into two components. For this purpose, we use (26) to re-write the flow of
equity in traded—good firms as:
PtT
c
T
c
W
−
α
W
Ptt ∆Att = αT
t
t
t−1 t−1 T ,
Pt−1
"
Ã
c
T
c
= ∆αT
t Wt + αt−1 ∆Wt −

!
#
PtT
c
− 1 Wt−1
αT
t−1 .
T
Pt−1

(28)

The first term in the second line captures portfolio flows resulting from each household’s desire to
alter portfolio shares due to changes in expected returns and risk. Bohn and Tesar (1996) name
this term the “return chasing” component. The second term reflects each household’s intention to
acquire or sell oﬀ some of the asset when wealth changes or when there are some capital gains or
losses on the existing portfolio. This term is called the “portfolio rebalancing” component. Bond
flows can be decomposed in a similar manner:
£
¤
1
c
Bt − Bt−1 = ∆αbt Wtc + αbt−1 ∆Wtc − (Rt−1 − 1) Wt−1
αbt−1 .
Rt
26

(29)

Again, the first term on the right identifies the “return chasing” component, and the second the
“portfolio rebalancing” component.
Table 4 reports the contribution each component makes to the variance of the bond and equity
flows.7 The upper panel shows that variations in the “return chasing” component are the main
source of volatility in bond flows under pi. Portfolio rebalancing plays an insignificant role. This
is not a surprising result. The statistics in Table 4 are based on the equilibrium dynamics of the
economy in the neighborhood of an initial symmetric wealth distribution, so the bond position of
households at the beginning of each period is typically a small fraction of total wealth. Under these
circumstances αb ∼
= 0, so the second term in (29) makes a negligible contribution to bond flows.
t−1

Table 4: Variance Decomposition of International Portfolio Flows8

std(flow)

Return Chasing
(i)

Portfolio Rebalancing
(ii)

Partial Integration
Equity
Bonds

—
43.09%

—
0.993

—
0.007

Full Integration
Equity
Bonds

6.26%
11.63%

2.38
0.991

-1.38
0.009

Note that the decomposition results reported here use portfolio flows in levels.

The lower panel of Table 4 presents the decompositions under fi. Once again, “portfolio rebalancing” is insignificant in the case of bonds. In the case of equities, both components play a
role. Households increase the share of tradable equity in their portfolios in response to shocks
that increase the price of tradable equity so the variations in the two components are negatively
correlated. The figures of 2.38 and -1.38 mean that a unit of positive equity flow results from an
increase of 2.38 units in the “return chasing” component and a 1.38 fall in the “portfolio rebalancing” component. Rebalancing plays a more important role in equity flows because households
7

More precisely, equation (28) implies that




t
c
) − 1]Wt−1
αtt−1 ).
V Ptt ∆Att = CV Ptt ∆Att , ∆αtt Wtc + CV (Ptt ∆Att , αtt−1 ∆Wtc − [(Ptt /Pt−1

Table 4 reports the first and second terms on the right as a fraction of V (Ptt ∆Att ) in the rows labeled “Equity”.
We perform a similar computation using (29) for the bond decompositions and report the results in the rows labeled
“Bonds”.

27

begin each period with approximately 50 percent of their wealth in tradable equity, which is evenly
split between stocks issued by domestic and foreign firms.
To understand how households choose to allocate their wealth among the available assets, in
particular how the α’s are determined, we must focus on the financial side of the model. Under fi,
the optimal portfolio shares for h households are determined by the first order conditions in (19b)
- (19e). These equations can be rewritten in log-linear form as
¡
1 ¡ χ ¢
χ
χ ¢
− rt + Vt rt+1
= −CVt mt+1 , rt+1
,
Et rt+1
2

(30)

χ
is the log return for equity χ = {t,t̂,n} , rt is the log risk free rate, and mt+1 ≡ ln Mt+1
where rt+1

is the log IMRS. Vt (.) and CVt (., .) denote the variance and covariance conditioned on period t
information. Equation (30) says that under an optimal choice of portfolio, the expected excess log
return on equity must equal minus the covariance of the log equity return with the log IMRS. We
shall refer to the left hand side of (30) as the equity risk premium. In our model the term on the
right hand side can be re-expressed as
¡
¡ n
χ ¢
χ ¢
+ (1 − γ t ) CVt qt+1
,
+ cnt+1 , rt+1
γ t CVt ctt+1 , rt+1
where

(31)

"½
#
φ ¾−1
λN ¡ N ¢ φ−1
γ t ≡ Et
Qt
1+
.
λT

Thus, (30) and (31) imply that the equity risk premium can be written as a weighed average of
two covariances: the covariance between the log equity return and the log tradable consumption
ctt+1 , and covariance between the log equity return and log nontradable consumption measured in
n + cn . In principle, both covariances can change as shocks hit the economy
terms of tradables, qt+1
t+1

and so can induce variations in the equity premia. However, in practice most of the variation in
the risk premia come through changes in γ t . As figure 4a showed, productivity shocks have an
immediate and long-lasting eﬀects on the relative price of nontraded goods under fi, so they also
induce variations in the equity risk premia via changes in γ t .
Changes in the equity premia determine how households allocate their wealth between equities
and bonds. This is easily demonstrated once we recognize that mt+1 is perfectly correlated with
log wealth, wt+1 . Using this feature of the model, we can use the household’s budget constraint to

28

rewrite the right hand side of (30) for χ = {t,t̂,n} . Re-arranging the resulting equations gives
¡
¢
αt = Σ−1
Et ert+1 + 12 σ 2t ,
t

(32)

t̂
t
n
− rt , rt+1
− rt , rt+1
− rt ]0
where αt = [αtt , αt̂t , αnt ]0 is the vector of portfolio shares, ert+1 = [rt+1

is a vector of excess equity returns, Σt is the conditional covariance of ert+1 , and σ 2t = diag (Σt ) .
Notice that Et ert+1 + 12 σ 2t is just the vector of equity premia.9 Thus, the variations in Qnt induced
by productivity shocks change the equity premia and also the equilibrium portfolio shares of households. This is why the “return chasing” component is such an important component of equity flows
under fi.

4.3

Asset Prices and Returns

We now turn to examine how greater financial integration aﬀects the behavior of asset prices
and returns. This analysis naturally complements the study of capital flows. It also provides a
theoretical perspective on the large empirical literature that uses the behavior of asset prices as a
metric for measuring the degree of financial integration between countries.
Table 5 reports the standard deviations of realized returns computed from our model simulations. Column (i) reports volatility under fa. Here we see that the model produces far less
volatility in bond and equity returns than we observe in the world. This is not surprising given
our very standard specification for productivity, production and preferences. We do note, however,
that the relative volatility of returns is roughly in accordance with reality: equity are much more
volatile than the risk free rate, and foreign exchange returns, ∆qt ≡ ln Qt − ln Qt−1 , are an order of

magnitude more volatile than equity. Note also that the volatility of the return on equity in firms
producing nontradable goods is almost twice that of the return on firms producing tradables.
Columns (ii) - (v) of Table 5 show how the volatility of returns change as the degree of financial

integration increases. Column (ii) reports the standard deviation of returns for the case of partial
integration where households can trade international bonds. Column (iii) shows how the volatility
changes relative to the case of fa. Opening trade in international bonds reduces the volatility
of equity returns and the risk-free rate by approximately one third, while the volatility of foreign
exchange returns falls by roughly 5%. The volatility of returns changes further when households are
given access to foreign t equity. As column (v) shows, the largest changes occur in the volatility
9

Excess returns are adjusted by the addition of one half times the return variance, a Jensen’s inequality term, to
account for the fact that we are working with log returns.

29

Table 5: Return Volatility, (annual, % std. dev.)

Risk free rate rt
tradable equity rtt
nontradable equity rtn
Portfolio returns rtw
Foreign exchange ∆qt
Depositary receipt r̃tt

fa
(i)

pi
(ii)

pi-fa diﬀerence
(iii)

fi
(iv)

fi-pi diﬀerence
(v)

0.15%
0.57%
1.09%
0.80%
3.75%
0.44%

0.11%
0.44%
0.94%
0.64%
3.56%
0.44%

-33.94%
-27.17%
-14.65%
-21.29%
-5.15%
-1.92%

0.11%
0.44%
0.92%
0.61%
3.55%
0.44%

0.00%
-0.01%
-2.77%
-4.63%
-0.17%
-0.04%

of portfolio returns (i.e., the return on wealth), which falls by 5% relative to its level under pi.
Volatility of n equity return decreases by roughly 3%.
Next, we turn to issue of how financial integration aﬀects the relation between returns. For
this purpose, we first derive a log version of the CAPM implied by our model. Under our log
specification for household utility, the IMRS for each household is proportional to the reciprocal
w . Using this fact, we can rewrite the log
of the (gross) return of optimally invested wealth, Rt+1

linearized version of the h household’s first order conditions in (19b) - (19e) as
¡ χ ¢
¡ w ¢
χ
= Btχ Vt rt+1
− rt + 12 Vt rt+1
Et rt+1

(33)

χ
w ≡ ln Rw . B χ is the beta for asset χ,
where rt+1
is the log return on equity χ = {t,t̂,n,} and rt+1
t
t+1

defined as the ratio of conditional covariance between asset χ and return on domestic wealth, and
the conditional variance of the market portfolio:
Btχ

¡ w
χ ¢
, rt+1
CVt rt+1
¡ w ¢
.
=
Vt rt+1

Notice that unlike the standard CAPM beta, Btχ depends on the moments of log rather than gross

returns.

w ], so the
The household first order conditions in (19b) - (19e) also imply that 1 = Et [Mt+1 Rt+1

approximate relation in (33) also applies to the log return on wealth. In this case Btw = 1, so the

approximation simplifies to

¡ w ¢
w
− rt = 12 Vt rt+1
.
Et rt+1
30

(34)

Our log version of the CAPM is obtained by combining (33) and (34):
¡ χ ¢
¡ w
¡ w ¢¢
χ
Et rt+1
− rt + 12 Vt rt+1
− rt + 12 Vt rt+1
= Btχ Et rt+1
.

(35)

This equation says that the expected log excess return on equity is proportional to the log excess
return on optimally invested wealth. Importantly, this relation is based on the optimality of households’ portfolio choice and holds (approximately) true whatever the degree of financial integration.
It therefore provides a natural framework for examining how increased financial integration aﬀects
the relationship between equilibrium returns.
We examine the eﬀects of integration with the regression
¡ χ ¢
χ
e
w
w
fx
− rt + 12 Vt rt+1
+ α2 Et ert+1
+ α3 Et ert+1
+ ηt,
= α0 + α1 Et ert+1
Et rt+1

(36)

¡ i ¢
i
i
b
for i = {w,w,fx}.
Here we consider the
≡ Et rt+1
− rt + 12 Vt rt+1
for χ = {t,n} , where Et ert+1

regression of the expected log excess equity return on the expected log excess return on domes-

e
w , foreign wealth, E er w
tic wealth, Et ert+1
t t+1 , and the expected excess return on foreign exchange,

fx (where r fx ≡ q
Et ert+1
t+1 −qt ). Our CAPM equation in (35) implies that if the betas for equity are
t+1

constant, the coeﬃcients α0 , α2 and α3 should equal zero, and the R2 of the regression should be

very close to unity. Alternatively, if the betas are time-varying, and those variations are unrelated
to returns on foreign wealth or foreign exchange, the R2 of the regression will be lower but α0 , α2
and α3 should still equal zero. Only when the variations in the betas are correlated with the return
on foreign wealth and/or foreign exchange, will α2 and/or α3 diﬀer from zero.
Table 6 presents the results from estimating (36) with simulated data on expected log excess
returns from our model.10 Since our simulations span 10,000 years of quarterly data, all the
regression coeﬃcients are estimated with great precision. We therefore omit standard errors from
the table for the sake of clarity. Three results stand out. First, excess equity returns are unrelated
to the foreign exchange returns across all degrees of financial integration; the estimates of α3 are
zero in all cases. Second, as integration increases, time-varying betas play a larger role in the
determination of t equity returns and a smaller role in the determination of returns on n equity.
The R2 statistics for t equity fall from 0.82 to 0.66 as we move from the fa to fi equilibria, while
the statistics for n equity rise from 0.27 to 0.99. Since returns (approximately) satisfy the CAPM
equation (35), a small R2 signals the presence of a time-varying beta that is largely uncorrelated
10
We can compute log excess returns directly from the model, so the regression can be estimated without the need
to instrument for the expected returns on the right hand side.

31

with the expected excess returns on wealth and foreign exchange. Third, the expected return on
domestic (foreign) wealth has less (more) of an influence on t equity returns as integration rises.
This result accords with the idea that foreign risk factors play an increasing important role in the
determination of equilibrium expected returns as integration rises. In the last row of the table we
report estimates of α1 from (36) with the restriction α1 = 1 − α2 . These estimates show that the
relative influence of domestic risk on traded equity falls from unity to approximately 0.5 as we move
from the fa to fi equilibrium.

Table 6. Excess Return Regression Results

Autarky
t equity n equity
(i)
(ii)

Partial Integration
t equity n equity
(iii)
(iv)

Full Integration
t equity n equity
(v)
(vi)

w : α
Et ert+1
1
e
w
: α2
Et ert+1
fx : α
Et ert+1
3

2.675
0.000
0.000

-0.341
0.000
0.000

0.257
-0.149
0.000

0.767
0.120
0.000

0.067
0.068
0.000

0.934
-0.069
0.000

R2

0.818

0.273

0.420

0.823

0.657

0.987

α1 = 1 − α2

1.000

1.000

2.390

0.865

0.496

1.079

Overall, the results in Table 6 confirm the idea that global risks have a larger impact on the
behavior of excess returns on assets that are more widely traded as financial integration increases.11
e
w
In our model, Et ert+1
represents the eﬀects of global risk from the perspective of domestic t equity.

Once all households are free to trade this equity, global risk accounts for approximately 50% of the

variation in excess returns. By contrast, excess returns on n equity remain largely unaﬀected by
global risk even under fi because these equity are only held domestically.12 The second noteworthy
feature of the results concerns the estimates of α3 . Pure foreign exchange risk, as represented by
fx , exerts no independent influence on expected excess equity returns in any equilibrium.
Et ert+1

Currency risk only aﬀects equity returns via its impact on the domestic and foreign risk factors,
11
The emprical literature relating returns to local and global risk factors includes Korajczyk and Viallet (1989),
Chan et al (1992), Errunza et al (1992), Dumas and Solnik (1995), Heston et al (1995), Bekaert and Harvey (1995,
1997), Hardouvelis et al (2000) and Fratzscher (2001).
12
These results provide theoretical perspective on the literature examining the relative importance of country and
industry factors in explaining equity return dynamics. See, for example, Heston and Rouwenhorst (1994), Griﬃn and
Karolyi (1998), Rouwenhorst (1999) and Adjaourte and Danthine (2002).

32

e
w and E er w
Et ert+1
t t+1 .

We can also use our model to study how integration aﬀects the behavior of equity price diﬀer-

entials. Recall that in equilibrium the price of equity for h and f firms producing traded goods,
Ptt and P̂tt satisfy
h
i
£
¤
t
t
t
t
+ Dt+1
) and P̂tt = Et M̂t+1 (P̂t+1
+ D̂t+1
) .
Ptt = Et Mt+1 (Pt+1

(37)

Notice that these expressions are based on households’ first order conditions and hold true in the
fa, pi and fi equilibria we study. They imply that cross—country diﬀerences in the price of t equity
can arise from either diﬀerences in the dividends paid out by h and f firms, Dtt and D̂tt , and/or
diﬀerences in the IMRS of h and f households.13 To diﬀerentiate between these sources, it is useful
to consider the price of a claim to the stream of dividends paid by f firms, D̂tt , valued with the
h IMRS, Mt+1 . This security has the features of an American Depositary Receipt (ADR).14 In
equilibrium, the price of this claim must satisfy
h
i
t
t
+ D̂t+1
) .
P̃tt = Et Mt+1 (P̃t+1

(38)

The price deferential between Ptt and P̃tt reflect diﬀerences in how h households value the dividend
streams of h and f firms. Similarly, cross-country diﬀerences in the IMRS will be reflected in the
price deferential between P̂tt and P̃tt .
Table 7 reports statistics on the price diﬀerential between P̂tt and P̃tt across the fa, pi and fi
equilibria. As economy moves from fa to pi both the average price diﬀerential and its volatility
decline dramatically. Recall that t equity is only held domestically in the pi equilibrium, so all the
change in the price diﬀerential reflect the eﬀects of greater international risk-sharing on Mt+1 and
M̂t+1 facilitated via trade in international bonds. Under fi, all households can hold t equity issued
by both h and f firms. Under these circumstances, optimal portfolio choice by h households requires
t + D̂ t )], so P̂ t must equal P̃ t and the price diﬀerential disappears. This
that P̂tt = Et [Mt+1 (P̂t+1
t
t
t+1

is clearly reflected by the statistics in the right hand column of the table.
We can also use the price of ADRs to study the components of realized return diﬀerentials. By
13

Price diﬀerences could also arise from diﬀerences in household expectations, but the common information formulation of our model rules out this possibility.
14
ADRs have been used to measure financial integration empirically by Karolyi (2002), Hunter (2005), Yeyati et
al. (2005) and others.

33

Table 7. T Equity Price Diﬀerentials (quarterly, %)

mean
std.
min
max
mean abs

Autarky
(i)

Partial Integration
(ii)

Full Integration
(iii)

0.06%
1.25%
-4.87%
4.72%
0.99%

0.00%
0.12%
-0.67%
1.96%
0.05%

0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%

definition the return diﬀerential on the t equity issued by h and f firms can be written as
rtt − r̂tt = (rtt − r̃tt ) + (r̃t − r̂tt )

(39)

t . The first term on the right
where r̃tt is the log return on an ADR defined as ln(P̃tt + D̂tt ) − ln P̃t−1

identifies the eﬀects of cross-country diﬀerences in the dividend prices, Dtt and D̂tt . Realized equity
returns in our model are predominantly driven by unexpected changes in equity prices (rather than
changes in the risk free rate or risk premia). This means that rtt − r̃tt will reflect news concerning

diﬀerences in the future path of t dividends across countries. Similarly, news concerning cross-

country diﬀerences in the future IMRS will be reflected in r̃t − r̂tt . To measure these contributions,

we multiply both sides of (39) by rtt − r̂tt and take expectations to give

¡ t
¢
¡ t
¢
¡ t
¢
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
V rt+1
− r̂t+1
− r̃t+1
, rt+1
− r̂t+1
− r̂t+1
, rt+1
− r̂t+1
= CV rt+1
+ CV r̃t+1
.

(40)

t −r̂ t )
Table 8 presents components of the decomposition in (40) computed as fractions of V(rt+1
t+1

from simulations of the fa, pi and fi equilibria. The first row of the table shows that the volatility
of the return diﬀerential declines as soon as there is any financial integration. Notice, also, that the
volatility does not disappear entirely under fi. This reflects the fact that the equity issued by h
and f firms producing traded goods represent claims to diﬀerent steams of dividends. The bottom
two rows of the table show how cross-country diﬀerences in dividends and the IMRS contribute
to the volatility of the return diﬀerential. Approximately 2/3 of the volatility is attributable to
diﬀerences in the IMRS and 1/3 to diﬀerences in dividends under fa. By contrast, under both pi
and fi, the volatility of the return diﬀerential is almost completely attributable to diﬀerences in
the dividend process.

34

Table 8. Volatility Decomposition of Return Diﬀerentials

t − r̂ t ) (annual %)
Std(rt+1
t+1
Volatility Shares
Dividends
IMRS

Autarky
(i)
81.06

Partial Integration
(ii)
32.64

Full Integration
(iii)
32.64

0.357
0.643

0.997
0.003

0.998
0.002

Table 8 shows that the behavior of the return diﬀerentials is almost identical in the pi and fi
equilibria. This result may seem surprising at first sight because the equilibria are not equivalent
in terms of risk sharing. Nevertheless, the intuition for the result is straightforward: unexpected
changes in equity prices account for almost all the variation in realized returns. This means that
news concerning the future path of dividends and/or expected future returns account for most of
the variation in the return diﬀerentials. In the pi and fi equilibria, news about future dividends
dominates news concerning future expected returns. And, since the dividend policies followed by
t firms are largely the same in the pi and fi equilibria, the behavior of the return diﬀerentials
remains largely unchanged as we move from pi to fi. One important implication of this finding is
that measures of integration based on the behavior of return diﬀerentials may be unreliable.

5

Conclusion

This paper develops a model of international financial integration to study how the latter aﬀects the
behavior of international capital flows and asset prices. We examine the eﬀects of greater financial
integration by comparing the equilibria of our model under three financial configurations: fa, pi
and fi. Our findings suggest that at the early stages of financial integration international capital
flows are large (in absolute value) and very volatile. When households gain access to foreign equity
markets, the size and volatility of international bond flows falls dramatically but still remains high in
an absolute sense. Although the integration of world equity markets facilitates greater risk-sharing
in our model, it leaves markets incomplete with the result that productivity shocks induce significant
international capital flows. Thus, our model demonstrates that there is no inconsistency between
the large and volatile international capital flows we observe and a greater degree of integration in
world financial markets. This result contrasts with the “conventional wisdom” that the size and
volatility of international capital flows are in some sense excessive.

35

Our model also provides theoretical guidance on the appropriate way to measure the degree of
financial integration. In particular, we find that as integration rises global risk factors become more
important in determining excess equity returns. We also find the equity price diﬀerentials using
ADRs can be used as reliable measures of financial integration. This finding is consistent with the
intuition behind the recent empirical literature examining international financial integration.

36

References
[1] Adjaoute, Kpate and Jean-Pierre Danthine (2002). ”European Financial Integration and Equity Returns: A Theory-Based Assessment”, European Central Bank.
[2] Albuquerque, Rui, Norman Loayza, and Luis Serven (2003). ”World Market Integration
Through the Lens of Foreign Direct Investors”.
[3] Ayuso, Juan and Roberto Blanco (1999). ”Has Financial Market Integration Increased During
The Nineties?” Banco de España Working Paper 9923.
[4] Bacchetta, Philippe and Eric van Wincoop (1998). ”Capital Flows to Emerging Markets: Liberalization, Overshooting, and Volatility”, NBER Working Paper No. 6530.
[5] Backus, Dave and Gregory Smith (1993). “Consumption and Real Exchange Rates in Dynamic
Exchange Economies with Nontraded Goods”, Journal of International Economics, Vol. 35,
pp. 297-316.
[6] Baele, Lieven, Annalisa Ferrando, Peter Hördahl, Elizaveta Krylova, and Cyril Monnet ”Measuring Financial Integration in The Euro Area” ECB Occasional Paper Series No. 14.
[7] Baxter, Marianne and Mario J. Crucini (1995). ”Business Cycles and the Asset Structure of
Foreign Trade”, International Economic Review, Vol. 36, pp. 821-854.
[8] _______, Urban J. Jermann, and Robert G. King (1998). ”Nontraded Goods, Nontraded
Factors and International Non-diversification”, Journal of International Economics Vol. 44,
pp. 211-229.
[9] Bekaert, Geert and Campbell R. Harvey (1995). ”Time-Varying World Market Integration”
The Journal of Finance, Vol. 50, No. 2, pp. 403-444.
[10] _______ (1997). ”Emerging Equity Market Volatility” Journal of Financial Economics
Vol. 43, pp. 29-77.
[11] _______ (2000). ”Capital flows and the behavior of emerging market equity returns”. In:
Edwards, S. (Ed.), Capital Inflows and the Emerging Economies. University of Chicago Press
and NBER, Cambridge, MA, pp. 159-194.
[12] _______, and Robin L. Lumsdaine (2002a). ”The Dynamics of Emerging Market Equity
Flows”, Journal of Money and Finance, Vol. 21, pp. 295-350.
37

[13] _______ (2002b). ”Dating the Integration of World Equity Markets”, Journal of Financial
Economics Vol. 65, pp.203-247.
[14] Bohn, Henning and Linda L. Tesar (1996). ”U.S. Investment in Foreign Markets: Portfolio
Rebalancing or Return Chasing?”, The American Economic Review, Vol. 86, No. 2, Papers
and Proceedings, pp. 77-81.
[15] Brandt, Michael W., Amit Goyal, and Pedro Santa-Clara (2001). ”Dynamic Portfolio Choice:
A Simulation Approach”, Anderson Graduate School of Management Finance Paper No. 4-01.
[16] Buch, Claudia M., Jorg Dopke, and Christian Pierdzioch (2002). ”Financial Openness and
Business Cycle Volatility”, Kiel Working Paper No. 1121.
[17] ______ and Christian Pierdzioch (2003). ”The Integration of Imperfect Financial Markets:
Implications for Business Cycle Volatility”, Kiel Working Paper No. 1161.
[18] Carrieri, Francesca, Vihang Errunza, and Ked Hogan (2003). ”Characterizing World Market
Integration Through Time” McGill University.
[19] Chan, K.C., G. Andrew Karolyi, and Renl M. Stulz (1992). ”Global Financial Markets and
the Risk Premium on U.S. Equity” Journal of Financial Economics Vol. 32, pp.137-167.
[20] Chen, Zhiwu and Peter J. Knez (1995). ”Measurement of Market Integration and Arbitrage”
The Review of Financial Studies Vol. 8, No. 2, pp. 287-325.
[21] Cochrane, John H. (2001). ”Asset Pricing”, Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey.
[22] Corsetti, Giancarlo, Luca Dedola and Sylvain Leduc (2003). ”International Risk-Sharing and
the Transmission of Productivity Shocks”.
[23] Campbell, John Y., Yeung Lewis Chan, and Luis M. Viceira (2000). ”A Multivariate Model
of Strategic Asset Allocation”.
[24] Danthine, Jean-Pierre and John B. Donaldson (1994). ”Asset Pricing Implications of Real
Market Frictions”.
[25] Diermeier, Jeﬀ and Bruno Solnik (2000). ”Global Pricing of Equity”.
[26] Dumas, Bernard and Bruno Solnik (1995). ”The World Price of Foreign Exchange Risk” The
Journal of Finance Vol. 50, No. 2, pp. 445-479.
38

[27] Engel, Charles and Akito Matsumoto (2004). ”Home Bias in Equities under New Open Economy Macroeconomics”.
[28] Evans, Martin D. D. and Viktoria V. Hnatkovska (2005). ”Approximation Methods for Solving
General Equilibrium Models with Incomplete Markets and Many Assets”.
[29] ______ and Richard K. Lyons (2004), “A New Micro Model of Exchange Rate Dynamics”,
NBER Working Paper No.10379.
[30] Errunza, Vihang and Etienue Losq (1985). ”International Asset Pricing under Mild Segmentation: Theory and Test”, The Journal of Finance Vol. 40, No. 1, pp. 105-124.
[31] ______, and Prasad Padmanabhan (1992). ”Tests of Integration, Mild Segmentation and
Segmentation Hyposeses”, Journal of Banking and Finance, Vol. 16, pp. 949-972.
[32] Ferson, Wayne E. and Campbell R. Harvey (1993). ”The Risk and Predictability of International Equity Returns”, The Review of Financial Studies Vol. 6, No. 3, pp. 527-566.
[33] Flood, Robert P. and Andrew K. Rose ”Financial Integration: A New Methodology and an
Illustration” http://faculty.haas.berkeley.edu/arose.
[34] Fratzscher, Marcel (2001) ”Financial Market Integration In Europe: On The Eﬀects Of EMU
On Stock Markets” ECB Working Paper No. 48.
[35] Froot, Kenneth A., Paul G. J. O’Connell and Mark S. Seasholes (1998). ”The Portfrolio Flows
of International Investors”, NBER Working Paper No. 6687.
[36] Froot, Kenneth A. and Melvyn Teo (2004). ”Equity Style Returns and Institutional Investor
Flows, NBER Working Paper 10355.
[37] Griﬃn, John M. and G. Andrew Karolyi (1998). ”Another Look at the Role of the Industrial Structure of Markets for International Diversification Strategies” Journal of Financial
Economics Vol. 50 pp. 351-373.
[38] Hardouvelis, Gikas, Dimitrios Malliaropulos, and Richard Priestley (2000). ”EMU and European Stock Market Integration” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 2124.
[39] Hau, Harald and Helene Rey (2004a). ”Exchange Rates, Equity Prices and Capital Flows”.
[40] ______ (2004b). ”Can Portfolio Rebalancing Explain the Dynamics of Equity Returns,
Equity Flows, and Exchange Rates?”.
39

[41] Heathcote, Jonathan and Fabrizio Perri (2002). ”Financial Autarky and International Business
Cycles”, Journal of Monetary Economics Vol. 49, pp. 601-627.
[42] ______ (2004). ”Financial Globalization and Real Regionalization”, Journal of Economic
Theory, Vol.119, No.1, pp. 207-243.
[43] ______ (2004). ”The International Diversification Puzzle is Not as Bad as You Think”,
Georgetown University Working Paper.
[44] Henry, Peter Blair (2000). ”Stock Market Liberalization, Economic Reform, and Emerging
Market Equity Prices” The Journal of Finance Vol. 55, No.2, pp. 529-564.
[45] Heston, Steven L. and K. Geert Rouwenhorst (1994). ”Does Industrial Structure Explain the
Benefits of International Diversification?” Journal of Financial Economics Vol. 36, pp. 3-27.
[46] ______, and Roberto E. Wessels (1995). ”The Structure of International Stock Returns
and the Integration of Capital Markets”, Journal of Empirical Finance Vol. 2, pp. 173-197.
[47] Hunter, Delroy M. (2005). ”What Drives Time Variation in Emerging Market Segmentation”,
The Journal of Financial Research Vol. 28, No. 2, pp. 261-280.
[48] Karolyi, Andrew G. (2002). ”The Role of ADRs in the Development and Integration of Emerging Equity Markets”, Ohio State University.
[49] ______ and Rene M. Stulz (2001). ”Are International Assets Priced Locally or Globally?”
Handbook of the Economics of Finance, George Constantinides, Milton Harris, and Rene M.
Stulz, eds., North-Holland.
[50] Korajczyk, Robert A. and Claude J. Viallet (1989). ”An Empirical Investigation of International Asset Pricing”, The Review of Financial Studies Vol. 2, No. 4, pp. 553-585.
[51] Kollmann, Robert, (1995). “Consumption, real exchange rates and the structure of international asset markets”, Journal of International Money and Finance, 14, pp. 191- 211.
[52] Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar S. Prasad, and Marco E. Terrones (2003). ”Financial Integration and
Macroeconomic Volatility”, IMF Working Paper WP/03/50.
[53] Lessard, Donald R. ”World, National, and Industry Factors in Equity Returns”, The Journal
of Finance, Vol. 29, No. 2, Papers and Proceedings of the Thirty-Second Annual Meeting of
the American Finance Association, New York, New York, pp. 379-391.
40

[54] Markowitz, Harry (1952). ”Portfolio Selection”, The Journal of Finance, Vol 7, No. 1, pp.
77-91.
[55] Martin, Philippe and Helene Rey (2000). ”Financial Integration and Asset Returns”.
[56] Merton, Robert C. (1969). ”Lifetime Portfolio Selection under Uncertainty: The ContinuousTime Case”, The Review of Economics and Statistics Vol. 51, No.3, pp. 247-257.
[57] Lewis, Karen K. (1999). ”Trying to Explain Home Bias in Equities and Consumption”, Journal
of Economic Literature Vol.37, pp. 571-608.
[58] Obstfeld, Maurice (1994). ”Risk-Taking, Global Diversification, and Growth”, The American
Economic Review, Vol. 84, No. 5, pp. 1310-1329.
[59] ______ and Kenneth Rogoﬀ (1996). ”Foundations of International Macroeconomics”, The
MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
[60] Pesenti, Paolo and Eric van Wincoop (1996). ”Do Nontraded Goods Explain the Home Bias
Puzzle?”, NBER Working Paper No. 5784.
[61] Rouwenhorst, K.Geert (1999). ”European Equity Markets and the EMU”, Financial Analysts
Journal, pp.57-64.
[62] Samuelson, Paul A. (1969). ”Lifetime Portfolio Selection by Dynamic Stochastic Programming”, The Review of Economics and Statistics Vol. 51, No.3, pp. 239-246.
[63] Senay, Ozge (1998). ”The Eﬀects of Goods and Financial Market Integration on Macroeconomic Volatility”, The Manchester School.
[64] Serrat, Angel (2001). ”A Dynamic Model of International Portfolio Holdings”, Econometrica,
Vol. 69, No. 6, pp. 1467-1489.
[65] Smith, P. N., Sorenson S., and M. R. Wickens (2003). ”An Asset Market Integration Test
Based on Observable Macroeoconomic Stochastic Discount Factors”, University of York.
[66] Stockman, C. Alan and Linda L. Tesar (1995). ”Tastes and Technology in a Two-Country
Model of the Business Cycle: Explaining International Comovements”, The American Economic Review, Vol. 85 (1), pp. 168-185.
[67] Stulz, Rene M. (1999). ”International Portfolio Flows and Security Markets”, Working Paper.

41

[68] Sutherland, Alan (1996). ”Financial Market Integration and Macroeconomic Volatility”, Scandinavian Journal of Economics, Vol. 98 (4), pp. 521-539.
[69] Tesar, Linda L. (1993). ”International Risk Sharing and nontraded Goods”, Journal of International Economics, Vol. 35, pp. 69-89.
[70] Yeyati, Eduardo Levy, Sergio L. Schmukler, and Neeltje Van Horen (2005). ”International
Financial Integration through the Law of One Price”, Universidad Torcuato di Tella.

42

A

Appendix: Approximations

This appendix describes the approximations used in the solution of the model. A formal discussion
of the solution technique is presented in Evans and Hnatkovska (2005).
In our model the equilibrium conditions include equations (6), (7) and (19a)-(19e) characterizing
household’s behavior, equations (24) describing firm’s problem at h country, a symmetric system
of conditions for the f country, a set of market clearing conditions in equations (10)-(12) and
(16)-(18b), plus return definitions in (20)-(22). The system in summarized below.
³
´
¡ t
¢
¡ n
¢
t̂
w
= Rt + αtt Rt+1
− Rt + αt̂t Rt+1
− Rt + αnt Rt+1
− Rt ,
Rt+1

w
(Wt − Ctt − Qnt Ctn ) ,
Wt+1 = Rt+1
µ ¶1−φ µ n ¶φ−1
Ct
λn
n
,
Qt =
λt
Ctt
1 = Et [Mt+1 Rt ] ,
£
¤
t
,
1 = Et Mt+1 Rt+1
h
i
t̂
1 = Et Mt+1 Rt+1
,
£
¤
n
,
1 = Et Mt+1 Rt+1
µ
¶
t
n
Ct + Qt Ctn
Mt+1 = β
,
t + Qn C n
Ct+1
t+1 t+1

(A1)

(A2)

t

t
= (1 − δ)Ktt + ezt Kttθ − Dtt ,
Kt+1
h
³
´i
t
(Kt+1 )θ−1 + (1 − δ) ,
1 = Et Mt+1 θZt+1

Ctn = Ytn = Dtn ,

Ctt + Ĉtt = Ytt + Ŷtt − It − Iˆt ,
1 = Att + Âtt ,
1 = Ant ,
Bt + B̂t = 0,
An analogous set of conditions for foreign country applies. To solve the model, we first find its
non-stochastic steady state. The system of equilibrium equations is then log-linearized as follows.
The equations pertinent to the real side of the model are log-linearized up to the first order,
while those related to the financial side - up to the second order. Real variables, such as capital,
dividends, etc. are stationary around their steady state. Individual’s financial wealth is linearized
around its initial distribution. Distributions of consumption and portfolio shares will be pinned

A1

down endogenously by the model. All small letters denote log transformation of the corresponding
variable, measured as deviation from the steady state or its initial level.
The log return on h wealth can be approximated as
¢
1 ¡
w
= rt + α0t ert+1 + α0t σ 2t − Σt αt .
rt+1
2

(A3)

CCV show that this approximation holds exactly in continuous time and remains a good approximation in discrete formulation with short time intervals.
The budget constraint of the h household in (6) can be simplified when preferences are logarithmic. In particular, the optimal consumption-wealth ratio under log-utility preferences is constant
and is equal to (1 − β) so Ctt + Qnt Ctn = (1 − β) Wt . The simplified budget constraint then becomes
w
w
Wt+1 = Rt+1
(Wt − Ctt − Qnt Ctn ) = βRt+1
Wt ,

whose log-linearized form is
w
+ ln β.
∆wt+1 = rt+1

(A4)

Next, we turn to the IMRS. By definition,
Mt+1

¡
¢
µ
¶
t
β ∂U/∂Ct+1
Ctt + Qnt Ctn
=β
=
,
t + Qn C n
(∂U/∂Ctt )
Ct+1
t+1 t+1

which can be simplified further with log preferences to
Mt+1 = β

Wt
,
Wt+1

or in logs
mt+1 = −∆wt+1 + ln β.
The Euler equations are linearized using a second-order Taylor series expansion and lognormality
of asset returns. We start with the consumption Euler equation in (19a):
£
¤
1 = Et [exp(mt+1 + rt )] ' exp Et (mt+1 + rt ) + 12 Vt (mt+1 ) .
Taking logs on both side yields a log-linearized Euler equation for the international bond:
0 = rt + Et mt+1 + 12 Vt (mt+1 ) .

A2

(A5)

The equity Euler equations are log-linearized analogously:
£
£ ¡
¡
χ ¤
χ ¢
χ ¢¤
1 = Et Mt+1 Rt+1
' exp Et mt+1 + rt+1
+ 12 Vt mt+1 + rt+1
.
Again, taking logs and substituting in the bond Euler equation gives equation (30):
¡ χ ¢
¡
χ
χ ¢
Et rt+1
− rt + 12 Vt rt+1
= −CVt mt+1 , rt+1
.

(A6)

The system (19b)-(19e) can be summarized is terms of portfolio shares αt and first and second
moments of asset returns as
Et ert+1 = Σt αt − 12 σ 2t .

(A7)

Using this equation, the budget constraint in (A4) can be rewritten as:
∆wt+1 = rt + 12 α0t Σt αt + α0t (ert+1 − Et ert+1 ) .

(A8)

The optimal dividend policy of domestic firm implies
h
³
´i
t
1 = Et Mt+1 θZt+1
(Kt+1 )θ−1 + (1 − δ) .
Again, we apply the log-normal approximation to get
³
´
³
´
k
k
k
= −CVt mt+1 , rt+1
,
Et rt+1
− rt + 12 Vt rt+1

(A9)

k
t − (1 − θ) ψk
where rt+1
= ψzt+1
t+1 and ψ = 1 − β (1 − δ) .

Next, we turn to the market clearing conditions. Bond market clearing from (16) requires

Bt + B̂t = 0. Substituting for bonds from (26) into this condition gives
³
´ ³
´ ³
´
β Wt + Ŵt = Ptt + P̂tt + Qnt Ptn + Q̂nt P̂tn .
In addition, since each aggregate consumption is a constant fraction of wealth, the same relation
holds at the global level
´ ³
´ ³
´
³
(1 − β) Wt + Ŵt = Ctt + Ĉtt + Qnt Ctn + Q̂nt Ĉtn .

A3

Combining the last two equations gives
(1 − β)

´ ³
´i
h³
´ ³
´i
h³
Ptt + P̂tt + Qnt Ptn + Q̂nt P̂tn = β Ctt + Ĉtt + Qnt Ctn + Q̂nt Ĉtn .

The linearized version of this expression is

=

n
o
P t ptt + P̂ t p̂tt + Qn P n (qtn + pnt ) + Q̂n P̂ n (q̂tn + p̂nt )
³
´ ³
´
P t + P̂ t + Qn P n + Q̂n P̂ n
n
³
´o
Dt dtt + D̂t dˆtt + Qn Dn (qtn + dnt ) + Q̂n D̂n q̂tn + dˆnt
³
´ ³
´
,
Dt + D̂t + Qn Dn + Q̂n D̂n

(A10)

where we have also applied the t and n goods market clearing conditions.
Market clearing in the t equity market requires 1 = Att + Âtt . Substituting for Att and At̂t in
terms of portfolio shares αt from (26) we obtain
exp (ptt − wt − ln β) = αtt + α̂tt · exp (ŵt − wt ) .
Approximation of the exponential terms on both sides is done around the aggregate steady state
share of t equity issued in h country, ᾱt = αt +α̂t . With the benchmark symmetric parametrization
this share is equal to half of h country wealth. The other half is allocated into n equity. This split
is determined by the preference parameters on t and n consumptions and the assumption about
equal initial distribution of wealth across countries. So, we get
Pt t
Pt t
Pt
+
(pt − wt ) + 12
(p − wt )2 = αtt + α̂tt
βW
βW
βW t

Ã

!
Ŵ
Ŵ
Ŵ
+
(ŵt − wt ) + 12
(ŵt − wt )2 ,
W
W
W

which becomes
³
´
³
´
ᾱt 1 + (ptt − wt ) + 12 (ptt − wt )2 = αtt + α̂tt 1 + (ŵt − wt ) + 12 (ŵt − wt )2 .

(A11)

The approximation for the f country t equity market clearing is symmetric and is approximated
around the aggregate steady state share of t equity issued by the foreign country, ᾱt̂ = αt̂ + α̂t̂ :
³
´
³
´
ᾱt̂ 1 + (p̂tt − ŵt ) + 12 (p̂tt − ŵt )2 = αt̂t + α̂t̂t 1 + (wt − ŵt ) + 12 (wt − ŵt )2 .
A4

(A12)

In summary, the system of linearized equations used to characterize the equilibrium in full
integration model consists of:
• the productivity process in (4);
• the three Euler equations for equity as given by equation (A6) for χ = {t,t̂,n} in each
country;

• the Euler equation for capital, given in (A9) for each country;
• the budget constraint in each country as given in equation (A8);
• t goods market clearing

ctt + ĉtt = dtt + dˆtt ;

• bond market clearing reformulated in terms of dividends and prices in (A10);
• t equity market clearing as derived in (A11)-(A12);
• n equity definition from equation (26)

µ
¶
1
αnt = ᾱn 1 + (qtn + pnt − wt ) + (qtn + pnt − wt )2
2
µ
¶
1 n
2
n
n
n
n
n
α̂t = α̂ 1 + (q̂t + p̂t − ŵt ) + (q̂t + p̂t − ŵt ) .
2

B

(A13)

Appendix: Robustness

Varying the initial wealth distribution In order to solve the model we need to make an
assumption about the initial distribution of wealth across the countries. The results in the text
assume that both countries have identical wealth to start with. To check the robustness of our
results, we considered an alternative solution to the model based on the relative wealth of country
f to h equal to 1.00218. This wealth distribution implies an initial current account deficit for
country h equal to 4% of GDP. Re—solving the model with this initial wealth distribution (and the
other model parameters unchanged) does not materially aﬀect the model solution. In particular,
the dynamics of international capital flows and returns are similar to those we report in the text.
Varying the weight assigned to n consumption Our benchmark model parametrization also
assumes that two countries are perfectly symmetric in terms of preferences, production and shocks.
A5

As a result, the model predicts that investors take fully diversified positions in t equity shares.
This prediction is, however, at odds with the persistent equity home bias observed in the actual
portfolio holdings of most developed countries. Our next robustness exercise, therefore, consists of
studying the eﬀects of integration on capital flow dynamics in the presence of home bias in equity
portfolios. We accomplish this by biasing preferences of consumers towards n consumption in their
aggregate basket. In particular, we assume that share parameters λn and λ̂n in the utility function
increase to 0.75.
We find that when households put more weight on n consumption in their utility function, they
also increase the share of their wealth allocated into equity providing claims to n consumption,
thus leading to the home bias in aggregate domestic portfolios. In particular, the average n equity
share in both h and f countries is equal to 81.53% under the new parametrization. The remaining
wealth is allocated into t equity, which, under fi is equally split between h and f issued claims. As
a result, even though the model generates home bias through an increase in the share of n equity,
the t equity holdings remain fully diversified.
The degree of risk sharing under fi is smaller in this version of the model: the cross—country
correlation in log IMRS is now 0.562 rather than 0.669. The size and volatility of both bond and
equity flows are higher than in our benchmark case, under fi. By contrast, the size and volatility
of bond flows under pi remain much the same. Overall, our finding of a hump-shaped relation
between capital flows and the degree of integration, appears robust.

A6

