                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              MONETARY AND EXCHANGE RATE
                             POLICY COORDINATION IN ASEAN+1

                                          William H. Branson
                                           Conor N. Healy

                                         Working Paper 11713
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11713


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2005




We thank the United Nations Development Program for support for this project, and Peter Kenen, Minh H.
Pham, Elena Tchernykh, and seminar participants at the Hong Kong Institute for Monetary Research and the
City University of Hong Kong for useful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the UNDP or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by William H. Branson and Conor N. Healy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy Coordination in ASEAN+1
William H. Branson and Conor N. Healy
NBER Working Paper No. 11713
October 2005
JEL No. F33, F41, G15

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper develops the basis for monetary and exchange rate coordination in Asia as part of a
package of monetary integration that could support growth and poverty reduction. This could be
achieved directly through coordinated exchange rate stabilization, and indirectly through the
implications of this for reserve pooling and investment in an Asian development fund (ADF) and
through development of the Asian bond market (ABM). Macro policy coordination could be viewed
as a necessary condition for further development of both reserve pooling via the Chiang Mai
Initiative (CMI) and of the ABM. The paper analyzes the trade structure of ASEAN and China in
terms of both geographic sources of imports and markets for exports, and of the commodity structure
of trade. The similarities of the geographic and commodity trade structures across the region are
consistent with adoption of a common currency basket for stabilization, and with an argument for
monetary integration across the region along the lines of Mundell (1961) on optimum currency areas.
The paper constructs currency baskets and real effective exchange rates (REERs) for the countries
in the region. Since their trade patterns are quite similar and their policies are already implicitly
coordinated, their REERs tend to move together. This means that ASEAN and China are already
moving toward integration in practical effect. Explicit movement toward coordination could support
surveillance and reserve-sharing under the CMI, and release reserves to be invested in an ADF.

William H. Branson                                    Conor N. Healy
Department of Economics                               Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University                                  Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544                                   Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER                                              chealy@princeton.edu
wbranson@princeton.edu
                                                                                           3



          Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy Coordination in ASEAN+1.


                           William H. Branson and Conor N. Healy




I. Introduction.
       This paper develops the basis for monetary and exchange rate coordination in
Asia as part of a package of monetary integration that would be aimed at supporting
growth and poverty reduction. This could be achieved directly through coordinated
exchange rate stabilization, and indirectly through the implications of this for reserve
pooling and investment in an Asian development fund (ADF) and through development
of the Asian bond market (ABM). By monetary and exchange rate coordination here we
mean flexible joint management of exchange rate movements against a common basket
that is aimed at maintaining real effective exchange rates (REERs) near their equilibrium
values as underlying real economic conditions evolve. The paper focuses on establishing
the conditions for such coordination.     Implications for reserve sharing, the ADF, and
ABM development are the subject of continuing research.




Figure 1: The relationship of policy coordination, reserve sharing and the ABM

      Macro policy and
  exchange rate coordination

                                     Sustainable macro
       Stability, growth and         policies
         poverty reduction           and surveillance
                                                            Reserve sharing (Chiang Mai)


           Exchange rate                                              Leveraged ADF
           stability
           Common basket



                                                         Derivatives and futures
                               ABM                       Issuance in common
                                                         basket
                                                                                             4




The relationship of exchange rate and macro policy coordination with reserve sharing and
the ABM is summarized in Figure 1, above. Macro policy coordination can contribute
directly to stabilization and growth by crisis prevention and reduction of uncertainty. It
could provide the basis for surveillance, activating reserve sharing. The reduction in the
demand for reserves at the individual country level could release resources for investment
in development through the ADF. Exchange rate stabilization and the additional flow of
investment resources could stimulate development of the ABM, increasing the efficiency
of resources for investment in growth and poverty reduction. Thus macro policy
coordination could be viewed as a necessary condition for further development of both
reserve pooling via the Chiang Mai Initiative (CMI) and of the ABM.
       Reserve pooling through the CMI structure and development of the ABM have
received substantial attention to date. See, for example, Kuroda and Kawai (2003) and
Nasution (2005). The political cooperation involved in the CMI and the rhetorical
ambition of recent ASEAN and Chiang Mai government statements have been taken by
many as suggesting a new era in region-wide monetary coordination. In practical terms
though, actual progress has been more limited. The CMI swap agreements have not been
activated, and the ABM is still mostly denominated in Singapore or US dollars.
       Policy coordination could strengthen the basis for surveillance under the CMI, a
necessary condition for effective reserve sharing. Exchange rate stabilization against a
common basket of currencies could reduce risk in bond markets and facilitate
development of derivatives and futures. Just as was the case with European monetary
coordination (and the use of the European Currency Unit), the common basket could act
as a focal point for monetary coordination. Moreover, it could also act as a spur for the
ABM, in particular through offering a broadly accepted local currency for bond issues.
These are necessary conditions for development of an active ABM denominated in the
currencies of the region. Since macro and exchange rate stabilization seem therefore
essential for successful development of the CMI and the ABM, this is the focus of this
                                                                                               5


paper. In further research, we expect to build on this analysis and look more closely at
reserve sharing and the ABM.
        Section II focuses on the potential gains from policy coordination, mainly within
ASEAN. These can be separated into three sources. The first is direct gains from
stabilization with sustainable macro policies. These might have prevented the crisis in
1997-9. The second is gains from cooperative stabilization to rule out unintended
competitive devaluations and cascading speculation from market to market as was seen in
the crisis. The third is indirect benefits gains in terms of the importance of stabilization
for CMI and ABM development. The section focuses on the first two sources of gains,
using an analytical narrative of the key macro developments in ASEAN since the early
1990s as its vehicle. Macro and exchange-rate policy coordination could have at least
cushioned the effects of the 1997-99 crisis, and prevented at least partially the growth
slowdown that followed.
        Sections III-V support the analysis presented in section II. In section III the trade
structure of ASEAN and China is laid out in terms of both geographic sources of imports
and markets for exports, and of the commodity structure of trade. The structure of trade
by commodity and sources and markets is also summarized for major commodity groups.
The similarities of the geographic trade structures across the region are consistent with
adoption of a common currency basket for stabilization. The similarities of commodity
structure in trade across the region are consistent with an argument for monetary
integration across the region along the lines of Mundell (1961) on optimum currency
areas. The even distributions of trade across sources and markets for the major
commodities show that stabilization against a common basket would not create strong
differential sectoral strains across the region.
        Section IV draws on the geographic data of Section III to construct currency
baskets and real effective exchange rates (REERs) for the countries in the region. It
complements the discussion of Section III, again providing support for the possibility of
implementing a common (externally-based) currency basket. Since their trade patterns
are quite similar and their policies are already implicitly coordinated (see Section V),
their REERs tend to move together. This means that ASEAN and China are already
moving toward integration in practical effect. Explicit movement toward coordination
                                                                                             6


could support surveillance and reserve-sharing under the CMI, and release reserves to be
invested in an ADF. If these were invested as paid-in capital, this could be leveraged in
international financial markets.
       Section V draws attention to the effective coordination of monetary policy by
studying correlations among monthly movements in nominal exchange rates and changes
in reserve money, representing monetary policy. The correlations are positive and quite
strong. This is consistent with common reactions to common shocks or with attempts to
maintain exchange rates within a stable zone within the region. In this case, monetary
policy coordination is already implicit. Making the coordination explicit, or even formal,
could yield the benefits of ruling out competitive devaluations and forestalling cascading
speculation. This could contribute to the results for an ADF and development of the
ABM described above. Section VI ends with some tentative conclusions and directions
for further work.


II. Macro Policy Coordination.
       This section discusses potential gains from coordinated stabilization of real
exchange rates, relating them to the crisis of 1997-99 and the periods before and since.
Exchange rates can be stabilized successfully only if the underlying macroeconomic
policies are sustainable. One of the lessons from the crisis is the loss from exchange rate
stabilization with unsustainable underlying policies and overheating. Thus “policy
coordination” here assumes sustainable underlying macro policies. We discuss losses
from non-stabilization terms of the events leading to the crisis in 1997-99, the loss of
output in the crisis, and depressed investment and slower growth since the crisis. These
are losses that could have been prevented or at least minimized by sustainable underlying
macro policies and coordinated exchange-rate policies. We then go on to discuss
potential gains from cooperative stabilization, and, more briefly, indirect gains in terms
of reserve sharing, development of an Asian Development Fund (ADF), and the Asian
Bond Market (ABM).


Direct Gains from Stabilization: Summary.
                                                                                               7


         The direct gains from management of exchange rates so as to stabilize a real
exchange rate come from the stability provided by the underlying macro policies and the
resulting minimization of exchange risk to investors. A necessary condition for
successful stabilization is a sustainable fiscal position that frees monetary policy to target
inflation with exchange rate stability. A focus on exchange rate stabilization thus
requires macro policy sustainability, a lesson learned (and being re-learned) in Europe.
         The data for the ASEAN countries since the early 1990s provide an illustration of
the problem of exchange rate stabilization without underlying macro sustainability, and
the loss from failure of stabilization. The inverse of this loss is the gain from successful
stabilization. These data are summarized shown in Graphs 2.1-2.3 (graphs and tables at
the end). These summarize the obvious aspects of the crisis and its aftermath. After this
summary we turn to data and analysis beneath these summary results.
         Graphs 2.1 and 2.2 show monthly USD exchange rates for the core ASEAN
countries, indexed to the beginning of 1990. These are defined as units of home currency
per dollar, so up is depreciation of the home currency. The extreme movement of the
Indonesian rupiah in 1997 distorts the picture in Graph 2.1, so Graph 2.2 eliminates
Indonesia. Both graphs show the stable and roughly parallel movement of nominal dollar
exchange rates before and after the crisis, interrupted by the crisis explosion in 1997-99.
During the period before the crisis, USD exchange rates were stable in nominal terms.
But the economies were experiencing investment booms not accompanied by fiscal
adjustment, as shown in the tables in the next section. They were overheating, with
inflation causing real appreciation of their currencies, although they were stable in
nominal terms against the USD. They had large and growing current account deficits,
and growing external debt denominated in foreign exchange. Thus the growth in the
current account deficits was accompanied by appreciating real effective exchange rates,
an unsustainable scenario that can be interpreted as a “bubble” in the FX market. These
developments have been analyzed in a large and nuanced literature on the crisis. This
includes Branson (2005), presented at the University of Malaya in Kuala Lumpur in
1998. We will summarize the central lessons of this episode for cooperative stabilization
below.
                                                                                               8


       Exchange rate stability was restored in the period after the crisis. However, this
period has seen a major depression in investment with current account surpluses. This is
consistent with real appreciation, but slower real growth. The effects of the lack of
sustainable policies and the breakdown of exchange-rate stability in the crisis are shown
in Graph 2.3. There the paths of real GDP are interrupted by the crisis, with serious
recessions in all the ASEAN countries. More importantly, none of the countries have
recovered back to their original growth paths, and in all cases the underlying growth rate
has been reduced. The unsustainable earlier policies and the crisis have depressed
investment, lowered and slowed the real GDP growth path and substantially reduced the
potential for poverty reduction. These losses from the failure of stabilization can be
interpreted as the potential gains from successful stabilization.


Investment, Saving, the Current Account, and REERs since 1990.
       The data on the current account, the investment-saving balance, and external debt
for the core ASEAN countries since 1990 are summarized in Tables 2.1 and 2.2. The
time series of the same data are shown in Graphs 2.4-2.7. The tables show in their first
three lines the evolution of the current account balance (CAB), investment (I), and saving
(S), all as percent of GDP. From the GDP accounts, these are connected by the equation
CAB = I – S. The current deficit is the excess of investment over saving. The current
deficit must be financed by borrowing abroad, expanding the external debt. The last line
of each table shows the path of the debt/GDP ratio for each country. The paths of the
effective real exchange rates of the core ASEAN countries are shown in Graph 2.8.
These are the total trade-weighted indexes from section IV below. We will analyze in
turn the data for the pre-crisis period, 1990-96, the crisis, 1997-99, and the period since.


Pre-crisis, 1990-96. With the exception of Singapore, and Indonesia in the early 1990s,
the tables show substantial and growing current deficits in the period before the crisis.
These were generated by investment booms, with investment exceeding domestic saving.
Investment and saving in the tables both include private and public. Thus the excess of
investment over saving could have been remedied by an increase in public saving, that is,
                                                                                                 9


a fiscal tightening. In the absence of fiscal adjustment, the current deficits persisted and
grew, maintaining or increasing the debt/GDP ratios in the last line of the tables.
        The data for Thailand in Table 2.2 provide a good illustration of the stabilization
problem before the crisis. From 1990 to 1996 investment was 41-42 percent of GDP,
while saving was around 35 percent. Thus the current deficit stayed near 5 percent of
GDP, increasing to over 6 percent in 1995-96, before the crisis. The ratio of external
debt to GDP increased from 32 percent in 1990 to 62 percent in 1996 and 73 percent in
1997. The market could see that this path was unsustainable, and the speculative pressure
against the Thai baht began the crisis in July 1997. The depreciation of the baht led to
contagion across the region, and the cascade of devaluations shown in Graphs 2.1 and 2.2
above. Thus the crisis was the combined effect of unsustainable underlying
macroeconomic policies and the lack of cooperative macro policy management.
        The graphs show basically the same pattern for all the core ASEAN countries
except Singapore. The investment ratios in Graph 2.4 are high and rising in the period up
to 1997. The exception is Singapore, with investment fluctuating around 35 percent of
GDP. The picture for saving is less clear in Graph 2.5. Thailand, Indonesia, and
especially Philippines have saving ratios that are flat or falling. Malaysia’s saving ratio
increases during the period, and all the way until 1998. But through 1995, it is lower than
the rising investment ratio in Graph 2.5. Singapore’s saving ratio is rising until 1998, and
exceeds investment.
        The external consequences of the investment boom underfinanced by domestic
saving are shown in Graphs 2.6 and 2.7. Graph 2.6 shows the decreasing current account
balances for all the core ASEAN countries except Singapore. Thailand’s and the
Philippines’ deficits are the most negative. Malaysia and Indonesia are closer to zero,
with Malaysia’s deficit diminishing after 1995. These patterns of current account
balances are reflected in the debt/GDP ratios of Graph 2.7. With rapid GDP growth, the
debt ratios of all but Thailand are stable until 1996-7. Thailand’s debt ratio rises
throughout the period 1990-1998, with an increase in its growth rate in 1994. This
rapidly rising debt ratio is a signal of potential unsustainability, which led to the onset of
the crisis in 1997.
                                                                                              10


          The depreciation of the Thai baht in July 1997, shown in Graphs 2.1 and 2.2
earlier, brought competitive pressure on the other ASEAN countries. This pressure was
perceived by the markets, leading to cascading speculation and the devaluations in the
other ASEANs. The source of the competitive pressure is in the similarity of their trade
patterns, shown in section III below. The contagion of this pressure is one argument for
cooperative exchange-rate management.
          Movements of the REERs of the core ASEAN countries from 1990 are shown in
Graph 2.8, moved forward from section IV on REERs. These are the REERs based on
total trade weights for the six major markets outside ASEAN+1, indexed to 1989 = 100.
In the graph, an upward movement is a depreciation of the home currency. This follows
from the definition of the exchange rate as units of home currency per unit of FX, e.g.
rupiah per USD. The data of section IV show that ASEAN REERs weighted by export
shares, import shares, and total trade move very closely together. This is due to the
similarity in their trade patterns, shown in section III. For clarity, we focus here on the
total trade-weighted REERs.
          The REER paths in Graph 2.8 generally show a downward concavity from 1990
to 1996. There is an initial period of depreciation from 1990 to 1992, a more-or-less flat
period from 1992 to 1994, and then an appreciation in 1995-1996. Again, the main
exception is Singapore, with a real appreciation from 1989 to 1996, consistent with its
rapid growth shown in Graph 2.1 earlier. Combined with the growing current account
deficits in Graph 2.8, the REER paths are consistent with an unsustainability that
developed into a bubble in the ASEAN FX markets, as shown analytically in Branson
(2005).
          The initial real depreciations in 1990-93 were broadly consistent with stable
adjustment. They could contribute to correction of the current deficits. But the flattening
out of the REER paths and the turn to real appreciation was a signal that the economies
were moving away from equilibrium. The real appreciations would contribute to further
growth in the current account deficits, rather than correcting them. As the markets saw
this growing contradiction, speculation on depreciation developed, with the initial
pressure on Thailand, the country with the rapidly growing debt ratio. The
                                                                                            11


unsustainability of the underlying macro policies combined with the lack of coordination
of exchange rate policy set the stage for the crisis that began with Thailand in July 1997.


Crisis, 1997-99. The crisis is clear in Tables 2.1-2.2 and Graphs 2.4-2.8. The collapse of
the REERs of all the core ASEANs except Singapore is evident in Graph 2.8. The real
depreciations in that graph range from 20 percent for the Philippines to 40 percent for
Indonesia. With external debt denominated in FX and domestic assets in home currency,
this collapse led to failures of financial institutions and a breakdown in credit. This
phenomenon, in which currency crisis spreads to the financial sector is well known in the
economic literature and is known as a “twin crisis”. As the currencies collapsed, so did
the local financial institutions, whose large dollar exposures were no longer matched by
equivalent local currency assets. The financial collapse was precipitous. In Thailand, for
example, 56 out of 91 finance companies were eventually liquidated. Similarly dramatic
levels of collapse were seen elsewhere, especially in Korea and Indonesia (see for
example, Radelet and Sachs, 1998). All of this combined with a major increase in
uncertainty leading to the investment collapses shown in Graph 2.4. Investment fell by
more than 50 percent in Indonesia, Malaysia, and Thailand and 25 percent in the
Philippines. It fell even more steeply from 1997 to 2003 in Singapore. This investment
collapse generated the recessions in GDP shown earlier in Graph 2.3.
       The effects of the crisis on poverty are well documented (e.g. the World Bank’s
East Asia Update for September 2000). The crisis itself generated recessions and sharp
increases in poverty across the region. Moreover, its costs in this regard have often been
understated as, in the absence of the crisis, poverty rates would have declined further
below pre-crisis levels. The effects of the crisis on poverty levels are summarized in
Table 2.3. The table shows the substantial progress in reducing poverty across the region
between 1990 and 1996, with the headcount percentage below $1 and $2 a day falling
markedly. The crisis sees a strong reversal between 1996 and 1999, with the headcount
living at under $2 a day in 2002 still well above the 1996 level.
       The results for external balance can be seen in Graph 2.6. With saving ratios
fairly stable and investment collapsing, the current balances all moved sharply into
surplus. This is essentially a macro result, since the currencies all depreciated in real
                                                                                           12


terms during the crisis. Graph 2.7 shows the crisis results for external debt ratios. With
debt mainly denominated in FX, the depreciations directly increased the debt ratios. The
recessions in real GDP added to the increase, most markedly in Indonesia. Thus the
investment collapse in the crisis led to the severe recessions, and the shift to current
account surplus, while the depreciations increased the debt ratios. The combination of
real recession, financial failures, and rising import prices contributed to significant
increases in poverty, reversing the trend of a decade.


Post-crisis, 1999-2004. Since the crisis, the ASEAN economies have stabilized, with
lower and slower paths of real growth (Graph 2.3), much lower investment ratios (Graph
2.4), current account surpluses, except the Philippines (Graph 2.6), and currencies
depreciated in real terms (Graph 2.8). The lower investment paths are a serious source of
concern, since capital formation was a driving force behind the “Asian miracle.” See
Alwyn Young (1995) for a fundamental discussion of investment and growth in Asia.
The domestic saving ratios remain high, as shown in Graph 2.5. Thus excess saving in
the region now generates current account surpluses and growth in reserves, as the Central
Banks hold currencies stable.
       The relationship between the paths of current account balances in Graph 2.6 and
REERs in Graph 2.8, the main source of instability before the crisis, is mixed. The only
country that stands out is Singapore, with a rising surplus and a depreciating currency, an
unstable combination. Indonesia and Malaysia have substantial but decreasing surpluses
with appreciating currencies in real terms, a stable combination. Thailand has a falling
surplus with a slowly depreciating currency, and the Philippines has a small deficit with
real depreciation.
       In summary, the region has settled on a lower and slower, but stable growth path.
Macro coordination centered on exchange rate management might have averted the crisis
by leading to sustainable macro policies and reduced vulnerability to speculation. This is
an underlying hypothesis for continued research.


Gains from Cooperative Stabilization.
                                                                                           13


        Cooperative stabilization against a common currency basket can yield two
potential additional benefits in addition to the direct benefits of stabilization just
discussed. These are analyzed in some detail in Branson (2001). First, it rules out
competitive depreciations. Charts 1 and 2 illustrate the problem. Once the pressure from
speculation forced the devaluation in Thailand in July 1997, the other ASEAN countries
had to follow. The market understood this, so the pressure moved to Indonesia and
Malaysia. These depreciations were not competitive in the sense that they were aimed at
achieving a competitive edge; they were forced by the market. But they had the same
result. Once one goes, the others have to follow. This led to overshooting, as is evident
in the graphs. A coordinated policy could have attained an orderly group devaluation, if
needed, without the disorganization that at least partially contributed to financial failures
and the depth of the recessions. The competitive nature of the depreciations is based on
the similarities of the trade structures of the ASEAN economies both in terms of
commodity composition and markets. This similarity is shown in section III. Explicit
coordination of macro policy could work for sustainability and fit into rules of
surveillance under the Chiang Mai agreement on reserve sharing. Implicit signs of
coordination are discussed in section V.
        The second benefit is removal of convenient individual country targets from
potential speculative pressure. In Asia in 1997, as in Europe in 1992, speculation could
target the weakest country in the group, and then move sequentially from country to
country. Coordinated stabilization with reserve sharing could remove this targeting
convenience for speculation. If the coordination is based on an explicit agreement, the
market will understand that it is facing a cooperative based on shared reserves. In this
case, the group can come to a considered decision on dealing with speculative pressures.
        Cooperative stabilization would be facilitated by development of a common
currency basket for exchange rate management. The feasibility of agreement on this
basket is supported by the similarity of trade composition among the core ASEAN
countries and China in terms of markets and commodities, as shown in the next section.
Thus a common basket in terms of currencies of export destination or import source
could be developed as the basis for exchange rate coordination. These baskets are
discussed in section IV. This could also be the basis for a basket for Asian bond issue.
                                                                                           14



III. Trade Structure: ASEAN and China.
       This section presents and analyzes the structure of ASEAN and China trade with
two objectives. The first is to develop the basis for weights for baskets of ASEAN
currencies in terms of major trade partners outside ASEAN and China. For individual
countries these would be weights for calculating effective exchange rates, nominal and
real. Movements of the real effective exchange rates (REERs) can be used as an
indicator of existing implicit coordination among the ASEAN+1 countries. For ASEAN
as a group, the weights would define a common basket for coordinated management of
exchange rate policy. This common basket could also be used as the currency of issue in
the Asian Bond Market.
       Since the major currencies that are candidates for any basket are identified with
the countries of issue or the regions using the currency, a discussion of weights for a
basket must begin with the geographic distribution of trade. The weights would be based
on the geographic distribution of trade across sources and destinations. So we first
present the structure of trade by markets and sources to develop weights for REERs.
       The second objective is to evaluate the case for some form of monetary
integration of ASEAN+1 based on the commodity composition of trade. Here we reflect
the original view of the basis for optimum currency areas of Mundell (1961). Countries
with similar structures of trade by commodity are good candidates for integration into a
currency area. Thus the next subsection presents the structure of trade of the region by
commodity classes.
       The last step is to present a summary of the structure of trade by market and
commodity. This summarizes the similarities and differences of trade structure across the
region. It can also yield an idea of the effects of stabilizing exchange rates against a
geographic basket on fluctuations of profitability across commodity-producing sectors.
The last subsection therefore turns to the structure by commodity and market.


Geographic Structure of Trade.
       The geographic structure of trade for the core ASEAN economies and China is
summarized in Tables 3.1 for exports and 3.2 for imports for 2003, the latest year
                                                                                            15


available. Trade structure does not change very fast over time, so the particular choice of
year is not crucial. The tables will be updated as more recent data become available.
Each table shows the total trade of the ASEAN+1 countries [core ASEAN plus China] in
$bn, and its percentage distribution across markets for exports and sources for imports.
We focus on the large ASEANs because inclusion of the small, newer members does not
change the numbers at all significantly. The full structure of ASEAN trade is presented
in appendix tables. In revision, we expect to integrate Hong Kong’s trade with China.
        Table 3.1 shows the structure of exports by markets for ASEAN+1. The first
column gives total exports, and the rest give the percentage distribution across major
markets. Taiwan and Australia are included among the major markets due to their
regional importance; their shares of ASEAN+1 exports are similar to Korea’s. In moving
to weights for REERs, we will concentrate on the six markets that are external to
ASEAN+1, treating trade in the region as internal. Here we begin with the broader
picture. We note for future reference and research that the total value of Singapore’s
trade is exaggerated by its entrepot nature. It is not clear what, if any, effect this has on
its trade distribution.
        A first thing to notice in Table 3.1 is that the distribution of China’s exports
across markets is very similar to ASEAN’s. The shares of the main six markets in the
last row of the table fit right into the ASEAN pattern. This also holds for import sources
in Table 3.2. This similarity of the geographic distribution of trade of ASEAN and China
is a first indicator that the two may be good candidates for monetary coordination. We
also note that total ASEAN exports at $427 bn are about the same as China’s.
        Turning to some of the notable details of the table, we note that the share of
ASEAN internal exports ranges from 17 to 28 percent. The share of China’s exports to
ASEAN is smaller, as are ASEAN’s to China, around 6-7 percent. Thus as of 2003,
ASEAN was a denser trade area than ASEAN-China. The total share of the three largest
markets {Japan, US, Europe} for all seven countries is in the range of 42 percent for
Malaysia to 52 percent for Philippines. Again, China fits into the ASEAN distribution
here. If we look at China separately, we see that the share of ASEAN exports to China
falls between the large three markets {Japan, US, Europe}, and the smaller three {Korea,
Taiwan, Australia}.
                                                                                             16


         The export market data of Table 3.1 would support the adoption of a common
currency basket by both ASEAN and China including either the three largest markets
{Japan, US, Europe}, or all six including {Korea, Taiwan, Australia}. Later we focus on
REERs defined using the six-currency basket.
         Table 3.2 shows the structure of imports by source for ASEAN+1. The table is
set up the same as Table 3.1. As in Table 3.1, the distribution of China’s imports across
source is quite similar to ASEAN’s. China’s shares of imports from Korea and Taiwan
are larger than ASEAN’s, and the shares of the US and Australia are smaller. But the
overall impression is that China’s import pattern from the major markets fits into the
ASEAN pattern, potentially supporting an argument for coordination. ASEAN’s total
imports of $356 bn are about the same as China’s $413bn. Thus in terms of trade
volumes, aggregate ASEAN and China are about the same size.
         The share of ASEAN internal imports in Table 3.2 ranges from 17 to 29 percent,
the same as the case for exports. The share of China’s imports from ASEAN is smaller
share, as are the shares of ASEAN imports from China. Thus on the import side intra-
ASEAN trade is also denser then that between ASEAN and China. The total share of the
three largest sources in imports is in the range of 39 percent for China to 48 percent for
Philippines. The ASEANs are all in the range 40-50 percent. These total shares for the
major sources are smaller than for exports, especially for China, with 51 percent for
exports and 39 percent for imports. The US shares of imports in Table 3.2 are all smaller
than the export shares in Table 3.1. Thus the imbalance between the export share and the
import share for the three largest trading partners may be due to the US trade imbalance.
As in the case of exports, the share of China in ASEAN imports falls between the three
largest sources {Japan, US, Europe} and the three smaller ones {Korea, Taiwan,
Australia}.
         The import source data of Table 3.2 would also support the adoption of a common
currency basket by both ASEAN and China. Later we see that the movements of import-
weighted and export-weighted REERs are quite similar across the ASEAN countries and
China.


Commodity or Sector Structure of Trade.
                                                                                           17


       The commodity structure of trade at the one-digit SIC level of the ASEAN
countries and China (in 2002) is summarized in Tables 3.3 for exports and 3.4 for
imports. The tables separate the founding “core” ASEANs from the later entrants plus
Brunei. The latter are much smaller individually and in aggregate and have very different
trade structures. China and China including Hong Kong are also presented separately,
mainly due to the entrepot nature of Hong Kong’s trade. [This problem is more striking
and difficult in the case of Singapore] Inclusion of Hong Kong with China does not
affect the data or conclusions significantly at this level of aggregation. The analytically
important one-digit SIC sectors are disaggregated in Appendix Tables A3.3 and A3.6.
       Table 3.3 for exports shows clearly the results of the “Asian miracle.” SIC 7 is
the dominant export sector for all of core ASEAN but Indonesia. [The 42.3 percent in
SIC 9 for Philippines is probably unclassified SIC 6-8. Further work is coming on this.
See also Myanmar.] The largest share of Indonesia’s exports (in 2002) is in SIC 3, which
includes oil. But if SIC 2 and 3 for Indonesia are excluded, the 16.8 percent in SIC 7
becomes 25 percent, still much less than the other core ASEANs. China’s share of SIC 7
is about the same as Philippines and Thailand. If SIC 7 and 8 are aggregated, the
commodity structure of China’s exports fits into the ASEAN pattern, as with the market
distribution earlier. China and the recent ASEAN entrants also have large shares in SIC
8, which includes apparel as is seen below. This is a major difference from the core
ASEANs.
       Table 3.4 for imports shows a pattern that is dominated by manufactures (SIC 6-
8), as is normal for industrializing countries. The core ASEANs (except Indonesia) and
China, show particularly high shares in SIC 7. This is also the case for Laos and Brunei.
Indonesia’s import structure more closely resembles Vietnam. However, no particular
pattern stands out in Table 3.4. Again, the structure of China’s trade resembles that of
the ASEANs.
       Disaggregated SIC categories 6-8 at the 2-digit level are shown for exports and
imports in Appendix Tables A3.3 and A3.4. [Appendix Tables are available directly
from the authors.] There several patterns stand out. These are extracted into Table 3.5.
On the export side in Table 3.5, the importance of SIC 75-77 for the core ASEANs and
China is clear. Here again, China’s trade fits in with ASEAN. The importance of SIC
                                                                                             18


84-85 for the other ASEANs and to a smaller degree China is also clear. These are the
apparel exporters of the region.
       On the import side in Table 3.5, SIC 77 stands out for the core ASEANs and to a
lesser extent China, reflecting intra-industry trade in electrical machinery. SIC 65 stands
out for the other ASEANs. Their apparel industry imports textiles, to some extent from
China -- see China’s 5 percent in imports in SIC 65 in Table 3.5) -- and exports the
finished product. This is also a pattern in S. Asia, especially Sri Lanka. These
disaggregated data reinforce the similarity of China’s trade to ASEAN’s, an important
condition for monetary coordination.


Trade by Sector and Market.
       In this subsection we summarize the data on trade of core ASEAN and China by
sector and market for exports and source by imports in SIC 6-8. The full set of data is in
Appendix Tables A3.5 and A3.6. This will give us information on potential differential
effects on sectors of coordinating exchange rate policies on a common basket. The same
movement of the exchange rate would have differing effects on the aggregate economy of
each country depending on the sectors with the largest differences in trade shares across
markets and sources. Similar distributions of trade by sectors and markets or sources will
minimize differential impacts within the economies; dissimilar distributions will increase
these differences, making coordination more costly. We see here that the distributions of
shares across markets for the major commodities are fairly even, minimizing this source
of disruption from coordination on a common basket.
       Tables 3.6-3.8 show the distributions of manufactured exports by markets for the
core ASEAN countries and China in SIC 6-8. The entries in each line show first the
fraction of total exports in the SIC category, and then the share of total exports in that
category separately to each market. The total shares for SIC 7 in Table 3.7 are the largest
for the core ASEANs except Indonesia, and for China. More than half of total exports
are SIC 7 for Malaysia and Singapore. With some exceptions, exports in Tables 6-8 are
evenly distributed across markets. Notable exceptions might be the small share of the US
in Malaysia’s exports in SIC 6 and the large share in SIC 7; and the small share of the US
                                                                                            19


in Philippines exports of SIC 7. These sectors could be differentially affected by
movements of the US dollar within a common basket.
       Tables 3.9-3.11 show the same distributions for imports by source. These
distributions seem even more even than for exports. One exception might be the low US
shares of SIC 6 exports to Malaysia and Philippines in Table 3.9. To summarize, the data
of Tables 3.6-3.12 do not show serious imbalances across major sources and markets in
the distributions of trade by sectors. Thus coordinated exchange-rate stabilization against
a common basket based on these sources and markets should not create substantial
differential sectoral pressures within ASEAN or China.


IV. Currency Baskets and Real Effective Exchange Rates.
       This section discusses the construction of currency baskets and REER indexes for
the core ASEAN countries and China. These are based on trade of ASEAN+1 outside
this region, since the focus of the study at this stage is on first intra-ASEAN coordination,
and then coordination of ASEAN with China. Similar baskets and REERs can be
calculated for the ASEAN member’s largest trading partners, regardless of region, or for
ASEAN+2 or 3 against major trading partners outside the region. The requisite data are
readily available. We begin by presenting the alternative weights for exports, imports,
and total trade, based on the data from section III. Next the alternative REER measures
are shown and discussed. We see that their movements are quite similar across indexes
(exports, imports, total trade) and countries, confirming the case for coordination.
       The REERs combine movement of nominal exchange rates and domestic price
levels, both at least partially under the control of the domestic monetary authority, and
trading partner’s price levels, which are independent of domestic policy. Therefore, the
similarity of movement of REERs across countries implies some form of policy
management of movements of domestic inflation and the nominal exchange rate that
maintains this similarity in REER movements. This is presumably aimed at maintaining
competitiveness in the region without competitive devaluations. To analyze this policy
management we show the decomposition of movements of the import-weighted REERs
at the end of the section.
                                                                                          20


Weights for Currency Baskets.
       The weights for currency baskets based on exports, imports, and total trade of
ASEAN plus China are shown in Tables 4.1-4.3. Tables 4.1 and 4.2 are taken directly
from Tables 3.1 and 3.2, scaled to 100. Table 4.3 is based on the total shares from Tables
3.1 and 3.2. The trade shares are quite similar across countries in each table, and across
tables. Exceptions might be Indonesia, with a high weight for Japan and a low weight for
the US on the export side, and Thailand, with a high weight for Japan on the import side.
The weights for China are well within the ASEAN distribution in all three tables.
       The similarities of the weights among the ASEAN countries suggest that a
common currency basket could fit ASEAN. This would serve for coordination of
exchange-rate policy and as the basis for security issuance in the ABM. Clearly common
weights would have to be the subject of eventual discussion and negotiation within
ASEAN. The similarity of ASEAN weights to China suggests that eventual coordination
of ASEAN exchange-rate policy on a similar basket as China could be feasible. A
common basket would fit both fairly well.


REER Indexes.
       Graphs 4.1, 4.2, and 4.3 show the movements of the REER indexes using the
alternative weights from Table 4.1-4.3. The export-weighted and total trade indexes use
GDP price indexes, which include exports but not imports. The import-weighted indexes
use CPIs, which include imports but not exports. The ASEAN indexes for total trade
from Graph 4.3 are the ones used in Graph 2.8 earlier. All three graphs show the stable
pattern of REERs before and after the crisis of 1997-98. The REERs of the core
ASEANs except Singapore show sharp depreciations in the crisis period. Singapore has a
milder depreciation of about 15-20 percent from 1996 to 1999 on export and total trade
basis, but only 5 percent on import basis. China’s REER moved differently, with an early
appreciation in 1995-97, and then a small depreciation. Thus Singapore and China
escaped the contagion of the crisis.
       The graphs show the highly similar movements of the country indexes across sets
of weights. This is expected from Tables 4.1-4.3, where country weights are similar
across baskets. They also show similar movements across the ASEAN countries, with
                                                                                            21


China moving somewhat independently. Before and after the crisis, though, the REER
indexes, including China, show no trend or tendency to diverge. They tend to stay within
a fairly well-defined range. After 2000, they seem to tend to converge. This suggests
that policies are at work in the background that tend to stabilize REERs in the region, and
even make them tend to converge. Such policies would be consistent with an implicit
coordination of nominal exchange rate movements aimed at REER stability that
maintains competitive positions. This policy stance can be seen when the REER
movements are decomposed into their nominal components.
       The broad synchronicity of the REER movements across the ASEAN+1 countries
tells us that it would be possible to construct a common basket with relative ease. The
relative export and total trade weightings behind these graphs (and shown in Tables 4.1
and 4.3) support this case. The trade structure of these countries is broadly similar, with
each country having roughly the same proportions of trade with major trading partners
such as Japan, the U.S. and Europe. It would therefore be possible to construct a basket
currency based on external or total trade and the regional governments could use this
currency as a focal point against which to coordinate exchange rate policy. In a similar
way the countries of the European Monetary System (EMS) used the basket European
Currency Unit (ECU) to coordinate their exchange rate policies (though with the
distinction that the ECU was an internally based basket currency). Such a basket
currency could be used to manage regional stabilization and to address such specific
regional concerns as export competitiveness and the response to externally driven shocks.
It would also be a natural unit of denomination for ABM issues.


Nominal Components of REERs.
       The REER is the nominal exchange rate adjusted for relative price levels.
Specifically here it is constructed as the product of a nominal exchange rate index times
the ratio of a trading partner’s price index to the domestic price index. In symbols, the
REER index e is defined as e = EP*/P, where E is the nominal effective exchange rate
(NEER) index and P* is the trading partners’ price index, all defined by the same set of
weights, and P is the domestic price index. The trading partner’s price index P* is not
substantially affected by domestic policies, but the NEER and P are. Thus policy to
                                                                                            22


stabilize a REER must work on the co-movement of E and P to be consistent with that of
P*. For example, with a stable P*, domestic inflation in P must be matched by
depreciation of E. This is illustrated in Graphs 4.4-4.6. These show the components of
the REERs weighted by import shares. These are chosen because they use CPIs as the
price indexes. These tend to be the focus of inflation perceptions and policies more than
GDP deflators.
       Graph 4.4 shows the movement of the weighted CPIs for trading partners. These
are the P* indexes. They move closely together since they differ only in their weights
across countries, which we have seen are quite similar. The graph shows a general
inflationary trend of about 2 percent per year for trading partners. Graph 4.5 shows
highly divergent movements of domestic price indexes, the Ps. These range from nearly
flat for Singapore to an average of about 11.5 percent a year for Indonesia, with a jump in
the crisis. Graph 4.6 shows the movement of the nominal exchange rate indexes E.
These are similar to the movements of the price indexes in the previous graph. Thus
policy pressures on domestic price levels and nominal exchange rates tend to produce
parallel movements that produce the stability of REERs shown earlier.
       Coordination of macro policies in ASEAN would work on both nominal variables
P and E. Coordination of sustainable macro policies domestically can work to stabilize
price levels P across countries around an acceptable rate of inflation. This is the
objective of surveillance. Coordination of exchange-rate policies can work to stabilize E.
The combination would maintain stable and competitive REERs with an acceptable
inflation trend in the region. In the absence of sustainable domestic macro policies that
stabilize P around the acceptable trend, price levels will diverge as in Graph 4.5, and
require trends in nominal exchange rates to maintain stability in REERs. A combination
of surveillance of sustainable domestic macro policies and coordinated exchange rate
policies would be a macropolicy coordination package promoting growth and poverty
reduction.


V. Implicit Exchange Rate and Monetary Policy Coordination.
       There is already a surprising degree of implicit coordination of exchange rate
policies among the ASEAN countries, or even the ASEAN+3. Tables 5.1 and 5.2 show
                                                                                           23


the correlations of monthly changes of USD exchange rates for the ASEAN+3 countries
for the post-crisis period. Table 5.2 shows the full group and Table 5.1 eliminates the
smaller ASEANs. In Table 1 all the correlations are positive. The correlations for China
and Malaysia are small, since these countries essentially fixed their currencies against the
USD during this period. The others show generally strong positive correlations,
indicating common co-movements against the dollar.
       Similar results are shown in Tables 5.3 and 5.4 for monthly changes in reserve
money. These are all quite positive for core ASEAN and ASEAN+1, indicating
monetary policy movement consistent with effective exchange rate coordination. These
results show that movement to explicit coordination does not require a large change in
actual policy positions. The ASEANs, and ASEAN plus China, already conduct
monetary policy in such a way as to maintain stability in exchange rates and REERs, as
seen in section IV. The policies are implicitly coordinated, as seen in the correlations
here. A movement to explicit coordination would present a common posture to the
markets and diffuse speculative pressure when it arises. It would also support reserve-
sharing as under the CMI. This could permit the release of reserves to be invested as
paid-in capital into an ADF that could leverage it in international markets to become a
real influence for development in the region.


VI. Conclusions and Further Research
       This paper has examined the prospects for macro policy and exchange rate
coordination in Asia (in particular in the ASEAN and in the ASEAN and China area) and
looked at the potential implications of such coordination for reserve sharing and financial
developments such as the ADF and the ABM. The paper makes an assessment of the
gains from such coordination. The direct gains from exchange rate management come
from the stability provided by the underlying macro policies and the resulting
minimization of risk to investors. The paper looks at the loss from non-stabilization in
terms of the economic over-heating leading to the crisis of 1997-9; the loss of output and
poverty growth from the crisis; and the depressed investment and slower growth since the
crisis. We argue that better coordination of the underlying macro policies could have
prevented or minimized such costs, in particular with beneficial consequences for pre-
                                                                                             24


crisis policy, the control of exposure to speculative contagion and for post-crisis
investment recovery.
       We argue that the existing geographic and commodity structure of the region’s
trade mean that REER’s already move together, ensuring a minimum autonomy loss from
policy coordination. We look at the geographic structure of trade, using this to develop
weights for baskets of ASEAN currencies in terms of major trade partners outside
ASEAN and China. Such weights are broadly similar for the main ASEAN countries.
The movements of real effective exchange rates are also broadly synchronous. This
highlights an existing implicit coordination amongst the ASEAN+1 countries and
suggests that use of a common basket for exchange rate coordination would not mark a
radical departure for existing policies or from domestic autonomy. We additionally look
at the commodity composition of trade for the ASEAN+1 countries. Once again, this
composition is broadly similar for the larger ASEAN+1 countries (SIC 7 being the
dominant export sector and the manufactures of SIC6-8 dominating imports). Such a
similar commodity structure implies greater benefits from coordination, as argued by
Mundell’s Optimal Currency Area theory. Overall, the trade data by both sector and
geography show no serious imbalances across major sources and markets. A coordinated
exchange rate stabilization against a common basket based on these sources and markets
shouldn’t create substantial differential pressures within ASEAN or China.
       We construct real and nominal effective exchange rate measures for the countries
of the region. These rates show the moves toward integration already in practical effect
in the region and underline the ease of any potential transition toward greater
coordination. In particular, they highlight how an externally-based currency basket might
easily be constructed, offering a focal point for greater regional integration. Similar to
the European Currency Unit in the European Monetary System, such a basket currency
could permit greater coordination of regional policies, addressing particular regional
concerns regarding competitiveness and the response to externally-driven shocks or
cascading speculation. It would yield direct benefits for growth and poverty reduction, as
well as setting the foundation for further cooperation in the areas of reserve sharing and
developing the ABM. The regional currency unit would provide a natural basis for the
denomination of ABM issues.
                                                                                        25


       We see this paper as the first part of a broader study of exchange rate and
monetary coordination in the region. In further research we propose to build on this
analysis and look more closely at reserve sharing and the ABM. As we have outlined in
Figure 1, we see all of these as closely tied together. We also intend to look more closely
at the political economy of regional cooperation in these areas.
                                                                                       26


References




Branson, William H., 2001, “Intermediate Exchange-rate Regimes for Groups of
Developing Countries,” in J.B.de Macedo, D. Cohen, and H. Reisen (eds), Don’t Fix,
Don’t Float OECD, Paris, 2001.


Branson, William H., 2005, “The Asian Crisis as a Bubble in Foreign Exchange
Markets,” mimeo.


Kuroda Haruhilo, Kawai, Masahiro, 2003, “Strengthening Regional Financial
Cooperation in East Asia,” PRI Discussion Papers 03A-10 (May 2003), Policy Research
Institute, Ministry of Finance, Tokyo.


Mundell, Robert, 1961, "A Theory of Optimal Currency Areas," American Economic
Review (September 1961) vol.51 pp.657-65.


Nasution Anwar, 2005, “Regional Financial Arrangements in East Asia,” AEA-ACAES
Joint Meetings (January 2005), forthcoming in Journal of Asian Economics.


Radelet Steven, Sachs Jeffrey, 1988, “The Onset of the East Asian Financial Crisis,”
NBER Working Papers 6680 (August 1988), National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.


World Bank, 2000, “East Asia Update, Special Focus: Poverty During Crisis &
Recovery”, World Bank, East Asia and Pacific publications, (September 18, 2000) pp.1-
6.


Young Alwyn, 1995, “The Tyranny of Numbers: Confronting the Statistical Realities of
the East Asian Growth Experience.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 110 (August
1995): 641-680.
Graph 2.1: Monthly exchange rates for core ASEAN, December 31 1989 until present


 800



 700



 600



 500



 400



 300



 200



 100



   0
   Dec-89 Dec-90 Dec-91 Dec-92 Dec-93 Dec-94 Dec-95 Dec-96 Dec-97 Dec-98 Dec-99 Dec-00 Dec-01 Dec-02 Dec-03 Dec-04




                            Indonesia            Thailand          Singapore           Malaysia             Philippines
                                                                                                    Source: Global Financial Data
Graph 2.2: Monthly exchange rates for core ASEAN, excluding Indonesia, December 31
1989 until present

 300




 250




 200




 150




 100




  50
   Dec-89 Dec-90   Dec-91 Dec-92   Dec-93 Dec-94   Dec-95 Dec-96   Dec-97 Dec-98   Dec-99 Dec-00    Dec-01 Dec-02   Dec-03 Dec-04




                                      Thailand           Singapore           Malaysia              Philippines

                                                                                                    Source: Global Financial Data
Graph 2.3: GDP (constant, 2000 LCU)

  240


  220


  200


  180


  160


  140


  120


  100
        1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003



          Malaysia          Philippines     Singapore          Thailand            Indonesia

                                                                Source: World Bank, WDI database

Graph 2.4: Gross capital formation (%GDP)


  45


  40


  35


  30


  25


  20


  15


  10
        1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003
                Indonesia        Malaysia   Philippines       Singapore         Thailand
                                                  Source: World Bank, Word Development Indicators
Graph 2.5: Gross domestic savings (% GDP)


  55

  50

  45

  40

  35

  30

  25

  20

  15

  10
        1990 1991   1992 1993   1994 1995   1996 1997    1998 1999    2000 2001     2002 2003
                Indonesia       Malaysia      Philippines        Singapore         Thailand
                                                     Source: World Bank, Word Development Indicators

Graph 2.6: External balance on goods and services (% GDP)

                                                     Source: World Bank, Word Development Indicators



  35

  30

  25

  20

  15

  10

   5

   0

   -5

  -10

  -15
        1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003
                Indonesia       Malaysia       Philippines       Singapore         Thailand
Graph 2.7: External debt (% GDP)


  160%

  140%

  120%

  100%

   80%

   60%

   40%

   20%

    0%
           1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003
                      Indonesia              Malaysia              Philippines         Thailand            Singapore
                                                                                              Source: Economist, EIU data
Graph 2.8: Real effective exchange rate
                        Core ASEAN real effective exchange rate, total trade basis
                                (markets outside ASEAN+China/HK)
  180

  170

  160

  150

  140

  130

  120

  110

  100

   90

   80

   70
        1989   1990   1991   1992     1993   1994    1995   1996     1997   1998   1999   2000     2001   2002    2003


                      Indonesia           Malaysia           Philippines           Thailand           Singapore
                                    Source: Global Financial data, IMF Direction of Trade Statistics, World Bank WDI
  Table 2.1: External balance, investment, savings and debt for Indonesia, Malaysia and Philippines
                         1990      1991      1992      1993      1994      1995      1996      1997       1998       1999        2000       2001        2002      2003
Indonesia
Ext. balance, goods        1.6       1.7       2.9       3.0       1.1      -1.3      -0.6      -0.3        9.8        8.1         9.5        7.4         6.6       5.5
& services (% GDP)
Gross capital             30.7      31.6      30.5      29.5      31.1      31.9      30.7      31.8      16.8        11.4       16.1        17.4       15.7       16.0
formation (% GDP)
Gross domestic            32.3      33.2      33.4      32.5      32.2      30.6      30.1      31.5      26.5        19.5       25.6        24.9       22.2       21.5
savings (% GDP)
External debt, total    69,872    79,548    88,002    89,172   107,824   124,398   128,937   136,161   151,236    151,201    144,407     134,045    131,755     134,389
(DOD, current US$)
GDP (current US$)      114,427   128,168   139,116   158,007   176,892   202,132   227,370   215,749    95,446    140,001    150,196     143,034    172,971     208,312
Ext. debt, % GDP        61.1%     62.1%     63.3%     56.4%     61.0%     61.5%     56.7%     63.1%    158.5%     108.0%      96.1%       93.7%      76.2%       64.5%
Malaysia
Ext. balance, goods        2.1      -3.7       1.4      -0.1      -1.6      -3.9       1.4       0.9      22.0        25.1       20.0        18.4       18.3       21.0
& services (% GDP)
Gross capital             32.4      37.8      35.4      39.2      41.2      43.6      41.5      43.0      26.7        22.4       27.3        23.9       23.8       21.4
formation (% GDP)
Gross domestic            34.5      34.1      36.7      39.1      39.6      39.7      42.9      43.9      48.7        47.4       47.3        42.3       42.1       42.3
savings (% GDP)
External debt, total    15,328    17,080    20,018    26,149    30,336    34,343    39,673    47,228    42,409     41,903      41,941     44,612      48,833     49,074
(DOD, current US$)
GDP (current US$)       44,024    49,134    59,151    66,894    74,481    88,832   100,852   100,169    72,175     79,148      90,320     88,001      95,164    103,737
Ext. debt, % GDP        34.8%     34.8%     33.8%     39.1%     40.7%     38.7%     39.3%     47.1%     58.8%      52.9%       46.4%      50.7%       51.3%      47.3%
Philippines
Ext. balance, goods       -5.8      -3.0      -4.9      -8.4      -6.3      -7.8      -8.8     -10.3       -6.6        0.2         1.9       -3.1        -0.5      -2.5
& services (% GDP)
Gross capital             24.2      20.2      21.3      24.0      24.1      22.5      24.0      24.8      20.3        18.4       21.2        20.6       19.3       18.7
formation (% GDP)
Gross domestic            18.4      17.2      16.4      15.5      17.8      14.6      15.2      14.4      13.7        18.6       23.1        17.5       18.8       16.2
savings (% of GDP)
External debt, total    30,580    32,494    33,220    36,143    40,257    39,391    44,031    50,746    53,529     58,063      60,850     58,499      60,090     62,663
(DOD, current US$)
GDP (current US$)       44,331    45,417    52,977    54,368    64,085    74,120    82,847    82,343    65,172     76,157      75,913     72,043      77,954     80,574
Ext. debt, % GDP        69.0%     71.5%     62.7%     66.5%     62.8%     53.1%     53.1%     61.6%     82.1%      76.2%       80.2%      81.2%       77.1%      77.8%
                                                                                                       Source: All World Bank, World Development Indicators
  Table 2.2: External balance, investment, savings and debt for Singapore and Thailand
                        1990     1991      1992      1993        1994        1995         1996       1997         1998       1999        2000        2001       2002       2003
Singapore
Ext. balance, goods       6.9     10.6       9.7       7.8       14.9         16.1        14.4        12.2        21.0        17.8        16.1       19.4        22.8       33.3
& services (% GDP)
Gross capital            36.4     34.5      35.8      37.4       33.1         34.1        35.9        39.2        32.3        32.4        32.4       25.2        21.2       13.4
formation (% GDP)
Gross domestic           43.3     45.1      45.5      45.2       48.0         50.2        50.3        51.4        53.3        50.3        48.5       44.6        43.9       46.7
savings (% of GDP)
External debt,          3,772    4,369     4,582     5,524      7,594       8,368        9,802     11,803       12,093     13,701      15,623      18,361     20,657      22,218
(current US$m)
GDP (current US$)      36,901   43,191    49,863    58,355     70,610      83,933       92,221     95,395       81,911     81,381      91,476      84,871     88,275      91,342
Ext. debt, % GDP       10.2%    10.1%      9.2%      9.5%      10.8%       10.0%        10.6%      12.4%        14.8%      16.8%       17.1%       21.6%      23.4%       24.3%
Thailand
Ext. balance, goods      -7.5     -6.5      -4.0      -4.2        -4.8        -6.7         -6.3        1.4        15.9        12.6         8.6         6.5         7.2       6.7
& services (% GDP)
Gross capital            41.4     42.8      40.0      40.0       40.3         42.1        41.8        33.7        20.4        20.5        22.8       24.1        23.9       25.2
formation (% GDP)
Gross domestic           33.8     36.3      36.0      35.8       35.4         35.4        35.5        35.1        36.3        33.1        31.4       30.6        31.1       32.0
savings (% of GDP)
External debt, total   28,095   37,703    41,784    52,638     65,533     100,039     112,838     109,699     104,917      96,770      79,710      67,181     59,459      51,793
(DOD, current US$)
GDP (current US$)      85,345   98,234   111,453   125,009   144,527      167,896     181,689     150,892     111,860     122,338     122,725    115,536     126,770     142,953
Ext. debt, % GDP       32.9%    38.4%     37.5%     42.1%     45.3%        59.6%       62.1%       72.7%       93.8%       79.1%       64.9%      58.1%       46.9%       36.2%
                                                             Source: All World Bank, World Development Indicators except Singapore external debt from Economist data
          Table 2.3: Regional aggregates for % of poor at $1 and $2 per day in East Asia 5*
                          1990        1996         1999         2000         2001         2002
          $1 per day      15.6         6.9          9.0          8.0          7.0          6.2
          $2 per day      53.3        38.5         46.2         44.7         42.8         41.1
          *The East Asia 5 comprises Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, South Korea and Thailand
                                                             Source: World Bank, East Asia Update, September 2000



  Table 3.1: Export distribution by market, ASEAN+1, 2003 data
                Total      Japan       Korea       US          EU       Taiwan      Australia     ASEAN       China        Other
               (bn, $)    Market distribution
Indonesia       60.995      22.3%         7.1%     12.1%       13.1%        3.7%        2.9%       17.6%            6.2%    15.0%
Malaysia       104.966      10.7%         2.9%     19.6%       12.1%        3.6%        2.5%       24.8%            6.5%    17.3%
Philippines     36.225      15.9%         3.6%     20.1%       16.3%        6.9%        0.9%       18.2%            5.9%    12.3%
Thailand        80.521      14.2%         2.0%     17.0%       14.7%        3.2%        2.7%       20.6%            7.1%    18.5%
Singapore      144.121       6.7%         4.2%     14.3%       13.4%        4.8%        3.2%       27.9%            7.0%    18.4%
China           438.25      13.6%         4.6%     21.1%       16.5%        2.1%        1.4%        7.1%                    33.7%
China + HK     490.358      14.6%         5.0%     27.4%       20.8%        2.9%        1.8%        9.1%                    18.3%
Core ASEAN     426.828
                                                                                   Source: IMF DOTS 2004 Yearbook



  Table 3.2: Import distribution by market, ASEAN+1, 2003 data
                Total      Japan       Korea       US          EU       Taiwan      Australia     ASEAN       China        Other
               (bn, $)    Source distribution
Indonesia       32.544      13.0%         4.7%      8.3%       10.9%       2.7%         5.1%       23.8%            9.1%    22.5%
Malaysia        82.726      17.3%         5.5%     15.5%       11.8%       5.0%         1.5%       24.4%            8.8%    10.1%
Philippines        37.5     20.4%         6.4%     19.8%        8.0%       5.0%         1.3%       17.1%            4.8%    17.3%
Thailand        75.809      24.1%         3.9%      9.5%       10.0%       4.3%         2.1%       16.6%            8.0%    21.6%
Singapore      127.996      12.5%         3.7%     14.1%       12.5%       5.1%         1.7%       28.6%            8.7%    13.3%
China          412.836      18.0%        10.4%      8.2%       12.9%      12.0%         1.8%       11.5%                    25.3%
China + HK     533.002      19.1%        10.2%      8.8%       13.6%      12.3%         1.7%       14.0%                    20.4%
Core ASEAN     356.575
                                                                                   Source: IMF DOTS 2004 Yearbook
     Table 3.3: Commodity exports to the world, % of total exports for each sector by country, 2002
SIC code                                    Core ASEAN countries                                  Other ASEAN                                                   China
                                            Indonesia Malaysia Philippines   Thailand    Sing.    Vietnam Myanmar           Cambodia        Laos     Brunei     China        China+HK
                              Total, $ bn    61.264    101.797    38.176      75.043    127.894   16.847        2.639          1.909        0.330     4.074     358.565       564.977
0-Food                                       6.3%       2.1%      3.9%       12.3%       1.5%     17.4%         21.5%          0.8%        4.7%       0.0%       4.4%         3.2%
1-Beverages                                  0.5%       0.3%      0.2%        0.2%       0.8%      0.1%         0.5%           0.1%        0.0%       0.0%       0.3%         0.3%
2-Crude materials                            8.0%       2.3%      0.9%        3.9%       0.6%      2.4%         12.6%          1.4%        4.6%       0.0%       1.4%         1.2%
3-Fuels, lubricants & related materials      24.4%      8.5%      1.1%        2.1%       6.9%     19.2%         1.1%           0.0%        0.0%      88.2%       2.6%         1.7%
4-Animal & vegetable oils, fats &            4.6%       5.0%      1.0%        0.1%       0.2%      0.0%         0.1%           0.0%        0.0%       0.0%       0.0%         0.0%
waxes
5-Chemicals & related products, n.e.s.       5.2%       4.6%      1.0%        5.2%       8.7%      1.1%         0.1%           0.0%        0.0%       0.0%       4.6%          4.6%
6-Manufactured goods classified              19.2%      7.0%      2.9%       10.2%       3.7%      5.3%         2.6%           2.3%        0.7%       1.1%       16.4%        15.4%
chiefly by material
7-Machinery & transport equipment            16.8%     60.3%      39.7%      39.9%      64.5%      7.1%          1.1%          0.2%        0.1%       4.4%       38.6%        40.2%
8-Miscellaneous manufactured articles        14.5%      8.6%       7.0%      15.6%       8.9%     39.7%         27.9%         93.6%        40.4%      6.1%       31.6%        32.8%
9-Commodities & trans. not classified        0.6%       1.2%      42.3%      10.6%       4.2%      7.6%         32.6%          1.6%        49.5%      0.2%        0.2%         0.5%
elsewhere
                                                                                             Source: World Trade Analyzer, Statistics Canada. International Trade Division
   Table 3.4: Commodity imports from the world, % of total imports for each sector by country, 2002
SIC code                                    Core ASEAN countries                                    Other ASEAN                                                    China
                                            Indonesia Malaysia Philippines   Thailand   Sing.       Vietnam Myanmar            Cambodia       Laos      Brunei     China        China+HK
                              Total, $ bn    28.143    84.884     30.682      53.332    114.596      15.443        2.245          1.546        0.186     1.884     328.045       510.141
0-Food                                        11.1%      4.0%        7.8%       3.5%     2.6%           5.1%         5.4%            1.5% 3.3%            9.2%        1.7%         2.3%
1-Beverages                                    0.8%      0.5%        2.0%       0.5%     0.7%           2.3%         2.7%            8.9% 16.7%           2.5%        0.1%         0.3%
2-Crude materials                              8.6%      1.9%        2.5%       3.5%     0.6%           2.2%         0.8%            2.1% 0.3%            0.5%        6.6%         4.7%
3-Fuels, lubricants & related materials       12.8%      4.1%        7.6%       4.7%    10.7%           8.7%        16.1%            8.8% 6.7%            1.4%        5.1%         4.1%
4-Animal & vegetable oils, fats &
waxes                                          0.2%      0.4%        0.2%      0.1%       0.3%         0.5%           2.5%           0.4%      0.0%       0.3%       0.6%          0.4%
5-Chemicals & related products, n.e.s.        14.6%      6.3%        8.3%     10.8%       5.5%        13.6%           9.3%           5.0%      3.6%       4.4%      12.3%         10.2%
6-Manufactured goods classified
chiefly by material                           16.7%      9.6%       11.9%     16.4%      7.7%         26.7%         24.6%          44.8% 14.7% 20.5%                17.8%         18.1%
7-Machinery & transport equipment             29.8%     63.3%       48.0%     49.9%     57.9%         33.4%         30.5%          17.8% 40.9% 46.9%                46.7%         46.8%
8-Miscellaneous manufactured articles          3.6%      6.1%        5.2%      6.6%      8.9%          6.0%          5.5%           8.9% 5.5% 10.7%                  7.6%         11.1%
9-Commodities & trans. not classified
elsewhere                                      1.8%      3.9%        6.5%       4.0%      5.0%          1.5%          2.6%           1.8%      8.2%       3.7%        1.6%         1.9%
                                                                                                Source: World Trade Analyzer, Statistics Canada. International Trade Division
           Table 3.5: Breakdown of key sectors for commodity exports and imports, extracted from tables A3.3 and A3.4, %, 2002
SIC code                                                Core ASEAN countries                                  Other ASEAN                                              China
EXPORTS                                                 Indonesia   Malaysia   Philipp.   Thai.     Sing.     Vietnam     Myanmar       Camb.     Laos      Brunei     China      China+HK

6-Manufactured goods classified chiefly by material      19.2%       7.0%       2.9%      10.2%     3.7%        5.3%        2.6%        2.3%       0.7%      1.1%      15.4%       15.0%
65X-Textile yarn,fabrics,made-upart.,related products     5.1%       1.1%       0.7%      2.1%      0.6%        1.8%        0.4%        1.3%       0.1%      0.6%      6.1%         6.1%

7-Machinery and transport equipment                      16.8%       60.3%     39.7%      39.9%     64.5%       7.1%        1.1%        0.2%       0.1%      4.4%      44.0%       43.8%
75X-Office mach. & automatic data processing equip.      3.8%        19.1%     17.1%      12.3%     21.0%       0.5%        0.0%        0.0%       0.0%      0.0%      12.2%       11.7%
76X-Telecommunic. & sound recording apparatus            5.9%        11.4%      3.0%      6.7%      6.4%        0.7%        0.1%        0.0%       0.0%      0.1%      9.2%         9.6%
77X-Elec. machinery,apparatus & appliances n.e.s.         4.1%       25.9%     16.4%      11.7%     29.8%       3.6%        0.3%        0.1%       0.0%      0.1%      15.1%       15.5%

8-Miscellaneous manufactured articles                    14.5%       8.6%       7.0%      15.6%     8.9%       39.7%        27.9%       93.6%     40.4%      6.1%      27.9%       29.4%
84X-Articles of apparel and clothing accessories         7.1%        2.1%       3.9%      5.4%      1.4%       14.6%        26.1%       85.6%     38.9%      5.9%      9.8%         8.1%
851-Footwear                                             2.0%        0.1%       0.1%      1.2%      0.1%       16.9%        0.8%        7.5%      1.3%       0.0%      2.4%        4.4%

IMPORTS

6-Manufactured goods classified chiefly by material        16.7%       9.6%     11.9%     16.4%      7.7%       26.7%         24.6%     44.8%     14.7%      20.5%     16.5%         17.0%
65X-Textile yarn,fabrics,made-upart.,related products       5.0%       1.4%      3.6%      2.3%      0.9%        9.3%         12.1%     36.7%      8.8%       8.3%      5.0%          5.4%

7-Machinery and transport equipment                        29.8%      63.3%     48.0%     49.9%     57.9%       33.4%         30.5%     17.8%     40.9%      46.9%     45.5%        45.9%
77X-Elec. machinery,apparatus & appliances n.e.s.           3.2%      37.4%     22.9%     17.6%     24.5%        5.9%          3.4%      1.1%      5.1%       4.6%     18.2%        18.4%
                                                                                                  Source: World Trade Analyzer, Statistics Canada. International Trade Division
Table 3.6: SIC-6, Manufactured goods classified chiefly by material export shares to
markets outside core ASEAN+1 countries
                       Total    Japan     Korea       U.S.    Europe Taiwan Australia                            Other
 Indonesia             19.2% 16.3% 15.2% 13.3%                 18.3%       19.2%     19.0%                       25.0%
 Malaysia               7.0%      9.1%       9.7%     2.6%       6.0%       7.9%     10.0%                        8.3%
 Philippines            2.9%      3.4%       6.8%     2.3%       1.5%       1.5%      5.9%                        3.7%
 Thailand              10.2%      8.7% 14.5% 11.3%             11.7%       13.1%     13.1%                        8.8%
 Singapore              3.7%      1.9%       3.1%     0.6%       1.9%       3.4%      4.1%                        5.4%

 China                  16.4%     12.2%        22.9%       13.2%         13.8%         17.2%            19.1%    20.4%
 China+Hong Kong        15.4%     11.1%        18.8%       11.1%         11.3%         12.2%            16.4%    20.2%
                             Source: World Trade Analyzer, Statistics Canada. International Trade Division

Table 3.7: SIC-7, Machinery and transport equipment export shares to markets outside
core ASEAN+1 countries
                        Total     Japan Korea       U.S.     Europe Taiwan Australia                            Other
 Indonesia               16.8% 11.6%        6.2% 19.2%        18.3%      7.4%       10.4%                       22.6%
 Malaysia                60.3% 42.9% 48.1% 80.6%              62.9% 64.7%           38.3%                       56.0%
 Philippines             39.7% 53.2% 26.7% 33.5%              54.9% 33.1%           58.3%                       31.3%
 Thailand                39.9% 39.4% 43.7% 39.4%              45.8% 55.3%           44.2%                       36.4%
 Singapore               64.5% 59.5% 71.9% 75.7%              71.4% 75.2%           47.2%                       59.1%

 China                   38.6%    32.4%        30.6%       39.4%          40.0%        50.3%          32.2%     40.7%
 China+Hong Kong         40.2%    33.7%        37.4%       35.5%          38.3%        55.9%          32.1%     44.9%
                             Source: World Trade Analyzer, Statistics Canada. International Trade Division

Table 3.8: SIC-8, Miscellaneous manufactured articles export shares to markets outside
core ASEAN+1 countries
                         Total    Japan Korea        U.S.     Europe Taiwan Australia                           Other
 Indonesia                14.5%    5.6%    1.9% 43.6%           29.0%     2.1%        7.0%                        7.2%
 Malaysia                  8.6%    7.5%    2.4% 12.0%           14.0%     3.6%       12.6%                        6.6%
 Philippines               7.0%    3.7%    0.9% 18.1%            6.1%     0.6%        8.3%                        2.2%
 Thailand                 15.6% 14.8%      5.8% 31.9%           26.5%     3.4%       11.3%                        4.6%
 Singapore                 8.9% 19.1%      9.1% 11.0%            7.9%     5.2%       12.3%                        7.5%

 China                   31.6%     35.6%       16.5%       41.2%          35.7%       12.9%          38.1%      24.5%
 China+Hong Kong         32.8%     38.3%       17.6%       49.0%          42.2%       16.8%          42.6%      20.8%
                             Source: World Trade Analyzer, Statistics Canada. International Trade Division
Table 3.9: SIC-6, Manufactured good import shares by source, outside core ASEAN+1
countries
                        Total    Japan Korea        U.S.     Europe Taiwan Australia                           Other
 Indonesia              16.7% 19.5% 36.3%            7.0%     12.0% 36.6%         15.5%                        14.2%
 Malaysia                 9.6% 15.0% 13.7%           3.0%       9.0% 13.1%        26.7%                         8.8%
 Philippines            11.9% 11.2% 17.0%            3.0%     11.4% 18.8%         13.3%                        13.1%
 Thailand               16.4% 18.7% 21.5%            7.6%     16.6% 28.0%         26.1%                        14.1%
 Singapore                7.7%    9.0%     9.2%      3.8%       9.9%      6.9%     5.4%                         7.9%

 China                   17.8%     18.5%       24.8%         6.0%         12.7%       24.6%            17.8%   18.0%
 China+Hong Kong         18.1%     16.4%       24.3%         7.6%         16.3%       22.8%            18.4%   18.8%
                             Source: World Trade Analyzer, Statistics Canada. International Trade Division

Table 3.10: SIC-7, Machinery and transport equipment import shares by source, outside
core ASEAN+1 countries
                       Total    Japan    Korea     U.S.     Europe Taiwan Australia                            Other
 Indonesia             29.8% 56.6% 24.0% 35.7%               44.5% 29.5%            13.6%                      15.9%
 Malaysia              63.3% 64.6% 75.1% 79.4%               65.1% 72.0%            13.0%                      56.8%
 Philippines           48.0% 66.2% 59.9% 66.1%               49.5% 27.2%             6.9%                      36.0%
 Thailand              49.9% 60.9% 57.9% 51.2%               46.3% 46.3%             5.8%                      45.6%
 Singapore             57.9% 64.2% 71.6% 66.4%               55.7% 80.2%            13.0%                      53.1%

 China                 46.7%     54.2%        43.5%       54.3%          60.6%       47.5%             5.2%    40.4%
 China+Hong Kong       46.8%     55.4%        46.4%       52.2%          52.8%       51.6%             6.6%    41.9%
                             Source: World Trade Analyzer, Statistics Canada. International Trade Division

Table 3.11: SIC-8, Miscellaneous manufactured article import shares by source, outside
core ASEAN+1 countries
                       Total     Japan Korea       U.S.    Europe Taiwan Australia                             Other
 Indonesia               3.6%     3.7%    5.4%      2.7%      3.5%       4.1%        1.3%                       3.8%
 Malaysia                6.1%     7.3%    2.0%      6.4%      6.6%       4.3%        3.6%                       6.1%
 Philippines             5.2%     4.4%    2.6%      4.3%      6.2%       3.4%        3.9%                       6.4%
 Thailand                6.6%     6.5%    2.9%      8.7% 10.3%           7.6%        2.7%                       5.3%
 Singapore               8.9%     8.2%    3.1% 11.2% 12.3%               5.0%        5.4%                       8.5%

 China                  7.6%      8.7%         4.7%        9.0%         7.7%           8.7%           2.6%      7.3%
 China+Hong Kong       11.1%     10.2%         4.6%       10.6%        12.4%           7.9%           4.8%     13.1%
                             Source: World Trade Analyzer, Statistics Canada. International Trade Division
Table 4.1: Export shares for weighting real effective exchange rates

               Japan     Korea, Rep.         United States          EU         Taiwan Australia
Indonesia      36.5%       11.6%                19.8%              21.4%        6.0%   4.8%     100.0%
Malaysia       20.8%        5.6%                38.1%              23.6%        7.0%   4.8%     100.0%
Philippines    25.0%        5.7%                31.6%              25.5%       10.8%   1.4%     100.0%
Thailand       26.4%        3.7%                31.6%              27.3%        6.0%   5.0%     100.0%
Singapore      14.4%        9.0%                30.6%              28.7%       10.3%   7.0%     100.0%

China          22.9%        7.7%                 35.7%             27.8%         3.5%          2.4%           100.0%
China+HK       20.1%        6.9%                 37.8%             28.6%         4.1%          2.5%           100.0%
                              Source: World Trade Analyzer, Statistics Canada. International Trade Division

  Table 4.2: Import shares for weighting real effective exchange rates
               Japan     Korea, Rep.      United States      EU      Taiwan Australia
Indonesia      29.1%        10.5%             18.6%         24.5% 6.0%       11.3% 100.0%
Malaysia       30.5%         9.7%             27.4%         20.9% 8.8%        2.7%    100.0%
Philippines    33.5%        10.5%             32.5%         13.2% 8.2%        2.2%    100.0%
Thailand       44.8%         7.2%             17.6%         18.6% 7.9%        3.9%    100.0%
Singapore      25.2%         7.4%             28.5%         25.2% 10.2%       3.5%    100.0%

China          28.4%        16.5%                13.0%             20.3%        18.9%         2.8%            100.0%
China+HK       29.1%        15.5%                13.4%             20.7%        18.7%         2.5%            100.0%
                              Source: World Trade Analyzer, Statistics Canada. International Trade Division



Table 4.3: Trade shares for weighting real effective exchange rates

               Japan     Korea, Rep.         United States          EU         Taiwan Australia check
Indonesia      34.4%       11.3%                19.5%              22.2%        6.0%   6.6%     100.0%
Malaysia       25.3%        7.5%                33.1%              22.3%        7.8%   3.8%     100.0%
Philippines    29.2%        8.1%                32.0%              19.4%        9.5%   1.8%     100.0%
Thailand       35.3%        5.4%                24.8%              23.1%        6.9%   4.5%     100.0%
Singapore      19.6%        8.2%                29.6%              27.0%       10.2%   5.3%     100.0%

China          22.9%         7.7%                35.7%             27.8%         3.5%          2.4%           100.0%
China+HK       24.5%        11.2%                25.7%             24.7%        11.3%          2.5%           100.0%
                              Source: World Trade Analyzer, Statistics Canada. International Trade Division
Graph 4.1: Real effective exchange rate, export basis
                    Core ASEAN + China/HK real effective exchange rate, export basis
                               (markets outside ASEAN+China/HK)
180

170

160

150

140

130

120

110

100

 90

 80

 70
      1989   1990     1991   1992    1993   1994     1995     1996   1997   1998   1999    2000   2001   2002   2003

        Malaysia             Philippines           Thailand          Singapore            Indonesia        China+HK
                                     Source: Global Financial data, IMF Direction of Trade Statistics, World Bank WDI
Graph 4.2: Real effective exchange rate, import basis
                      Core ASEAN + China/HK real effective exchange rate, import basis
                                 (markets outside ASEAN+China/HK)
  180

  170

  160

  150

  140

  130

  120

  110

  100

   90

   80
        1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003

          Indonesia         M alay sia       Philippines       Thailand        Singapore        China+HK

                                  Source: Global Financial data, IMF Direction of Trade Statistics, World Bank WDI
Graph 4.3: Real effective exchange rate, total trade basis
                        Core ASEAN real effective exchange rate, total trade basis
                                (markets outside ASEAN+China/HK)
  180

  170

  160

  150

  140

  130

  120

  110

  100

   90

   80

   70
        1989   1990   1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999    2000   2001   2002   2003


          Indonesia          Malaysia         Philippines         Thailand           Singapore        China+HK
Graph 4.4: Weighted CPI indices for trading partners, core ASEAN and China+HK
                    CPI index of major trading partners for each ASEAN+1 country,
                                      weighted by import shares
  140


  135


  130


  125


  120


  115


  110


  105


  100
        1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003

        Indonesia       Malaysia        Philippines         Thailand         Singapore          China+HK
                              Source: Global Financial data, IMF Direction of Trade Statistics, World Bank WDI
Graph 4.5: CPI indices for core ASEAN and China+HK


  500


  450


  400


  350


  300


  250


  200


  150


  100
        1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003

        Indonesia    Malaysia        Philippines         Thailand         Singapore          China+HK
                           Source: Global Financial data, IMF Direction of Trade Statistics, World Bank WDI
Graph 4.6: Nominal effective exchange rate, import basis
                           Nominal effective exchange rate, import basis
                             (markets outside ASEAN+HK/China)
  520

  470

  420

  370

  320

  270

  220

  170

  120

   70
        1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004

        Indonesia     Malaysia        Philippines         Thailand         Singapore          China+HK
                            Source: Global Financial data, IMF Direction of Trade Statistics, World Bank WDI
   Table 5.1: Correlation matrix of monthly changes in dollar exchange rates, January 2000- June 2005
                   Indonesia    Malaysia        Philippines       Thailand       Singapore      China       Japan    Taiwan       Korea
    Indonesia               1
    Malaysia             0.15               1
    Philippines          0.39            0.09               1
    Thailand             0.45            0.23            0.57              1
    Singapore            0.54            0.32            0.33           0.65               1
    Japan                0.27            0.29            0.24           0.53            0.64      -0.06          1
    Taiwan               0.11            0.07            0.36           0.62            0.33      -0.11       0.36           1
    Korea                0.25            0.20            0.19           0.47            0.47      -0.01       0.57        0.60           1
                                                                                   Source: Global Financial Data; Datastream

Table 5.2: Correlation matrix of monthly changes in dollar exchange rates. January 2000- June 2005
                  Indonesia   Malaysia     Philippines   Thailand       Singapore      Vietnam     Myanmar        Cambodia     Laos      Brunei      China   Japan    Taiwan      Korea
  Indonesia               1
  Malaysia             0.15          1
  Philippines          0.39       0.09               1
  Thailand             0.45       0.23            0.57              1
  Singapore            0.54       0.32            0.33           0.65              1
  Vietnam             -0.07      -0.15            0.31           0.05           0.03          1
  Myanmar              0.12       0.19            0.16           0.41           0.34       0.00               1
  Cambodia             0.05       0.00           -0.01           0.08          -0.06      -0.17            0.21           1
  Laos                -0.10      -0.02           -0.15           0.00          -0.22      -0.05           -0.03        0.65          1
  Brunei               0.54       0.34            0.33           0.65           0.98       0.02            0.33       -0.04      -0.19           1
  China               -0.18      -0.11           -0.27          -0.07          -0.15      -0.17            0.07       -0.03       0.08       -0.15       1
  Japan                0.27       0.29            0.24           0.53           0.64       0.06            0.35       -0.06      -0.19        0.58   -0.06       1
  Taiwan               0.11       0.07            0.36           0.62           0.33       0.37            0.28       -0.10       0.01        0.33   -0.11    0.36            1
  Korea                0.25       0.20            0.19           0.47           0.47       0.13            0.21       -0.05      -0.08        0.46   -0.01    0.57         0.60      1
                                                                                                                               Source: Global Financial Data; Datastream
Table 5.3: Correlation matrix of monthly changes in reserves, denominated in LCU (starting Jan 19991)
                  Indonesia      Malaysia        Philippines       Thailand       Singapore        China      Japan       Taiwan       Korea
Indonesia             1
Malaysia            0.07               1
Philippines          0.35            0.10               1
Thailand            0.33             0.34             0.21              1
Singapore           0.37             0.73             0.29            0.51             1
Japan                0.37            0.50             0.27            0.47            0.64            1
Taiwan              0.50             0.34             0.40            0.65            0.61          0.51        1
Korea               -0.07            0.46             0.07            0.15            0.37          0.33       0.04           1
     1
      China starting July 99                                                                            Source: IMF IFS; Taiwan CBC data


Table 5.4: Correlation matrix of monthly changes in reserves, denominated in LCU (starting Jan 19992)
                  Indonesia      Malaysia        Philippines       Thailand       Singapore        Vietnam       Myanmar           Cambodia    Laos    China   Japan      Taiwan       Korea
Indonesia             1
Malaysia            0.07              1
Philippines          0.35            0.10               1
Thailand            0.33            0.34             0.21               1
Singapore           0.37            0.73             0.29             0.51              1
Vietnam             -0.22            0.55            -0.15           -0.07            0.45             1
Myanmar              0.00           -0.15             0.06            0.10            0.02           -0.13             1
Cambodia            -0.08           -0.20            -0.03           -0.11           -0.22           0.05           0.06              1
Laos                0.19            -0.22             0.11           -0.18           -0.20           -0.10          -0.13            0.04        1
China               0.37            0.50             0.27             0.47            0.64           0.45           -0.14           -0.13      -0.03    1
Japan                0.50            0.34             0.40            0.65            0.61           -0.26           0.27           -0.13      -0.11   0.51       1
Taiwan              -0.07            0.46             0.07            0.15            0.37            0.39          -0.10           -0.04      -0.17   0.33     0.04          1
Korea               0.35            0.08              0.15            0.42            0.29           -0.07          -0.01           -0.07      -0.12   0.28     0.41        0.18        1
     2
      China starting July 99, Vietnam missing July-Dec 99; lao missing Mar 05; not including Brunei (pegged to Singapore dollar)                       Source: IMF IFS; Taiwan CBC d
