                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    REVIEW OF A HISTORY OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE.
                        VOLUME 1 (2003) BY ALLAN H. MELTZER

                                           Michael D. Bordo

                                         Working Paper 11714
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11714


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2005




Article written for the Journal of Monetary Economics. For helpful suggestions and comments I would
like to thank Forrest Capie, Bruce Champ, Charles Goodhart, Chris Hanes, Joseph Haubrich, David
Laidler, Athanasios Orphanides, Angela Redish, Hugh Rockoff, Anna Schwartz, Francois Velde, David
Wheelock, Eugene White and John Wood. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Michael D. Bordo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Review of A History of the Federal Reserve. Volume 1 (2003) by Allan H. Meltzer
Michael D. Bordo
NBER Working Paper No. 11714
October 2005
JEL No. E58

                                          ABSTRACT

In this essay I distill the seven major themes in A History of the Federal Reserve which covers the
Federal Reserve's record from 1914 to 1951. I conclude with a critique.

Michael D. Bordo
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
bordo@econ.rutgers.edu
    The History of the Federal Reserve 1913-1951 Vol. I by Allan Meltzer: A Review Essay


                                         1. Introduction



Allan Meltzer’s A History of the Federal Reserve 1913-1951 Vol. I is a monumental

accomplishment. The volume provides a very detailed history of the Fed in its formative years

from its establishment in 1913 to the Federal Reserve Treasury Accord of 1951. The narrative

covers the key events of four decades; getting started; war finance in World War I; the 1920-21

recession; the boom years in the 1920s; the Wall Street crash and the Great Depression;

subservience to the Treasury beginning in 1934; World War II finance and the pegging of

interest rates; and the 1951 Accord when the Fed regained its independence from the Treasury.

       In painstaking detail Meltzer documents how the Fed grew up to be an adult central bank

and what a drawn out and rocky adolescence it suffered through. The narrative in Volume I sets

the stage for the yet to be completed Volume II which covers the period from the Accord to the

beginning of Alan Greenspan’s tenure as chairman - - the Federal Reserve’s far from tranquil

adulthood.

       The volume complements Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz’s A Monetary History of

the United States: 1867-1960 published in 1963. However unlike their work, which is a monetary

history of the United States, Meltzer’s book is a biography of its central bank, portrayed within

the broader context of U.S. monetary history. More importantly, because Meltzer had access to a

much more complete archived official record than they had (the records of the Federal Reserve

Board, the Board of Governors and the minutes of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s

board of directors as well as of the Federal Advisory Council), his interpretation of many of the

key episodes in Fed history greatly expands upon and in several episodes, differs considerably



                                               2
from theirs. This is most evident in Volume I’s treatment of the Fed’s policy failure in the 1920s

and 1930s that culminated in the debacle of the Great Depression. Indeed his chapters four and

five are the signature chapters in the book, as of course is chapter seven The Great Contraction,

1929-1933 in Friedman and Schwartz. They are essential reading for any serious student of that

disaster.

            Section 2 of my essay discusses what I distill to be the seven major themes in History

of Federal Reserve. A History is an excellent source for any serious student of the Federal

Reserve. It is also very detailed and a time consuming read. Appendix I offers a succinct Readers

Guide to the Historical Narrative in Volume I. Section 3 concludes with some critical insights.



                                         2. Major Themes



        Seven major themes knit the historical narrative together and are the essence of Meltzer’s

thesis: (1) the Fed followed the wrong model from the beginning and never really got it right

even by 1951; (2) as in Friedman and Schwartz, the structure of the Federal Reserve was flawed

from the beginning and contributed greatly to its inability to learn; (3) in distinction to Friedman

and Schwartz, the effects of adhering to a flawed policy model outweighed the contribution of

bright officials, even Benjamin Strong, who may have known better; (4) the interpretation of the

Great Depression by Friedman and Schwartz            and other scholars such as Bernanke and

Eichengreen is wanting; (5) economic forces in the rest of the world are important and the Fed

had ongoing problems coming to grips with them; (6) the Fed had a long and protracted struggle

in maintaining its independence from the Treasury; (7) Meltzer views the history of the Fed

through monetarist glasses.




                                                 3
                                 2.1. The Fed followed the Wrong Model

        A theme that determines Meltzer’s interpretation of Federal Reserve history is that from

its very outset the Federal Reserve Act of 1913, was based on two precepts: the real bills doctrine

and the gold standard. These precepts led it on many occasions to follow policies that were

detrimental for the U.S. economy. The same point was made by Friedman and Schwartz (1963)

and West (1979), but Meltzer takes it much further. His analysis (to be developed further in

Appendix I) starts with the problems that the Fed had in operating monetary policy.

        Policy in the post-1914 environment was supposed to maintain gold convertibility by the

passive rediscounting of self liquidating real (commercial) bills and use of the discount rate, to

counter movements in the gold reserve ratio. In response to the changing environment (World

War I and its aftermath) and especially heavy Congressional criticism of its performance

following the severe recession of 1920-21, the Fed shifted to a more activist stance based more

on the use of open market operations rather than discount policy and a new policy framework

which Meltzer calls the Burgess - Riefler doctrine.1 According to this doctrine; which was an

adaptation of real bills, member banks would apply to the discount window only in time of need

and not for profit, and the Fed could induce member banks to borrow to repay loans by

conducting open market purchases or sales of government securities. According to Burgess-

Riefler the level of member banks indebtedness in the key reserve districts of New York and

Chicago, and the level of short-term nominal interest rates, would indicate whether monetary

ease or tightening was in order.

        Throughout the book Meltzer effectively demonstrates that by following this doctrine, the

system seriously misjudged policy. Thus it viewed low member bank indebtedness and low

1
 The role of the doctrine in Fed policy making was first developed by Wicker (1966, 1967) and then expanded upon
by Brunner and Meltzer (1968).They referred to it as the Burgess-Riefler-Strong doctrine. It is a bit puzzling why
Meltzer dropped Strong’s name from the doctrine in his latest work.


                                                        4
nominal interest rates from 1930-33 as evidence of monetary ease, thereby creating the Great

Depression, the recession of 1937-38 and other less spectacular failures.

        Meltzer goes further in his indictment of the Fed. In chapter 2 he masterfully reminds us

that Henry Thornton in Paper Credit (1802) had already worked out the proper role of central

bank policy under both gold and inconvertible paper money standards which was to use the

discount rate to maintain price stability. Moreover, Walter Bagehot in Lombard Street (1870)

gave central banks the precepts they needed to act as lenders of last resort to maintain financial

stability and Irving Fisher in The Theory of Interest (1930) explained the distinction between

nominal and real interest rates.

        According to Meltzer, had the Fed followed the lessons of monetary orthodoxy which

had been well developed in the century before its establishment, it would not have made the

mistakes that it did.



                                   2.2. The Structure of the Federal Reserve



        Meltzer argues throughout the narrative, similar to a theme in Friedman and Schwartz,

that the structure of the Federal Reserve System, as delineated in the Federal Reserve Act of

1913, created the conditions for continuous conflict between the 12 regional Federal Reserve

banks and the Federal Reserve Board in Washington D.C. The framers of the Federal Reserve

had to balance the interests of the northeast financial centers that wanted a European type central

bank to manage the gold standard, with those of the interior that feared the centralization of

economic power and wanted an institution responsive to local credit market conditions,

smoothing seasonal stresses on interest rates and incorporating the lender of last resort reserve




                                                   5
pooling feature of the National Reserve Associations under the Aldrich Vreeland Act of 1908.

The Federal Reserve System compromise established 12 regional Reserve banks (largely owned

by, and whose governors (later presidents) were appointed by the member commercial banks,

with the power to regulate local credit conditions by discounting eligible commercial bills) and

the Federal Reserve Board in Washington D.C. (composed of government appointed officials

who were to oversee and coordinate the operations of the system as a whole).

       The structural flaws emphasized by Meltzer were based on the incentive incompatibility

of the two institutions within the Fed. The Reserve banks had an incentive to focus on local

business and credit conditions with limited regard to the national economy. The Board, which

was supposed to act in the national interest, did not have the power to compel the Reserve Banks

to follow a uniform national policy. Moreover according to Meltzer, there were few individuals

at the Board who had the ability to see the big picture clearly. Consequently, the early years of

the system were characterized by a lack of national symmetry in Reserve bank discount rate

policy as well as conflict between the Board and the Reserve banks in the setting of discount

rates. Some of the early dissidence was resolved by creation in 1923 of the Open Market

Investment Committee (OMIC) to oversee national open market policy.

       The power vacuum was filled by Benjamin Strong, Governor of the Federal Reserve

Bank of New York. Strong, with a superior intellect, extensive experience as an international

banker, and great force of character, headed the influential OMIC. He was able to gain the

support of the other Reserve banks. Strong’s vision of a powerful central bank located in the

nation’s financial capital and setting both national and international monetary policy, often

differed from the perspective of the members of the Federal Reserve Board in Washington as

well as from those of officials of the other Reserve banks. Strong’s views usually prevailed.




                                                6
        Meltzer largely accepts the views of Chandler (1958) and Friedman and Schwartz, that

following Strong’s lengthy illness and death in October 1928, the conflict reemerged. George

Harrison, Strong’s successor at the New York Fed had neither the intellect nor the personality to

follow Strong’s precedent. This surely was an important reason for the system’s inability to deal

with the Depression which began in August 1929.

        Later in 1931, in congressional hearings on reform of the Federal Reserve Act, Adolph

Miller, Strong’s principal opponent on the Board, blamed Strong’s ‘highhanded’ expansionary

policies in the summer of 1927 to preserve Britain’s adherence to the gold standard,2 for fueling

the Wall Street stock market boom with its inevitable crash and depression. This view was

accepted by Carter Glass, Chairman of the Senate Banking Committee and one of the framers of

the original Federal Reserve Act. It led to major reforms of the Federal Reserve System in 1933

and 1935, which once and for all centralized power with the Board in Washington. However, as

Meltzer underlines, after 1933 Franklin Roosevelt’s Treasury dominated monetary policy and it

took until March 1951 for the Fed to become a fully functioning central bank.



                                  2.3. Individuals would not have saved the day

        An important theme in A History is the role of individuals in developing policy. Meltzer

documents in detail the role of Federal Reserve officials in the events he describes. The key

players in the narrative are: Benjamin Strong, Adolph Miller, George Harrison, Henry

Morgenthau, Marriner Eccles, and Allan Sproul.

        Friedman and Schwartz, following Chandler(1958) view Benjamin Strong as the hero of

the early Federal Reserve years. They praise his actions in the 1920s as being largely responsible


2
  Although at the time both the directors of the New York Fed and the Reserve Board (including Miller) approved
the policy.


                                                        7
for the ‘High Tide of the Federal Reserve.’ According to them he had a clear understanding of

the central bank’s role in both domestic and international policy. On the domestic side he was

responsible for unifying the System in the 1920s to conduct the correct counter cyclical open

market policies to offset the recessions of 1923-24 and 1926-27.

       On the international side, he worked tirelessly with Montagu Norman, Governor of the

Bank of England (and also later with Emile Moreau, Governor of the Banque de France and

Hjalmar Schacht, Governor of the Reichsbank) to stabilize the currencies of the European

belligerents in the early 1920’s, to restore general adherence to the gold exchange standard and

to help the Bank of England in 1924 and especially in 1927 in its losing battle to restore and then

maintain its gold parity. Finally they argue that it was Strong’s untimely death in October 1928

that allowed the System to devolve into a state of paralysis that failed to prevent the banking

panics of the 1930’s. Moreover they argue that, had he lived, he would have acted after the fall

of 1929 to continue open market purchases to prevent the banking panics from doing their

damage.

       Meltzer generally agrees with Friedman and Schwartz on Strong’s role in unifying the

system in the 1920s, and in restoring the gold exchange standard, but he differs with them by

also emphasizing some of his mistakes; particularly the failure to respond quickly enough to the

inflation of 1919-20 after World War I and then the recession of 1921; the belief that monetary

tightening was necessary to stem the Wall Street boom, and his focus on the same indicators that

led the system to misjudge its policy from 1930 to 1933 and that he probably, but not definitely,

would have led to the system to jettison the framework in time.

       Meltzer also is much more critical of George Harrison, Strong’s successor at the New

York Fed than are Friedman and Schwartz. They view him as not having the leadership




                                                8
capabilities to do what Strong would have done but as basically being on the same page. Meltzer

demonstrates time and again how Harrison either made incorrect judgments based on Burgess-

Riefler or delayed actions that had been agreed upon.

       Adolph Miller also gets mixed reviews by Meltzer. Although he was Strong’s fiercest

opponent on the Board in the 1920s and a staunch advocate of real bills, he also pushed for the

continuation of expansionary policy in 1932 while Harrison was opposed.

       After the Great Depression, Marriner Eccles became chairman of the greatly strengthened

Board of Governors in 1934. He generally gets low marks as an avid believer in the impotence of

monetary policy “as pushing on a string” and the existence of a liquidity trap, for advocating the

doubling of reserve requirements in 1936-37 out of fear of future inflation to sop up commercial

banks’ excess reserves, and as passively accepting Treasury domination of the Fed, although by

1949 he effectively joined the fight to regain the Fed’s independence.

       Henry Morgenthau Jr., Secretary of the Treasury from 1934 to 1945 generally gets very

high marks for having the Treasury follow an expansionary gold purchase program, for

devaluing the dollar and creating a gold-induced reflation (as well as threatening the Fed for

being contractionary with the stick of open market purchases to be conducted by the Treasury’s

Exchange Stabilization Fund (ESF)) that pulled the U.S. out of the depression - - effectively

doing what the Fed wouldn’t do.

       Finally Allan Sproul, appointed President of the New York Fed in 1940, is given the

highest marks for consistently and coherently making the case for ending the interest rate peg in

the late 1940’s and restoring Federal Reserve independence.




                                                9
       Many other characters slip in and out of the narrative and are generally dismissed as

ineffective advocates of real bills and other sins. Two of the most reviled were Governors

MacDougal of Chicago and Young of Boston.



                        2.4. A Reinterpretation of the Great Depression



       A key feature of A History is the treatment of the Great Depression. Meltzer agrees with

Friedman and Schwartz and others (Hamilton 1987) that the Great Depression was caused by

monetary forces - - the pursuit by the Fed of tight money in 1928-29 to stem the stock market

boom and the failure to offset the banking panics of 1930-33 by expansionary open market

policy. The key difference between his treatment and that of Friedman and Schwartz is in the

reason why the Fed was at the center of the forces creating the depression. As discussed above,

he attributes it primarily to the Fed’s adherence to the Burgess-Riefler doctrine and more

fundamentally real bills. According to Meltzer (and also Friedman and Schwartz), the Fed in the

late 1920s was obsessed with the U.S. stock market because an important element of the real

bills doctrine stated that the central bank should not accommodate lending to finance speculation

in asset markets. That would fuel asset price inflation which would inevitably spill over into

general inflation and inevitably lead to deflation and depression. Hence all the players in the

system, including Strong, sought to deflate the boom, although he and the New York Fed wanted

to do it by raising the discount rate, and the Board which favored regulating restrictions on

member bank lending.

       Once the crash occurred, and after a brief period in the fall in 1929 when the New York

Fed, with the permission of the Board, followed an expansionary lender of last resort policy, the




                                               10
system reverted to a neutral to tight policy based on its readings of the indicators of the Burgess-

Riefler doctrine as signifying monetary ease, i.e. member bank borrowing was low as were

nominal interest rates.

        The Fed’s policy, according to Meltzer in A History Vol. I, Brunner and Meltzer (1968)

and Wheelock (1992), was perfectly consistent with that followed in the earlier recessions of

1923-24 and 1926-27. The only difference was that member bank borrowing was low because of

the depression, and nominal rates were low reflecting expectations of deflation. In contrast to

Friedman and Schwartz, who view the 1930-33 episode as a departure from the sound policies of

the 1920’s, Meltzer et al view the Fed’s policy as consistent between the 20s and the 30s. The

only difference was that economic conditions had changed but were not taken into account by

Fed officials. Hence Meltzer is less sanguine than Friedman and Schwartz that, had Strong lived

he would have saved the day. Moreover he posits that all of the members of the OMPC (Open

Market Policy Committee, the successor to the OMIC) who set policy in 1930-33 following the

Burgess-Riefler doctrine, had also done so several years earlier. Meltzer agrees with Friedman

and Schwartz on the importance of the flawed structure of the Fed, but emphasized that it

increased the difficulty of developing the consensus that would have produced the required

change in policy.3




3
 Meltzer also expresses considerable differences with Bernanke’s (1983) view of the banking panics as a non-
monetary event, identifying the key channel separate from the effects of a decline in money supply, by which the
banking crisis impacted the real economy as the rise in the cost of credit intermediation to small firms. Meltzer
(pp.313-314, 396) argues that commercial paper declined much more than bank lending to small firms and that the
decline in bank lending to small firms most likely reflected a response to a decline in the demand for loans as
borrowers incomes fell. He expresses similar reservations to the related approach by Calomiris (1993).


                                                        11
                                          2.5. The Rest of the World



         The gold standard was one of the two pillars of the Federal Reserve Act and Federal

Reserve officials paid considerable attention to it over much of the period covered in volume I.

According to the rules of the gold standard, the monetary authority was supposed to define the

value of its currency in terms of a fixed weight of gold and then maintain the gold peg by freely

buying or selling gold coins or bullion. The gold standard embodied an automatic adjustment

mechanism whereby shocks to the balance of payments would be accommodated by gold and

short-term capital flows and domestic money supply; interest rates, prices and output would

adjust. Monetary authorities were supposed to follow the ‘rules of the game’ and raise and lower

their discount rates to speed up the adjustment mechanism. They were supposed to subsume

domestic policy objectives to maintain external convertibility but over short periods of time, they

could engage in the temporary smoothing of real output and interest rate shocks.4

         When the Fed was established it was supposed to follow the ‘rules of the game’ in the

way the Bank of England had done in the 1880-1914 period - - to alter the discount rate in

reaction to changes in the gold reserve ratio. However, shortly after the Fed opened its doors,

World War I led to the suspension of gold convertibility (de facto and de jure) in most countries.

Hence the Fed did not have to worry much about external balance considerations for close to six

years. From 1914 to 1917 massive gold inflows increased the gold reserve and led to inflation,

but because the rest of the world was inflating even faster, and because convertibility had been

suspended, the adjustment mechanism did not function. After hostilities ceased, inflation (now


4
 Bordo and MacDonald (2004) show that under the pre 1914 classical gold standard because the core countries of
Western Europe had considerable credibility, the gold points surrounding gold parity served as a ‘target zone’ in the
sense of Krugman (1990) and Svensson (1993) in which central banks could temporarily pursue domestic
objectives.


                                                         12
paper money induced) increased, and by 1919, U.S. gold reserves began to decline. The Fed then

began following the ‘rules’ and by dramatically raising the discount rate in 1920-21 produced a

very serious deflation and recession.

       The NY Fed under Benjamin Strong’s leadership in the early 1920’s was then

instrumental in restoring the gold standard, albeit a gold exchange standard with the dollar and

the pound as the key currencies. The restored gold exchange standard did not work as effectively

as the pre war version. Meltzer in Vol. I, following Meltzer (1976) has a brilliant treatment of its

flaws. According to him the system had two fatal flaws. First, real exchange rates were

misaligned, Britain went back to gold in 1925 at the pre war parity of $4.86 to the pound at an

overvalued rate. France restored convertibility de facto in 1926 at a greatly undervalued parity

(as did Germany in 1924). Secondly, key adherents were unwilling to allow the adjustment

mechanism to work. France followed a pro-gold policy and sterilized its gold inflows. The Fed

also sterilized gold inflows in the 1920’s because it feared inflation. As a consequence, gold

flowed continuously to the U.S. and France from Britain and the rest of the world. Britain

suffered continuous deflationary pressure and lurched from crisis to crisis in which it threatened

to leave the gold standard unless it was aided by rescue loans and coordinated policy responses

by the U.S., France and Germany.

       Meltzer documents how this maladaptive international monetary system contributed to

monetary tightening in 1928-29 that led to the depression. After 1929, gold inflows to the U.S.

continued imposing deflationary pressure across the world.

       Eichengreen (1992), as well as Temin (1989) argued that the gold standard was the key

cause of the Great Depression because member countries, locked into a gold standard mentality,

were unwilling to leave it to end deflation and bank distress, and because their commitment to




                                                13
defend convertibility above all else had been weakened after World War I by the rise of

democracy and labor unions. Eichengreen argued that the U.S. like Belgium, the Netherlands and

other countries could not follow expansionary monetary policy to end the depression for fear that

gold reserves would fall below the statutory minimum. In the U.S. case he focused on the

problem of ‘free gold’ (“gold held by reserve banks that was not required as a reserve against

outstanding base money” (Meltzer p. 335)), as a key reason why the Fed was reluctant to follow

expansionary policy in 1930-33.

        Meltzer strongly disagrees with this position and effectively argues that except for several

months between October 1931 after Britain left the gold standard, and February 1932 when the

Glass Steagall Act allowed U.S. government securities to serve as eligible securities in the Fed’s

balance sheets, free gold was not a problem. And even in those few months when the gold

reserve ratio declined to 50% (10% above the minimum) that, were expansionary policy

followed and the gold reserve ratio threatened, the Federal Reserve Act allowed a temporary

suspension of the gold cover ratio (which had actually been invoked in 1916), as well as other

measures that could have been taken.5

        Meltzer is also highly skeptical of another claim by Eichengreen (1992), who argued

following Kindleberger (1986), that absent countries leaving the gold standard, only

internationally coordinated reflation would have ended the depression. Meltzer argues that

coordination would work only if it were consistent with the self-interest of all the parties

concerned which, as he documents, was not the case in the failure of policy coordination during

the depression and in the Tripartite Agreement of 1936-39. The only really successful example


5
  Bordo, Choudhri and Schwartz (2002)simulate a model of the U.S. as a large open economy with imperfect capital
mobility, demonstrating that even in the worst case scenario in the late 1930’s, had expansionary open market
operations been undertaken sufficient to correct the downturn, that gold reserves would not have reached the
statutory minimum. Hsieh and Romer (2001) corroborate this conclusion.


                                                      14
of policy coordination on record was that engineered by Benjamin Strong to save sterling in

1927.

        More importantly, Meltzer disagrees with the basic thesis put forward by Eichengreen

and other proponents of the revisionist international interpretation of the Great Depression. He

convincingly argues that, the gold standard per se was not the basic problem. It was rather the

fact that the interwar gold standard was based on misaligned real exchange rates and that the key

members did not allow the gold standard adjustment mechanism to work.

        After World War II, the U.S. was instrumental in establishing the Bretton Woods

International Monetary System. The adjustable peg exchange rate arrangement, whereby

countries pegged their currencies to the dollar (but could alter the peg under conditions of

fundamental disequilibrium) and the dollar was pegged to gold at $35.00 per ounce, was a

compromise between the interwar gold standard and floating. The U.S. negotiations over Bretton

Woods were carried out by the U.S. Treasury with the Federal Reserve Board playing only a

minor role. Meltzer documents the dispute between John Williams of the New York Fed, who

wanted to restore a key currency arrangement based on gold as had existed under the Tripartite

Agreement, and the Board, which supported the Treasury. As it turned out the Bretton Woods

System evolved into a key currency gold dollar standard very close to that envisioned by

Williams. Regardless, in the early years covered in Vol I, the U.S. had massive gold reserves and

external balance considerations had virtually no the influence on monetary policy.




                                               15
                            2.6. The Fed’s Struggle for Independence



       A theme running through A History is the Fed’s struggle to maintain independence from

the Treasury. The Federal Reserve Act gave the institution a considerable amount of

independence from the fiscal authority. The Reserve banks could set their discount rates based

on the demands by member banks to discount eligible paper. Government securities were not

included in eligible paper and so the Fed was from the beginning, not supposed to be a central

bank to finance short-run government revenue shortfalls, as were the Bank of England and the

First and Second Bank of the United States. However, the Fed was not completely independent,

the Secretary of the Treasury and the Comptroller of the Currency were members of the Board.

       World War I changed the picture considerably. The system quickly became involved in

war finance, absorbing short-term government securities at low pegged rates and marketing war

bonds, and by 1917 became an engine of inflation. Once the war ended it took the Fed two years

to regain its independence during which it fueled two more years of inflation. Although Fed

officials became concerned in 1919 about the runup in inflation, they were unable to act without

Treasury compliance. The Treasury wanted to keep rates low and bond prices high to protect the

commercial banks, which had absorbed its debt. As a consequence, the Fed had to wait to raise

interest rates beginning in late 1919, until the Treasury had completed its funding of the war

debt, to stem inflationary pressures. It then waited too long to reduce rates in 1921 once a serious

recession had set in. Meltzer, like Friedman and Schwartz, views this episode as the Fed’s first

serious policy error.

       In the 1920’s the Fed did conduct independent monetary policy. As discussed in section

2.1 above policy was based on the Burgess-Riefler doctrine. Meltzer, like Friedman and




                                                16
Schwartz, gives it high marks for the mid 20’s. But then its flawed perception of the stock

market boom, helped trigger the downturn and crash of 1929. Disaster followed in the next three

years because of the Fed’s mistaken reliance on the Burgess-Riefler doctrine.

         The Bank Acts of 1933 and 1935 in theory solidified the Fed’s independence by

removing the Secretary of Treasury from the Board and centralizing control in the new Board of

Governors. However, as Meltzer points out, although the Fed in theory had the trappings of a

powerful independent central bank (‘independent within government’), in practice it was

subservient to Treasury gold policy and low interest rate policy over the next 18 years.

         In a fascinating discussion developed in section 3.6 below Meltzer then documents the

drawn out process beginning after World War II by which the Fed regained its independence,

removed the interest rate peg, and began to use once again the instruments of monetary policy

developed in the 1920’s.

                                        2.7. A History and Monetarism

         Allan Meltzer was one of the pioneers of monetarism - - he and Karl Brunner along with

Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz defined the school from the late 1950’s to the present. A

History Vol. I is based on the monetarist model of the macro economy: that monetary forces

determine nominal income, that money is neutral in the long run, that changes in money induce

changes in real output in the short-run; and that the demand for money is stable.6

         Meltzer in A History expands on Friedman and Schwartz. Their earlier book (1963) was

based on the theoretical framework in Friedman’s “Modern Quantity Theory of Money” (MQT)

(1956) although no formal model was present in A Monetary History of the United States: 1867-

1960. However Friedman and Schwartz organized their analysis of history in terms of the


6
 Other propositions are: the distinction between nominal and real interest rates; the absence of a long-run Phillips
curve trade off; and preference for monetary rules over discretion.


                                                          17
categories of the equation of exchange. And they decomposed the money supply into its

proximate determinants to isolate the different forces affecting money supply. Their narrative

was written to provide historical evidence for the MQT, to show that regardless of institutional

arrangements the money income relationship held up. To do this, Friedman and Schwartz

developed what later Romer and Romer (1989) and Lucas (1993) and Miron (1993) called the

narrative approach - - to isolate historical episodes when changes in money could be identified as

exogenous and hence have a causal influence on spending, output and prices.

       Meltzer takes this framework as given. Like Friedman and Schwartz he does not write

down an explicit model. However he does amplify their framework in some very important

ways. Rather than focusing on the proximate determinants of the money supply, (for which he

criticized them in his review of their book (1964)) he emphasizes the relationship between the

real monetary base and the behavior of real output. In a number of business cycle episodes he

compares the growth rate of the real base to subsequent changes in real output. He then compares

movements in real base growth to movements in the ex post short-term real interest rate - - to

capture the effects of the policy variable (the short-term nominal interest rate) that non

monetarists of various stripes and Fed officials have always focused on.

       Meltzer also continuously distinguished between nominal and real interest rates, which,

as he points out in Volume I, Fed officials never were aware of. Finally he frequently spells out

the transmission mechanism from Brunner and Meltzer (1993), whereby changes in money

supply impinge on a portfolio of assets ranging from money to government and corporate bonds

to equity. Using this analysis he shows quite convincingly that, in virtually every significant

recession and recovery episode in the four decades covered in Volume I, movements in the real

base dominate movements in real interest rates in the relationship with real growth. This he




                                               18
argues reflects the operation of the real balance effect. On only one occasion, 1931-33 do real

interest rates outperform the real base and that is because in that episode the base fell faster than

prices. Moreover he also demonstrates that, in two deflationary recession episodes in which

nominal interest rates were very close to the zero nominal bound (1937-38 and 1948-49),

declining prices, by inducing a positive real balance effect led to recovery - - evidence against

the existence of a liquidity trap.



                                            3. Critique



        I have some differences with Meltzer on a number of issues raised by vol. I.

        My main concern is with chapter 2 on the history of doctrine. Although it is an extremely

tight exegesis on the origins of classical monetary doctrine in the tradition of Jacob Viner’s

Studies in the Theory of International Trade (1937), chapter 2 doesn’t quite fit with the rest of

the volume. Its location at the beginning of the book sets the stage for Meltzer’s key theme in the

following historical narrative chapters namely, that the Fed followed the wrong model from the

beginning and that the right model had been worked out a century earlier by Henry Thornton.

The chapter doesn’t really tell us why the Fed did worse than other central banks - - all of whom

had forgotten Thornton by 1914.

        I would have preferred if chapter 2 primarily covered the history of the U.S. experience

in the century preceding the establishment of the Fed, with and without central banks, beginning

with the First Bank of the United States founded in 1791. Had Allan Meltzer done that, he would

have had better insights as to why the Fed had such a flat (and tortured) learning curve. My

thesis (expressed earlier by Redlich (1957), Hammond (1958), and Timberlake (1978)) is that




                                                 19
populism in the U.S., and the fear of concentration of economic power in anything like the Bank

of England (dating from 1694), made U.S. monetary history very different from that of the other

advanced countries. Both the First and later the Second Bank of the United States, designed by

Alexander Hamilton, were brilliant models for their time of proto-central banks. Their charters

were terminated because of populism and the fear of concentrated economic power. The Second

Bank of the United States under Nicholas Biddle was developed into a first rate central bank.

According to Redlich (1957), Biddle had read his Thornton and was concerned with exactly the

macro relationships (between money, interest rate, prices, exchange rates and the balance of

payments) that Meltzer accuses Fed officials of having forgotten. Biddle had a remarkably clear

understanding of the role of the Bank in stabilizing foreign exchange rates, smoothing seasonal

and cyclical shocks, and acting as a lender of last resort. In many respects he was ahead of his

contemporaries at the Bank of England.

       Indeed, had the Second Bank not been destroyed by Andrew Jackson, U.S. monetary

history would have been very different (also see Hammond (1958)). The Second Bank would

have evolved like the major European central banks of the nineteenth century which all followed

the rules of the gold standard, learned Bagehot’s rule and believed in real bills.

       My counterfactual hypothesis of what the world would have been like had Jackson not

destroyed the Second Bank plays out like this. Had the Second Bank survived, Free Banking

would not have been a problem (it would have probably appeared because something like it (the

country banks) developed in England). The Civil War would have been financed in a more

efficient way (probably just by the issue of greenbacks plus Federal bond issues and tax

increases but not by the issue of national bank notes), indeed the National Banking system would

likely not have been created because the Second Bank would have learned to deal with the




                                                 20
problem of banking panics and the seasonal patterns of short term interest rates. Moreover a

unified money market that Biddle helped create (Knodell 2001) would have developed more

rapidly than it did, allowing better regional risk diversification. Possibly (interregional) branch

banking would have developed under a strong Bank. Had the financial crisis problem been dealt

with, as was the case in England in 1866, the U.S. central bank would likely not have behaved as

it did in 1930-1933.

       Moreover, the Second Bank would have learned to play by ‘the rules of the gold standard

game’ as most European central banks had done. It still would have followed the real bills

doctrine, which was the prevailing theory of banking in all countries in the late nineteenth

century. World War I would have been financed in the way it was and the gold standard would

have been suspended by the U.S., as was the case in the Civil War. An embargo on gold exports

would have been imposed. The postwar instability in Europe would not have been much

different, nor would be the real exchange rate misalignment. Had the U.S. central bank

incorporated monetary orthodoxy in the nineteenth century, as the European central banks had

done, it also may have not sterilized gold inflows in the 1920’s. But given these external

parameters, a long-established U.S. central bank, similar to the Bank of England, the Reichsbank

or the Banque de France would likely have learned to deal with its counterparts as equals without

raising suspicions in Washington as Strong did (although one could argue as did Chandler (1958)

that one couldn’t improve much on Benjamin Strong’s leadership).

       Instead of this scenario, what the U.S. wrought before the Civil war was Free Banking,

frequent financial crises, and an inefficient payments system. Then the National Banking System

was established with a uniform national convertible currency but frequent crises and no effective

lender of last resort. That environment led to the creation of the Fed primarily to deal with the




                                                21
inelasticity of high-powered money (Friedman and Schwartz 1963) and financial crises and also

to observe the rules of the gold standard. The Fed was backward looking. It was set up in the

twentieth century to deal with nineteenth century problems that the European central banks had

long worked out.

       Moreover, as Meltzer makes very clear, Wilson’s compromise in 1913 insured that the

System wouldn’t work because the regional Reserve banks were designed to deal with nineteenth

century problems using nineteenth century tools, and the Board was not given the power to

conduct real monetary policy. It was a pleasant accident of history that Benjamin Strong became

the governor of the New York Fed and was able to temporarily set up a real central bank.

Unfortunately he died too soon.

       My main point is that an understanding of the path dependency of history would have

been useful to help us understand how the structural flaws of the early Fed came about and how

structure interacted with the real bills doctrine to produce the big mistakes of the early decades

and also the Fed’s tardiness in learning from them. Other central banks did not mess up in the

way the Fed did in the 1920s and 1930s (except maybe the Banque de France) and they were hit

by equally big shocks.

       Counter to my Second Bank counterfactual, one could argue that deep-seated American

populism and distrust of economic power would have eventually terminated the Second Bank

even if the Bank War between Andrew Jackson and Nicholas Biddle had not happened. A

possible response to this objection is that, as was the case with the Bank of England in the

eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, and the Federal Reserve in the twentieth century, the U.S.

central bank would have learned some self protective skills to create a constituency in the nation

and especially in the Congress, to ward off incipient threats to its charter. This would suggest




                                               22
that the Biddle /Jackson war was sui generis, reflecting a head on collision of two egomaniacs,

and that it would not necessarily have repeated itself.

       Regardless of the outcome, the point of my exercise is to demonstrate the importance of

path dependency. The legacy of the destruction of the Second Bank and the victory of populism

in the nineteenth century, led to eight decades of monetary disarray. This was the background to

Wilson’s compromise and the slow and painful learning process for the Federal Reserve which

followed.

       Meltzer critiques Fed officials for failing to remember Thornton, Bagehot and Fisher.

Which central bank in the pre 1950 period did remember their doctrine? The Bank of England

and the other central banks knew Bagehot, although the other countries usually solved banking

crises with government bailouts and didn’t worry about the liquidity/solvency distinction. They

also observed the rules of the game (again the Bank of England much more than others). But few

central banks had the open economy quantity framework embedded in Thornton in their psyche.

Moreover the economics profession in the interwar also wasn’t completely clear on how

monetary policy should be conducted. Thus although Thornton may have had the right model in

1802, most economists in the U.S. and abroad (with some exceptions like Fisher, Hawtrey and

Keynes) had forgotten it or never learned it. This then leaves us with the question, suppose the

Fed officials had the Thornton model in mind but the structure established in 1913, and the

legacy of nineteenth century monetary disarray been the same, would the Fed have avoided its

big mistakes? I am skeptical.

       My last comment is a minor quibble. The book is a very dense read. It meticulously

documents every detail of the record. It contains many useful figures and tables to help the

reader and a detailed analysis of who said what is then usefully summarized by the author. What




                                                 23
the book lacks is a detailed table of contents at the beginning and a list of figures and tables (only

chapter titles are listed in the contents). These items would have made it much easier for the

reader to zero in on episodes of particular interest.



                                            4. Conclusion



       Allan Meltzer’s A History of the Federal Reserve Volume I is a major addition to the

literatures on monetary history and monetary policy. It is on par with the classic histories of the

Bank of England by Clapham (1945) and Sayers (1976). Any serious scholar of the Federal

Reserve will have to have this book in his collection. We eagerly await the publication of

Volume II.




                                                  24
                        Appendix I. A Reader’s Guide to the Historical Narrative



       In this Appendix, I develop in more detail the narratives in the five central chapters of the

book. My discussion follows chronologically the treatment in Volume I.



                                        3.1 Doctrinal Antecedents



       Chapter 2 in A History develops the doctrinal antecedents to the Federal Reserve Act in

the British literature on monetary theory and policy in the nineteenth century. Meltzer argues that

the basic theoretical precepts behind the Act - - the gold standard and the real bills doctrine - -

were also those that guided the Bank of England in the nineteenth century.

       He begins with Henry Thornton’s An Inquiry into the Nature and Effect of the Paper

Credit of Great Britain (1802) written during the Napoleonic war suspension period (1797-1821),

when the Bank of England suspended gold convertibility and aided the government war finance

efforts by freely discounting short-term government securities and commercial bills and issuing

inconvertible bank notes. The resulting inflation led to the famous Bullionist debate between

those who attributed the inflation to the Bank of England’s note issue (the Bullionists) and those

who attributed it to real forces such as harvest failures and remittances to the continent (the Anti

Bullionists).

         Thornton is generally acknowledged to have had the clearest vision of the relationship

between Bank of England policies, the price level, real output, interest rates (nominal versus

real), exchange rates and the balance of payments (Fetter (1963), Viner (1937), Wood (1939)).

According to Meltzer p. 20, Thornton combined the theory of central bank policy actions with




                                                25
the operation of the open economy quantity theory of money. He distinguished between the

effects of policy actions under fixed and flexible exchange rates. Under the fixed exchange rate

gold standard, the Bank of England’s note issue was determined by its gold reserve, which in

turn depended on the balance of payments, which in turn depended on the relationship between

the price level in England and the rest of the world.

       Thornton understood that an issue of Bank of England notes would ultimately be

displaced by a decline in gold reserves but that in the short run, the increase in the money supply

would temporarily reduce short-term (real) interest rates, stimulate output, lead to a rise in the

price level, an improvement in the terms of trade, a balance of trade deficit, a gold outflow, and

then a decline in the Bank’s gold reserves. Under an inconvertible paper money regime, Bank of

England note issue would lead to rising prices, a depreciating exchange rate and, once inflation

was anticipated, to a departure of nominal from real interest rates, presaging Fisher’s (1896)

famous distinction between real and nominal interest rates. According to Meltzer, Thornton also

distinguished between money and credit, had a theory of velocity but above all, understood the

distinction between long-run equilibrium and the short-run transmission mechanism. Moreover,

Thornton disputed many of the propositions of the anti-Bullionists (later the real bills

proponents) that money was passively determined by aggregate demand. Finally he had a good

understanding of the basic rule to be followed by a central bank acting as a lender of last resort -

- to lend freely to the money market (Humphrey 1975).

       In Meltzer’s view (page 63), the state of British monetary thinking deteriorated after

Thornton. Ricardo and his followers, focused on long-run equilibrium and comparative statics

ignoring the transmission mechanism, a development which gave only limited guidance to the

Bank directors concerned with short-run disturbances to the money market. The subsequent




                                                 26
Currency school / Banking school debate in the 1820’s/1830’s led to the development of the

currency principle under which the Bank would vary its note issue directly with its gold reserves.

The Banking school criticized the currency principle for neglecting the fact that bank deposits

were also part of the money supply and for not accounting for movements in velocity (Viner

1937). The Currency school also advocated the case for rules over the discretion of even well

meaning and knowledgeable Bank directors.

       Meltzer (pp.37-39) follows Viner (1937) and others in discussing the problems of the

implementation of the currency principle embodied in Palmer’s Rule (1827), under which the

Bank would keep a fixed percentage of its portfolio in gold and then allow the note issue to vary

with gold flows. The resulting financial turbulence of the 1830’s and 1840’s (panics in 1837 and

1847), which reflected the neglect by the rule of the shocks emanating from and impacting on the

commercial banking system, and of shifts in velocity, led to a compromise between the two

schools and a mix between rules and discretion manifest in the Bank Charter Act of 1844. The

Act divided the Bank into the Issue Department based on the currency principle and the Banking

Department under which the Bank of England followed normal banking business (taking

deposits, portfolio management) and developed its discount rate policy.

       In the rest of the nineteenth century, the Banking school became the key influence over

the Bank’s policy view. The Bank’s directors focused on changes in the discount rate (Bank rate)

to influence short-term interest rates, short-term capital flows and its gold reserve. The real bills

doctrine came from this tradition (Meltzer p. 43). According to it, as long as the Bank only

discounted real commercial bills and satisfied the ‘needs of trade’, there would never be an over

issue of money and credit.




                                                 27
        Financial crises (aka banking panics), which were a perennial problem in England before

1866 (see Schwartz 1986) were believed to be caused by real shocks. The solution to them,

worked out by Walter Bagehot in Lombard Street (1870) was for the Bank to accept

responsibility for the stability of the financial system (the Responsibility Doctrine) and to “lend

freely but at a penalty rate.”

        The key theme in chapter 2 is that by the end of the nineteenth century, Banking school

ideas motivated the Bank to focus on the state of the short-term money market and its gold

reserves. The long-run influence of the effects of Bank rate policy on money supply, the real

economy and the price level and the feedback to the Bank’s portfolio by the price-specie flow

mechanism posited by Henry Thornton was ignored. The framers of the Federal Reserve System

inherited this state of beliefs and embedded it in the 1913 Act. They did not adopt the quantity

theoretic perspective and the adjustment mechanism worked out by Thornton or even the long-

run equilibrium perspective of Ricardo. These beliefs, according to Meltzer, lay at the heart of

the system’s policy errors in its first four decades of existence. This theme runs through the

remainder of the narrative.



                                         The Early Years



        The Federal Reserve Act of 1913 was a compromise between proponents of a European

central bank and those who feared the financial power of New York. According to Meltzer (p.

67) President Wilson’s compromise led to 12 regional Reserve banks controlled by local bankers

and the Federal Reserve Board approved by the government, with no clear division of power - - a

portent of future problems.




                                                28
       The Fed’s basic functions were to adhere to the gold standard and to provide an elastic

currency. This would be achieved by discounting real commercial bills issued for the needs of

trade (lending against the security of speculative projects or government securities was

prohibited). The Fed was also supposed to serve as a lender of last resort, smooth the seasonal in

interest rates, facilitate par value check clearing, manage the payments system and other tasks.

       Lending on real bills under the gold standard, the Fed was designed to be a passive

institution. As events turned out, it learned to be more active (Meltzer p. 73). World War I

permanently changed the environment facing the nascent institution. In the three years before the

U.S. entered the war the Fed monetized gold inflows from the belligerent nations and thereby

fueled inflation. Benjamin Strong of the New York Fed quickly became the leading force in the

system and played a key role in galvanizing it into action. Although there were frequent

territorial skirmishes between the Board and the Reserve bank, they were minor compared to

those that followed later in the 1920’s and 1930’s and Strong often diffused them. He was

instrumental in centralizing open market operations (p.77) and pooling the system’s gold

reserves. His intentions were to run the Fed like the Bank of England and to keep the discount

rate above market rates as a penalty rate (p. 78). Once the U.S. entered the war the Fed quickly

became subservient to the Treasury, abandoned the penalty rate, and began indirectly supporting

Treasury finance by setting a preferential discount rate on U.S. Treasury certificates below

market interest rates. This fueled inflation in a manner similar to the absolute interest rate pegs

used in World War II (Meltzer p. 86).

       After hostilities ceased in November 1918 the Fed followed the Treasury’s lead in

keeping interest rates low to preserve member banks’ balance sheets. This policy further fueled

inflation. Beginning in the summer of 1919, after the Treasury in June lifted the embargo on gold




                                                29
exports, Fed officials, became concerned over a decline in the gold reserve ratio and began to

discuss raising rates according to classical doctrine, However, no action was taken until after the

Fed was released from Treasury control in December 1919, and in January 1920 the Fed began a

series of hikes in the discount rate within a few months from below 5% to 7%.

        Like Friedman and Schwartz, Meltzer criticizes the Fed for waiting too long to raise

rates. Shortly after the rise in rates, the economy went into a severe recession and soon the gold

reserve ratio began to decline, but Strong and other important Fed officials opposed cutting rates,

because high member bank borrowing was perceived as a sign of ease (p.130). This decision

revealed an ongoing conflict between the Fed’s external and internal goals. In Strong’s view the

Fed had to roll back the inflation generated after 1917 by its bond-support policy. On real bills

lines the financing of bank government bond purchases was deemed to be speculation. Strong

believed the Treasury and not the Fed to be responsible for the inflation and the necessary

deflation and recession that followed (p.128). His goal on gold standard lines was to restore the

price level to its 1917 level (p. 111).

        Like Friedman and Schwartz, Meltzer regards this episode as the Fed’s first policy

failure. Indeed he demonstrates that the recovery started a few months before the Fed reversed its

tight money policy in June 1921. The recovery resulted from deflation that raised real cash

balances and stimulated gold inflows. In this episode rising real balances outweighed the

negative effects of extraordinarily high real interest rates (p. 118). The Fed reversed policy only

under the lash of political pressure from Congress. The criticism made Strong and others gun-shy

of the British penalty rate model and led him (but not most other Fed officials) to abandon the

simple precepts of the real bills doctrine and to develop a new policy framework (pp. 132-135).




                                                30
                                                 The 1920’s



       After the debacle of 1920-21, the Fed gave up use of the discount rate as a penalty rate

and the gold reserve ratio as a policy indicator. Meltzer carefully analyzes the evolution of

Federal Reserve procedures developed in the Tenth Annual Report in 1923 that altered its stance

from a passive institution to an activist one.

       Meltzer in earlier work with Brunner (1968) treated the Burgess-Riefler doctrine

developed in the report and in key books by Riefler and Burgess as the theoretical rationale for

this shift to an activist policy from the passive real bills approach underlying the Federal Act. It

was also a rationale for the use of open market operations as the key policy tool. The Burgess-

Riefler doctrine argued that member banks were reluctant to borrow and would turn to the

discount window only in time of need (i.e., when their reserves were deficient), and they would

repay loans promptly. They would not borrow for profit. Hence open market operations could

affect their decision to borrow or repay loans: purchases would lead to a lower discount rate and

induce them to borrow and expand their credit; sales would lead to a high discount rate and

induce banks to repay.

       This doctrine was compatible with real bills but it allowed the Fed to conduct an activist

policy. According to this doctrine, two indicators were crucial to determine whether policy

should be eased or tightened: the level of member banks indebtedness in the New York and

Chicago Federal Reserve Districts (above $500 million defined high indebtedness; below $500

million low indebtedness and the need for ease); and the level of short-term nominal interest

rates (Meltzer p. 161).




                                                 31
       Although adherence to this rule of thumb led in part by chance to good outcomes in the

recessions of 1923-24 and 1926-27, it led to disaster in 1929-1933 and 1937-38. Meltzer

throughout the rest of the narrative in Chapters 4, 5 and 6 criticizes the approach for its basic

premise that member banks do not borrow for profit, for its assumption that the level of member

bank borrowing is a good indicator of the state of the economy, for focusing on nominal and not

real interest rates, because it was still embedded in real bills and its emphasis on the discounting

of self-liquidating commercial bills only.

       A related development in the early and mid 1920 was the shift of power from the Board

in Washington to Reserve banks and especially to the New York Fed under Benjamin Strong in

the setting of Reserve bank’s policy by the Open Market Investment Committee. Strong was able

to count on the support of the other Reserve Banks in part because he offered the Banks in the

rural regions some assistance in meeting their required dividends payable to their member bank

shareholders, by pooling the returns on the open market portfolio (Meltzer pp. 214-215).

       Strong and the OMIC were proponents of the Burgess-Riefler doctrine and activist

national open market policy to stabilize the business cycle. The Board, whose chief spokesman

was Adolph Miller (the only Ph.D. economist on the Board), continued to be staunch advocates

of the original real bills view. In a fascinating discussion in chapter 4, Meltzer narrates the

ongoing tennis match between Strong and Miller. The Reserve banks didn’t always win every

match in the 1920s. One of the interesting episodes in which the Board successfully exerted its

power was the ‘Chicago Rate Controversy’ in September 1927, when the Chicago Fed was

forced by the Board to reduce its discount rate in line with reductions by the other Reserve banks

(Meltzer pp. 221-224). This episode illustrates an important theme in the book - - that in the

1920’s and 1930’s ambiguous division of authority in the system weakened monetary control.




                                                32
       The third development in the twenties was the restoration of the gold standard. Benjamin

Strong played a key role along with Montagu Norman in the international cooperation that

allowed the major belligerents and many other countries to return to gold convertibility. Meltzer

is highly complementary of Strong’s role in both aiding sterling’s return to the fold in 1925 and

keeping it there in 1927. The famous meeting in Long Island in July 1927 between, Strong,

Norman, Moreau and Schacht in which the Fed (along with the others) agreed to ease policy to

offset pressure on sterling, Meltzer views as a unique event of cooperation which worked only

because the interest of all parties concerned coincided (p. 177).

       The 1927 meeting was successful in dealing with the immediate pressure on the pound

but ignored the basic long-term problems of the restored gold exchange standard: the misaligned

real exchange rates and the fact that each country’s long-run objectives were incompatible with

the basic framework of the international monetary system. For the U.S. the problem was that the

Fed was unwilling to let the gold standard adjustment mechanism work and allow gold inflows

to raise the price level and thereby lead to adjustment via the price specie flow mechanism. Fed

officials feared that inflation would inevitably lead to deflation so the system continuously

sterilized gold inflows, thereby putting deflationary pressure on the rest of the world. As

discussed in section 2 above, France followed a similar deflationary policy. Meltzer clearly

points out the irony in the Fed’s policy. Because of fear of deflation they sterilized gold inflows

(and ended the Wall Street boom), thereby producing the deflationary outcome they wished to

prevent.

       The final theme in the 1920’s was the denouement of the struggle for power in the debate

over the Wall Street boom. In 1927-28 the struggle between Miller and Strong (later Harrison,

after Strong died) was over the use of the discount rate (Strong) and qualitative controls on bank




                                                33
loans that financed the stock market (Miller). Miller, an advocate of real bills, believed that the

quality of credit mattered. He also feared a repeat of 1920-21 for which the Fed was heavily

criticized. For Strong, on the other hand, credit was fungible. He wanted to restrict total credit

and money.

       According to Meltzer (p. 265), all Fed officials because of their common belief that rising

asset prices inevitably leads to inflation which inevitably leads to deflation (a view still held by

the BIS), erred in believing that the Fed should deflate the stock market boom. Meltzer correctly

points out that in addition to the difficulty of ascertaining whether an asset price boom reflects

fundamentals or a bubble, the Fed focused (in 1929) rising interest rates on brokers loans as

signaling inflationary pressure when at the same time the real monetary base, beginning in late

1927, predicted an excess demand for money and deflation.

       Meltzer also documents Miller’s (1935) postmortem on the causes of the crash and the

depression, reprising in testimony he had given before hearings of the Senate Banking

Committee held in 1931. Miller blamed the New York Fed and Benjamin Strong in particular for

adopting an expansionary policy in the summer of 1927 to save sterling. This policy (which

Miller signed on to at the time), fueled the stock market boom. Then because Strong and

Harrison in both 1921 and 1929 opposed Miller’s qualitative approach to speculation, the boom

got out of hand. The resulting crash caused the depression. The Board’s role, according to Miller

was secondary. Its mistake was only its delay in taking leadership. The legislation in 1933 and

1935 was evidence that Congress shared the Board’s view.

       In the end Meltzer (p. 265) gets back to his basic theme. Fed officials, sacrificed their

longer-term aims to satisfy immediate concerns that policy was highly expansive and

inflationary, when in fact it was deflation that was under way owing to restrictive actions. .




                                                 34
                                            1929-1933



       Much of the discussion of Meltzer’s treatment of the Great Depression was covered in

section 2 above. His main thesis is that the Depression came about because of a policy failure by

the Federal Reserve based on its belief in the flawed Burgess-Riefler doctrine. In contrast to

Friedman and Schwartz, he downplays both the importance of the structure of the system and

Strong’s death. The narrative in chapter 5, which is an engrossing read, is well illustrated with a

series of tables showing the information available to the OMPC (successor to the OMIC) at each

meeting.

       According to Friedman and Schwartz and also Meltzer (p. 288), the New York Fed

responded correctly to the stock market crash by expansionary open market purchases through

the fall. The Board, the OMPC and the New York Fed were on the same page because the

Burgess-Riefler indicators showed that member bank borrowing was high as were interest rates.

The Board did differ with New York on how stimulus should be achieved. On real bills lines

they preferred discounting over open market purchases. Once the pressure seemed to ease later in

the fall, the case for open market purchases declined.

       Meltzer, (page 288), disagrees with Friedman and Schwartz on the interpretation of the

episode. They argued that Harrison of New York pushed for continued purchases but was

discouraged by a negative response from the Board. According to Meltzer’s reading of the

Board’s minutes, which Friedman and Schwartz did not have access to, the Board agreed with

Harrison’s case for large-scale purchases in October; their objection was New York’s decision to

act alone.




                                                35
       In the following months from November 1929 through the summer of 1930, as the U.S.

economy sunk into recession, Meltzer carefully documents the system’s continued unwillingness

to follow expansionary policy because member bank borrowing in New York was below $500

million and market rates were low. Like Friedman and Schwartz, he argues (p. 279) that had the

Fed focused on money supply, instead of interest rates, as its indicator of policy, they would not

have considered that money was easy. Moreover, he points out on p. 310 that in September 1930,

Miller of the Board was arguing for expansion while Harrison was opposed on the grounds that it

would lead to inflation and gold outflows. Based on this evidence and also the views of Miller

and others that Strong had precipitated the stock market boom by his policies to aid Britain in

1927, as well as adherence by everyone in the System to the Burgess-Riefler doctrine, he doubts

that had Strong lived he would have changed the course of events.

       The same theme follows in the narrative on the events of 1931, the crucial year of the

contraction, with one new element - - events abroad. Like Wicker (1966), he argues (p. 330) that

the Fed paid more attention to distress abroad than to the burgeoning banking crisis at home. In

June 1931 Harrison arranged loans to assist Austria, Germany and Hungary. Later in August he

expressed little interest in expansionary monetary policy because member banks borrowing was

low and excess reserves were beginning to accumulate in the banking system - - evidence on

Burgess-Riefler lines of ease.

       The classic blunder of the Great Contraction then followed after Britain left the gold

standard in September 1931. The Fed reacted by raising the discount rate, ignoring its effect on

the weakened banking system and justifying the move by Bagehot’s rule. According to Meltzer

(p. 348), the Fed had forgotten the first half of the rule “to lend freely at a penalty rate”. Meltzer

(p. 359) does not agree with the view that the Fed’s experiment with expansionary open market




                                                 36
purchases in the spring of 1932, was largely an unwilling response to congressional pressure.

According to him there was considerable support for it in the system because it was consistent

with Burgess-Riefler indicators - - member bank borrowing and short-term nominal rates had not

declined.

        Suspension of purchases in July reflected the belief that the policy had not been

successful; member bank borrowing and nominal rates had declined to the level of the previous

year, and also concern over gold outflows. As discussed in section 2.5 above, Meltzer effectively

disposes of Eichengreen’s argument, that indeed the Fed had to stop purchases because of the

free gold problem. Meltzer, like Friedman and Schwartz, and Bordo, Choudhri and Schwartz

(2003) argues that expansionary policy was successful and if it had continued would have led to

a much more positive outcome.

        Meltzer’s treatment of the final collapse in late 1932 and early 1933 (pp. 374-389)

leading to the Banking holiday of March 5, 1933 closely follows that of Friedman and Schwartz.

He emphasizes the structural flaws that prevented the Reserve banks from cooperating to deal

with the national crisis.

        In the end, he reiterates the theme developed in chapter 2. Had Fed officials read

Thornton, Bagehot and Fisher, none of the awful events of 1929-1933 would have transpired.

Instead by following real bills and its offshoots, they focused on the wrong indicators of policy.

Once the depression began, they then failed to follow through with the well-known and

appropriate policies developed by these great economists.




                                               37
                                           The 1930’s



       In the period following the Banking holiday of March 1933, the Federal Reserve’s

fortunes changed significantly. In chapter 6, Meltzer considers the changes in structure of the

Fed following the Banking Acts of 1933 and 1935; the shift in control of monetary policy from

the Fed to the Treasury under Secretary Henry Morgenthau; the major policy mistake in 1936-37

of doubling reserve requirements; and the major changes in international economic policy under

the direction of the Treasury.

       Congress blamed the financial system and the Federal Reserve for the crash and the

depression. It attributed speculative excesses leading to the crash to the interconnection between

commercial and investment banking. This led to separation of the two under the Glass Steagall

Act of 1933. This act also created the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) and

converted the OMPC into the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) with all 12 Reserve

banks as members (p. 431). As discussed in section 3.4 above, Carter Glass, Chairman of the

Senate Banking Committee, based on the statements by Adolph Miller and others at the hearings

held in 1931, held that the New York Fed had too much power. Miller blamed Benjamin

Strong’s loose monetary policy in 1927 to aid the British, for fueling the Wall St. boom.

Consequently, the 1933 Act transferred the power of the Reserve Banks to conduct exchange

market policy to the Board (Meltzer p. 433).

       Marinner Eccles, appointed Chairman of the system in January 1934, was a strong

advocate for centralized control. He and his brilliant advisor Lauchlin Currie helped draft the

legislation that led to the 1935 Act. Meltzer (pp. 470-486) describes the process leading to its




                                               38
passage. Eccles, was an early Keynesian who believed that fiscal policy was the principal means

to stabilize the macro economy. Using the traditional tools of monetary policy was like “pushing

on a string. Administrative controls (margin requirements, credit controls, ceiling interest rates)

should be used aggressively by the Fed to supplement fiscal policy (Meltzer pp. 467-470).

        The 1935 Banking Act radically changed the Fed. The Board of Governors in

Washington now had the majority of votes on the FOMC (the committee consisted of 7

governors of the Board and 5 Reserve bank Presidents). The Secretary of the Treasury and the

Comptroller of the Currency were removed from the Board. The influence of real bills was

diluted by adding “with regard to the general credit situation of the country” to ‘accommodating

commerce and business’; and the Board gained the power to change reserve requirements up to

twice the prevailing ratio by majority rule (p. 488).

        Meltzer (p. 575) points out the irony that once the Banking Act of 1935 made the Federal

Reserve a full fledged central bank with power centralized in Washington, conferring

independence within the government, the Fed lost effective control to the Treasury for the next

16 years. He describes (pp.442-463) how FDR and Morgenthau orchestrated the Treasury’s

policies to reflate the U.S. economy from 1933 to 1941, with the Fed playing a very subservient

role. In 1933 the Fed was pressured (against Harrison’s judgment because member bank

borrowing was low) into expansionary monetary policy by the threat that the Congress would

issue greenbacks under the Thomas Amendment to the Agricultural Adjustment Act of April

1933.

        The key reflationary policy initiatives that effectively extricated the U.S. from the

depression were produced by the Treasury not the Federal Reserve. After taking the U.S. off the

gold standard on April 11, 1933, Morgenthau initiated a gold buying policy to raise the price of




                                                 39
gold and, in accordance with the theories of George Warren, thereby raise commodity prices.

Meltzer documents the limited impact of the policy on prices until January 31, 1934 when

Roosevelt officially devalued the dollar by close to 60% thereby making a clear commitment to

pursue domestic rather than international policy goals.

       Most Federal Reserve officials would have preferred that the U.S. return to the gold

standard and, in addition in accordance with the Europeans at the June 1933 London monetary

conference, a coordinated stabilization of the dollar-sterling and dollar-franc exchange rates.

Meltzer (p. 550) points out that such a solution would not have addressed the basic international

monetary issue that the real exchange rates between the U.S., England and France were

drastically misaligned. The new U.S. gold price of $35.00 attracted a flood of gold from the rest

of the world, that was not sterilized, fueling an increase in the monetary base and rising prices.

       Some of the proceeds of the devaluation were used to create the Exchange Stabilization

Fund, designed to mimic the British Exchange Equalization Account of 1932, to conduct

exchange market intervention. The legislation creating the ESF gave the Treasury the power to

use it for domestic monetary policy purposes, thus, like the Thomas Amendment, according to

Meltzer serving as a possible threat to the Federal Reserve’s monetary powers.

       The key event for the Federal Reserve in the second half of the decade was the decision

by Eccles and the Board to double reserve requirements in three steps in 1936-37 beginning in

July 1936. Meltzer (pp. 490 – 521) beautifully describes the discussion in the FOMC and with

Treasury leading to these actions as motivated by the concerns that commercial bank growing

excess reserves would fuel inflation, inevitably leading to deflation and recession. According to

him (p. 495) the Fed never gave up the Burgess-Riefler doctrine but now began treating excess




                                                 40
reserves as negative member borrowings. The system never explained the reason for the excess

reserves but labeled them “as a redundant surplus.”

       The increase in reserve requirements coincided with the decision by the Treasury in

December 1936, also concerned about inflationary pressure, to sterilize the massive gold inflows

into the U.S. Both policies were contractionary, leading to the recession of May 1937 to April

1938, the third deepest in the twentieth century. Meltzer follows Friedman and Schwartz in

attributing the policy mistake to the failure to recognize the precautionary nature of excess

reserves. He documents (p. 530) the system’s unwillingness to take stimulative action once the

recession was underway because on Burgess-Riefler guidelines, since nominal interest rates were

low, money must be easy. In the end, recovery was fueled by Treasury actions in the spring of

1938 desterilizing gold purchases (opposed by Eccles because they could be inflationary) and by

stimulative fiscal policy (p. 531). Following this episode, until the outbreak of World War II, the

system primarily operated a passive low interest “easy money” policy under the effective control

of the Treasury.

       In chapter 6 (pp. 534 – 535) Meltzer documents the Treasury’s major foray into

international policy coordination under the Tripartite Agreement of October 1936 with Britain

and France. The agreement designed to create a smooth adjustment to the devaluation of the

French franc, required the Treasuries of the three countries to coordinate daily operations in the

foreign exchange market. Ultimately the agreement collapsed in 1938 because France followed

expansionary fiscal and monetary policies inconsistent with the agreed upon pegs.

       More fundamentally (p. 544), Meltzer criticizes Tripartite (and its modern advocates

Kindleberger(1986) and Eichengreen (1992)) as based on two fundamental flaws : the failure to

distinguish real from nominal exchange rate movements; and that international cooperation is not




                                                41
a viable substitute for adjustment of a floating exchange rate regime. Although Tripartite was a

failure in economic terms, Meltzer believes was successful as a political statement in unifying

the western democracies against the looming fascist threat.



                                              3.6. The 1940’s



       From 1941 to 1951, the Federal Reserve was completely subservient to the debt

management policies of the Treasury. In the late 1930’s the Fed kept interest rates low to

facilitate the funding of the Treasury’s debt. In April 1942, once World War II was under way,

the System adopted an explicit peg for 90 day T-Bills at 0.375% and for the 25-year bond at

2.5%. Meltzer (chapter 7) describes how the Fed became an engine of inflation, initially by

lending to commercial banks on the collateral of government securities at a preferred rate below

the official peg; and later by directly purchasing Treasury securities. Problems arose because

rates were pegged at all maturities, leading commercial banks to sell low-interest T-bills to the

Fed and then buy higher yielding long term bonds for their portfolios, with the Fed absorbing

most of the short term debt (p. 596).

       Chairman Eccles was a strong advocate of the wartime bond pegging policy and was not

concerned about the impotence of monetary policy, because as mentioned in section 3.5 above,

he believed that monetary policy was limited anyway. He continually pushed for an extension of

the Federal Reserves’ mandate to control credit and expenditure to aid the war effort. Although

the Fed was an engine of inflation, inflation remained relatively low during World War II

compared to World War I and the Civil War experiences reflecting the greater use of bond

finance and the effectiveness of price controls.




                                                   42
       After the war ended, the interest-rate-pegging policy was retained as were many of the

ponoply of controls, with the exception of price controls. Officials at the Fed acquiesced to the

peg and expansionary policy because of a widespread belief, fostered by Keynesian doctrine and

the experience following World War I, that postwar there would be a serious recession. Also, as

after World War I, Fed and Treasury officials were concerned over capital losses to bondholders,

should rates be allowed to rise. As it turned out, with the exception of a sharp recession right

after the war and a milder one in 1948-49, the U.S. economy boomed. Moreover, Meltzer (pp.

629-635) points out that despite the peg, inflation, money growth and market yields remained

low throughout the late 1940’s. This did not reflect Fed policy, but occurred because the

Treasury used its surplus to retire debt. Indeed, he argues (p. 650) that inflation expectations

remained quite low throughout this period owing to these factors and continued belief in the gold

standard as a nominal anchor under the 1944 Bretton Woods system.

       Despite the relatively sanguine environment, some Fed officials, concerned about

inflation, pressed for the institutional independence to raise rates. One of the strongest and

earliest advocates was Allan Sproul, President of the New York Fed. He was initially opposed by

Eccles and later by Eccles’ successor Thomas McCabe, on the grounds that it would take a large

increase in rates to be effective, which would not “be consistent with the maintenance of stable

conditions in the government securities markets” (Eccles is quoted on p. 633). The need for

flexibility in monetary policy became apparent in the recession of 1948-49. The Fed was slow to

react to it. It reduced reserve requirements (the principal tool of monetary policy in use then (p.

678)) but with little impact. Recovery was largely precipitated by falling prices raising real cash

balances (p. 679).




                                                43
       In one of the most fascinating discussions in the book, Meltzer documents in great detail

the events that led to the Accord of March 1951 which ended the Treasury’s control over the

Federal Reserve. The key events in the saga were the Congressional hearings led by Senator Paul

Douglas in the fall of 1949 (pp. 688-690). At these hearings: John Snyder, Secretary of the

Treasury, made the case for interest rate stability to aid in debt management; Sproul made the

case in favor of changing interest rates to influence expectations; McCabe supported the

Treasury’s view; Eccles changed his earlier views to favor Federal Reserve independence;

Burgess of New York made the case that discount rate policy was a sufficiently powerful tool for

monetary control. The subsequent report backing up the views of Sproul and Burgess was a

victory for the Fed.

       From then on the conflict between the Fed and the Treasury over raising rates to deal

with the inflationary pressures at the start of the Korean War deepened (pp. 691-712). In January

1951 at a meeting held in the White House between key Fed and Treasury officials, the Treasury

argued for bond market stability, while the Fed urged raising rates to stem inflation. After the

meeting Snyder gave a speech stating that the Fed fully agreed to continue supporting bond

prices. This infuriated McCabe and other Fed officials. The New York Times and the financial

press supported the Fed, as did Douglas.

       President Truman then invited the members of the FOMC to the White House for a

meeting on January 31, 1951 where “he discussed the importance of maintaining confidence in

government securities” (p. 763). Subsequently a letter from Truman indicated that the Fed would

continue to support long-term rates. The FOMC disagreed. In letters on February 5 to Truman

and Snyder the FOMC stated that to the contrary it favored control of rates to stem inflation.

Intense negotiation between Fed officials and the Treasury under Assistant Secretary William




                                               44
McChesney Martin, culminated in another meeting on February 26 at the White House which led

to the famous Accord. “The Treasury and the Federal Reserve System have reached full accord

with respect to debt management and monetary policy to be pursued in furthering their common

purpose to assure the successful financing of the government’s requirements and, at the same

time, to minimize monetization of the public debt” (quoted on p. 711). According to Meltzer, the

Accord gave the Federal Reserve the independence to conduct its own interest rate policy. Soon

thereafter the Fed reverted to its Burgess-Reifler roots, focusing on net free reserves and short-

term market rates (p. 721).

       The Fed took so long to regain its independence, according to Meltzer (p. 715), because

Eccles’ basic belief in the ineffectiveness of monetary policy. Once he was replaced by McCabe

in 1949 (who lacked Eccles leadership abilities), Sproul was able to take charge of events and

lead the charge to independence.

       A final theme treated in chapter 7 by Meltzer, was the Bretton Woods agreement of July

1944 that led to the creation of the IMF, the World Bank and the adjustable peg international

monetary system. The U.S. and British Treasuries negotiated the Articles of Agreement at

Bretton Woods.

       Meltzer’s contribution to the Bretton Woods story (see earlier accounts by Meltzer

(1991), Bordo (1993) and James (1996)) is to document the lack of influence that the Board of

Governors had in shaping the U.S. plan drafted by Henry Dexter White of the Treasury, and in

the deliberations at Bretton Woods. While the Board in Washington was in agreement with the

Treasury on the Articles, the New York Fed and especially John Williams were markedly

opposed. Williams correctly worried that the U.S. was the only country (other than Costa Rica)

under the “scarce currency clause” of the Bretton Woods Articles with a convertible hard




                                               45
currency. Once exchange controls were lifted, the U.S. would have to provide unlimited liquidity

to the rest of the world. He also was concerned (presciently so) that Britain, the other reserve

currency, was too weak to become convertible, and, once it did, would end up with a crisis and

devaluation, as occurred in 1947 and 1949. Instead of the Bretton Woods adjustable peg,

Williams advocated a key currency system (based on the gold standard that would operate like

the Tripartite agreement of 1936). The key reserve countries, the U.S., Britain and France would

adhere to gold pegs and the other countries would eventually peg to them (Bordo 1993). As it

turned out, the Bretton Woods system, under which the members would peg their currencies to

the dollar and the dollar was pegged to gold at $35.00 per ounce evolved, after current account

convertibility was declared by the European countries in 1958, into the gold dollar standard. The

gold dollar standard in many ways echoed the Williams plan.




                                               46
                                          References


Walter Bagehot (1962) [1873], Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market. Reprint,
Homewood, Ill. Richard D. Irwin.


Ben S. Bernanke (1983), “Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of the
Great Depression.” American Economic Review 73 (June), 257-76.


Michael D. Bordo and Ronald MacDonald (2004), “Interest Rate Interaction in the Classical
Gold Standard; 1880-1914: Was There Monetary Independence?” Journal of Monetary
Economics Vol. 52, pp. 307-377.


Michael D. Bordo, Ehsan Choudhri and Anna Schwartz (2002), “Was Expansionary Monetary
policy Feasible During the Great Depression?” Explorations in Economic History. January.


Michael D. Bordo (1993), “The Bretton Woods International Monetary System: A Historical
Over view” in Michael D. Bordo and Barry Eichengreen (eds.) A Retrospective on the Bretton
Woods System. Chicago, University of Chicago Press.


Karl Brunner and Allan H. Meltzer (1993), Money and the Economy: Issues in Monetary
Analysis. Cambridge University Press for the Raffaele Mattioli Foundation.


Karl Brunner and Allan H. Meltzer (1968), “What did we learn from the monetary experiences
of the United States in the Great Depression?” Canadian Journal of Economics 1, 334-48.


Charles Calomiris (1993), “Financial Factors in the Great Depression.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 7 (spring), 61-85.


Lester Chandler (1958), Benjamin Strong Central Banker. Washington D.C., Brookings
Institution.




                                              47
Sir John Clapham (1944), The Bank of England: A History. Cambridge, Cambridge University
Press.


Barry Eichengreen (1992), Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression, 1919-
1939. New York: Oxford University Press.


Frank W. Fetter (1965), The Development of British Monetary Orthodoxy 1717-1875.
Cambridge, Harvard University Press.


Irving Fisher (1930), The Theory of Interest. New York, Macmillan. Reprint New York, A.M.
Kelley.


Irving Fisher (1896), “Appreciation and Interest.” Publications of the American Economic
Association 9 (4), 331-447.


Milton Friedman (1956), Studies in the Quantity Theory of Money. Chicago, University of
Chicago Press.


Milton Friedman and Anna J. Schwartz (1963), A Monetary History of the United States: 1867-
1960. Princeton, Princeton University Press.


James Hamilton (1987), “Monetary Factors in the Great Depression.” Journal of Monetary
Economics 19, 145-69.


Bray Hammond (1957), Banks and Politics in America. Princeton. Princeton University Press.


Chang-Tao Hsieh and Christina Romer (2001), “Was the Federal Reserve Fettered?”
Devaluation Expectations in the 1932 Monetary Expansion.” NBER Working Paper No. 8113.


Charles Kindleberger (1986), The World in Depression, 1929-1939. Revised Berkeley,
University of California Press.



                                               48
Jane Knodell (2003), “Profit and Duty in the Second Bank of the United States’ Exchange
Operations.” Financial History Review 10, 5-30.


Paul Krugman (1991), “Target Zone and Exchange Rate Dynamics.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics CUI (3) pp. 669-682.


Robert Lucas Jr. (1994), “Review of Milton Friedman and Anna J. Schwartz’s, ‘A Monetary
History of the United States: 1867-1960’” Journal of Monetary Economics Vol. 34, No. 1
(August) pp. 5-16.


Allan H. Meltzer (2003), A History of the Federal Reserve, Volume I: 1913-1951. Chicago,
University of Chicago Press.


Allan Meltzer (1976), “Monetary and Other Explanations of the Start of the Great Depression.”
Journal of Monetary Economics 2, 455-72.


Jeffery A. Miron (1994), “Empirical Methodology in Macroeconomics: Explaining the Success
of Friedman and Schwartz’s, ‘A Monetary History of the United States: 1867-1960’” Journal of
Monetary Economics Vol. 34, No. 1 (August) pp. 17-25.


Fritz Redlich (1951), The Molding of American Banking: Man and Ideas. New York: Hafner
Publishers.


Christina Romer and David Romer (1989), “Does Monetary Policy Matter? A new Test in the
Spirit of Friedman and Schwartz.” NBER Macroeconomic Annual, 4, 121-170.


Richard S. Sayers (1976), Bank of England Operations 1891-1944. Vol I.             Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.




                                              49
Anna Schwartz (1986), “ Real and Pseudo Financial Crises.” In Forrest Capie and
                                                                                              !"


         #           $ %%!& '        (       )          *+ ,
--           ./ %%


0     1          $ %2%&                           3                 4         51 0


)            1   4        $ %/2& 1       6                              7
     4           8    #    7 #           0


Henry Thornton (1962) [1802], An Inquiry into the Nature and Effects of the Paper Credit of
Great Britain. Reprint, New York, Kelley.


Jacob Viner (1965) [1937], Studies in the Theory of International Trade. Chicago, University of
Chicago Press. Reprint New York, Kelley.


Richard C. West (1977), Banking Reform and the Federal Reserve, 1863-1923. Ithaca, Cornell
University Press.


David C. Wheelock (1991), The Strategy and Consistency of Federal Reserve Monetary Policy
1929-1933. New York, Cambridge University Press.


Elmur Wicker (1965), “Federal Reserve Monetary Policy, 1922-33: A Reinterpretation.” Journal
of Political Economy 73 (August), 325-43.


Elmur Wicker (1966), Federal Reserve Monetary Policy, 1917-1933. New York, Random House.


Elmer Wood (1939), English Theories of Central Banking Control, 1819-1858. Cambridge,
Harvard University Press.




                                                 50
