                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              LOCAL PUBLIC GOOD PROVISION:
                            VOTING, PEER EFFECTS, AND MOBILITY

                                            Stephen Calabrese
                                              Dennis Epple
                                             Thomas Romer
                                               Holger Sieg

                                          Working Paper 11720
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11720


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2005




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Stephen Calabrese, Dennis Epple, Thomas Romer, and Holger Sieg. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Local Public Good Provision: Voting, Peer Effects, and Mobility
Stephen Calabrese, Dennis Epple, Thomas Romer, and Holger Sieg
NBER Working Paper No. 11720
October 2005
JEL No. H4, H7, H1, R5

                                           ABSTRACT

Few empirical strategies have been developed that investigate public provision under majority rule
while taking explicit account of the constraints implied by mobility of households. The goal of this
paper is to improve our understanding of voting in local communities when neighborhood quality
depends on peer or neighborhood effects. We develop a new empirical approach which allows us
to impose all restrictions that arise from locational equilibrium models with myopic voting
simultaneously on the data generating process. We can then analyze how close myopic models come
in replicating the main regularities about expenditures, taxes, sorting by income and housing
observed in the data. We find that a myopic voting model that incorporates peer effects fits all
dimensions of the data reasonably well.

Stephen Calabrese
University of South Florida

Dennis Epple
Tepper School of Business
Carnegie Mellon University
Posner Hall, Room 257B
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
and NBER
epple@andrew.cmu.edu

Thomas Romer
Princeton University

Holger Sieg
Tepper School of Business
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890
and NBER
1    Introduction


Models of interjurisdictional equilibrium take as their starting point the idea that households

are at least potentially mobile. Communities differ according to their levels of public good

provision, tax rates, and local housing market conditions. Each household takes these factors

into account in choosing a community. If local public good provision is decentralized via

local majority rule then the level of public goods will depend on characteristics of the

community’s residents. Households will sort among communities according to tastes and

income, so that households with similar preferences for local public goods will tend to live

in the same community. Since the population of each community is endogenous, the set of

households who live in the community and the decisive voters in the community are jointly

determined in equilibrium. We would like to know whether, when voting and thereby

collectively determining the level of public good provision within a community, voters take

into consideration the interaction among housing market equilibrium, mobility and public

good provision. Almost all models of locational equilibrium rest on the assumption that

voters are myopic: voters in each community ignore all effects of migration. Under this

assumption, voters treat the populations of the communities as fixed and believe that the

distribution of households across communities is not affected by a change in public good

provision.


    While local public good provision is an important component of neighborhood quality,

there is a growing recognition in urban economics that the composition of neighborhoods

itself may be valued by some of its residents. Thus the quality of life in a given community



                                              1
may depend on peer or neighborhood effects.1 Recent empirical research suggests that peer

effects may also be quantitatively important.2 If peer effects are important in explaining

residential sorting, then they will alter the nature of the political equilibrium within commu-

nities. We, therefore, need to incorporate peer effects into the specification of our locational

equilibrium model if we want to explain the patterns of local public good provision observed

in the data. Thus far, almost no empirical strategies have been developed that test models

of majority rule while taking explicit account of the constraints implied by neighborhood

effects.3


    The objective of this paper is, therefore, to provide an empirical test of majority rule in

the presence of peer interactions controlling for the mobility of households. The approach

taken in this paper differs from previous research in four important aspects. First, we

extend the baseline locational equilibrium model to incorporate peer or neighborhood ef-

fects. Second, we show that there is at most one equilibrium of the model that is consistent

with the observed sorting of households by income. Third, we develop a new estimation

algorithm that is based on solving for equilibria for different parameter values. Almost all

previous work has primarily looked at demand side issues using partial solution estimation

methods.4 We impose all relevant restrictions that arise from the model in estimation and

   1
     For theoretical studies see, for example, deBartolome (1990), Benabou (1993), Durlauf (1996),Epple and
Romano (1998), Nechyba (2000), and Sethi and Somanathan (2004).
   2
     The empirical literature incorporating peer and neighborhood effects in local public good provision
includes early research by Henderson, Mieszkowski, and Sauvageau (1978), and Summers and Wolfe (1977),
and the more recent resurgence reflected, for example, in work of Cutler, Glaeser, and Vigdor (1999),
Hanushek, Kain, Markman, and Rivkin (2000), Hoxby (2000), and Rothstein (2004).
   3
     Epple, Romer, and Sieg (2001) found little empirical support for the hypothesis that myopic voting
behavior is consistent with the data. But they largely ignored peer effects.
   4
     Examples of this strategy include Bergstrom, Rubinfeld, and Shapiro (1982), Rubinfeld, Shapiro, and
Roberts (1987), Epple and Sieg (1999), Sieg, Smith, Banzhaf, and Walsh (2004), Bajari and Kahn (2004),
Bayer, McMillan, and Reuben (2004), Bayer and Timmins (2005), and Ferreira (2005). The only exception is


                                                    2
provide a comprehensive analysis of how well each specification of the model fits the out-

comes observed in the data. This approach is feasible if we can easily compute equilibria

for models with large numbers of communities. There are, for example, 92 communities

in our data set. Thus, a fourth contribution of this paper is that it provides a method for

computing the equilibrium of a model with a large number of communities in the choice

set. Previous research with endogenous local public provision has typically not solved for

equilibrium with anything near a choice set of this magnitude.


    The data set we use in this paper includes the communities that constitute the Boston

Metropolitan Area. Massachusetts is convenient to study because cities and school districts

are coterminous. Hence a single residential tax rate applies within a community’s boundary.

We therefore avoid problems that may arise due to overlapping jurisdictions. Property

taxes are also the primary source of local revenues in Massachusetts, which avoids the need

to model other revenue sources. Our data set is from the 1980 US Census. This time

period predates a Massachusetts law that restricts property taxation (usually referred to as

Proposition 2 12 ). This law, which was passed in 1981, limited property tax rates to two-and-

a-half percent (after some adjustment period). Since many jurisdictions had property taxes

in the period leading up to 1981 that were higher than the limits set in Proposition 2 12 ,

the law imposed for all practical purposes a binding constraint on these communities. We

model the political process within each community as unconstrained choices determined by

majority rule, and we estimate the parameters of the model using data prior to Proposition

Ferreyra (2005) who also estimates demand and supply side parameters of a fully specified general equilibrium
model.




                                                     3
2 12 .


         Our main findings indicate that the simple myopic model can generate a distribution of

local expenditures that fits the data well. Nonetheless, the model does not fit the observed

tax rates and hence does not explain the pattern of local political choices. We find that a

generalization of the myopic voting model, that also allows for peer effects in the produc-

tion of educational quality, fits the data much better. Thus, our model adds support to the

increasing emphasis placed on neighborhood effects and peer effects in theoretical research

on locally provided public goods and in related empirical research. We emphasize, however,

that our empirical analysis does not pin down the channel through which peers affect out-

comes. Our findings are consistent, for example, with peers directly influencing educational

attainment of fellow students, or with households having preferences with respect to peers

even if peers have no impact on educational achievement.


         The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the theoretical model

on which the analysis is based and discusses existence and uniqueness of equilibrium. Section

3 introduces a parameterization of the model and discusses the estimation strategy. Section

4 discusses the data. Section 5 reports the main empirical findings. Section 6 discusses the

main findings. Section 7 concludes the paper.




2         The Model


The economy consists of a continuum of households, C, living in a metropolitan area.

Throughout the paper we will refer to a household as the decision-making unit, though for


                                                   4
variety we will sometimes also use the terms “individual”, “voter”, and “agent” to mean

the same thing. The homogeneous land in the metropolitan area is divided among J com-

munities, each of which has fixed boundaries.5 Jurisdictions may differ in the amount of

land contained within their boundaries. In the development that follows, we suppress the

jurisdiction subscript, j, where this is obvious from context. We assume that households

behave as price-takers. A household has preferences defined over local public good quality,

q, housing good, h , and a composite private good, b. Households differ in their endowed

income, y, and in a taste parameter, α, which reflects the household’s valuation of public

good quality. The continuum of households, C, is implicitly described by the joint distri-

bution of y and α. We assume that this distribution has a continuous density, f (α, y), with

respect to Lebesgue measure. We refer to a household with taste parameter α and income y

as (α, y). The preferences of a household are represented by a utility function, U (α, q, h, b),

which is strictly quasi-concave and twice differentiable in its arguments.


      The quality of this local public good in a jurisdiction is determined by per capita gov-

ernment expenditure, g, and by a measure of peer ”quality,” y; q = q(g, y). We assume that

peer quality can be measured by the mean income in a community, which is given by:


                                        Z                       .
                                ȳj =        y f (α, y) dy dα       nj                              (1)
                                        Cj




where Cj is the set of households choosing community j and nj is the population of com-

munity j. Higher income neighbors may generate positive ”production” externalities such

  5
    In our empirical application, we consider the Boston metropolitan area. Municipal boundaries in Mas-
sachusetts were set in the 1930’s and have remain unchanged since.


                                                    5
as interactions among achievement-motivated children that facilitate learning, or parental

engagement in neighborhood and school activities that enhance learning by children. Alter-

natively, y may reflect preferences for neighbors due to ”consumption” externalities, such as

desire by each household for social contact and interactions with higher income households.6


       Let p denote the relative gross-of-tax price of a unit of housing services in a community,

ph the net-of-tax price, and let y be the household’s endowment of the composite private

good. Households pay taxes that are levied on the consumption of housing services. Let

t be an ad valorem tax on housing. Households maximize their utility with respect to the

budget constraint, which is given by:



                                       (1 + t) ph h = y − b                                                 (2)



and choose their preferred location of residence by comparing maximum attainable utility

levels among communities. We can represent the preferences of a household by specifying

the indirect utility function. Let h(p, y, α) denote the housing demand function7 and let



                 V (α, q(g, y), p, y) = U (α, q(g, y), h(p, y, α), y − p h(p, y, α))                        (3)

   6
      Combining the utility function and quality function from the ”production” formulation of peer effects,
we obtain an induced utility function that has g, h, y, and b as arguments: U (α, q(g, y), h, b). The allocative
effects of this formulation of preferences and quality are equivalent to those from the ”consumption” formu-
lation in which public good quality depends only on g, q = q(g), and peer quality enters the utility function
as a separate argument: U (α, q(g), y, h, b). We have presented the production interpretation in the text for
ease of exposition, but emphasize that our empirical analysis does not distinguish these two channels for
peer influence. Nechyba (2000) and Ferreyra (2005) likewise use mean income as a peer measure to capture
potential production and/or consumption externalities. Were a measure of student ability available in our
data, it would be of interest to investigate a more general formulation of peer effects, along the lines of
Epple, Romano, and Sieg (2004), in which mean student ability affects peer quality.
    7
      Here we anticipate a simplification adopted in our empirical analysis. Preferences are assumed separable
in q and (h, b) so that housing demand does not depend on q.



                                                       6
denote the indirect utility function of a household, where p = (1 + t) ph . We assume

that the indirect utility function satisfies standard single-crossing properties. In particular,

indifference curves in the (q, p) plane have slopes increasing in y for given α and increasing

in α for given y.


       Let Cj ⊂ C denote the population living in community j. The set of border households

between communities j and j + 1 is characterized by the following expression:



                     V (α, q(gj , y j ), pj , y) = V (α, q(gj+1 , y j+1 ), pj+1 , y)                  (4)



This boundary indifference condition defines loci yj (α). The single crossing properties imply

that the population, Cj , living in community j is thus given by



                              Cj = {(α, y)| yj−1 (α) ≤ y ≤ yj (α)}                                    (5)



Total housing demand in community j is then given by:


                                                  Z
                        Hjd (gj , pj , tj )   =        h(pj , y, α) f (α, y) dy dα                    (6)
                                                  Cj




We also assume that the budget of community j must be balanced.8 This implies that:


                              Z                                     .
                       t ph         h(p, y, α) f (α, y) dy dα           nj = c(g)                     (7)
                               Cj


   8
    The analysis can be extended to incorporate lump sum transfers, for example, from the state government
to the local governments.




                                                          7
where c(g) is the cost per household of providing g and


                                           Z
                                nj    =           f (α, y) dy dα                         (8)
                                             Cj




is the size of community j.


   Furthermore, we assume that housing is produced from land and non-land factors with

constant returns to scale, so that housing per household is given by:



                                     Hj = h(Aj , Zj )                                    (9)



where Aj is the fixed amount of land area in community j and Zj is a mobile factor used

in production. Assume that pz is the same in all communities. Profit maximization by

price-taking producers implies that the total housing supply function is given by:



                                     Hjs = Hjs (pj , tj )                               (10)




   Following most previous positive studies in the literature, we assume that the pair (t, q)

in each community is chosen by majority rule. In each community, voters take the (t, q)

pairs in all other communities as given when making their decisions. One can make a

variety of assumptions about voter sophistication regarding anticipation of the way changes

in the community’s own (t, q) pair affect the community’s housing prices and migration

into or out of the community. For example, voters might take the community’s net-of-tax

price, population, and the community tax base as given, and then deduce from the budget


                                                  8
constraint the link between gross-of-tax price and the quality of the local public good. The

myopic model is the simplest and most commonly adopted approach (Epple, Filimon, and

Romer, 1984).9 Alternatively, voters in a community might take the (t, g) pairs in other

communities as given and then predict how changes in their community’s tax rate will affect

community population, public good quality, and the price of housing in their community.

The myopic model is used extensively both in theoretical models and in empirical analysis.

Our focus in this paper is on investigating in our equilibrium framework whether the myopic

voting assumption provides a good fit of the data.


      The community budget constraint, housing market clearing, and perceived migration

effects define a locus of (g, p) pairs that determines the government-services possibility

frontier, i.e. GPF = {g(t), p(t) |t ∈ R+ }. For given tax and expenditure policies in other

communities, a point on the GPF that cannot be beaten in a majority vote is a majority

equilibrium. Let yj (α) be the implicit function defined by equation (4). Consider a point

(gj∗ , p∗j ) on community j’s GPF, and let ỹj (α) define a set of voters who weakly prefer (gj∗ , p∗j )

to any other (gj , pj ) on the GPF. It follows from the assumption that the utility function

satisfies the standard single-crossing properties that (gj∗ , p∗j ) is a majority voting equilibrium

for the given GPF if


               Z    ∞ Z ỹj (α)                     1
                                                        Z   ∞ Z yj (α)
                                   f (α, y) dy dα =                       f (α, y) dy dα           (11)
                0       yj−1 (α)                    2   0      yj−1 (α)


  9
    Fernandez and Rogerson (1996) provide a formalization of the timing of moving and voting that ratio-
nalizes this assumption on the part of the voters.




                                                    9
Note that ỹj (α) defines a locus of pivotal voters.       10



    In order to characterize pivotal voters in a community, we need to derive an expression

for the slope of the GPF. Recall that the GPF is defined as the locus of (gj , pj ) such that

housing markets are in equilibrium:



                       Fj (gj , pj , tj ) = Hjd (gj , pj , tj ) − Hjs (pj , tj ) = 0                (12)



and the community budget is balanced:


                                                           tj Hjd (gj , pj , tj )
                    Gj (gj , pj , tj ) = c(gj ) − pj                              = 0               (13)
                                                         1 + tj     nj


given the perceived migration effects. Totally differentiating (12) and (13) and solving for

dpj /dgj yields:


                                                          Gjg       Fjg
                                    dpj                   Gjt   −   Fjt
                                                 = −      Gjp       Fjp
                                                                                                    (14)
                                    dgj   GP F                  −
                                                          Gjt       Fjt



The right-hand side of (14) does not have a simple closed form solution in general.


    If voters are myopic, they ignore all effects of migration; i.e., voters treat the popula-

tion boundaries of the communities as fixed. Hence, voters believe that the distribution of

households across communities is not affected by a change in public good provision. Fur-

thermore, if voters also treat housing demand and net-of-tax price of housing as fixed when

 10
    A formal proof of a similar result is in Epple and Platt (1998) and the same argument applies in this
model.




                                                    10
voting, then we obtain the simple myopic voting model:


                                         dpj            c0 (gj )
                                                    =                                                    (15)
                                         dgj   MV       Hjd /nj


The right hand side of equation (15) gives the slope of the GPF as perceived by a myopic

voter. The main technical advantage of the myopic voting model is that the slope of the

GPF is basically a function of only two variables: the marginal cost of providing the public

good and per capita housing demand. This formulation is implicit in all prior empirical

work estimating demand functions for local public goods and traces to the pioneering work

by Barr and Davis (1966) and Bergstrom and Goodman (1973).


    To summarize, voters in each community decide about the level of provision of the public

good, g, and the tax level, t. Mobility among communities is costless, and in equilibrium

every household lives in his or her preferred community. Having specified all components

of a (generic) equilibrium model, we define an intercommunity equilibrium as follows



Definition 1 An intercommunity equilibrium consists of a set of communities,

{1, ..., J}; a continuum of households, C; a distribution, P , of household characteristics α

and y; and a partition of C across communities {C1 , ..., CJ }, such that every community has

a positive population, i.e. 0 < n∗j < 1; a vector of prices and taxes, (p∗1 , t∗1 , ..., p∗J , t∗J ); an al-

location of public good expenditures, (g1∗ , ..., gJ∗ ); a vector of public good qualities, (q1∗ , ..., qJ∗ );

and an allocation, (h∗ , b∗ ), for every household (α, y), such that:



   1. Every household (α, y), living in community j maximizes its utility subject to the


                                                     11
       budget constraint:11



                                           (h∗ , b∗ ) = arg max U (α, qj∗ , h, b)
                                                                        (h,b)

                                                                 s.t. p∗j h = y − b




   2. Each household lives in one community and no household wants to move to a different

       community, i.e. for a household living in community j, the following holds:



                                  V (α, qj∗ , p∗j , y) ≥ max V (α, qi∗ , p∗i , y)                        (16)
                                                                       i6=j




   3. The housing market clears in every community:


                                                                                        p∗j
                           Z                                                                    !
                                      ∗
                                  h       (p∗j , y, α)   f (α, y) dy dα =       Hjs                      (17)
                             Cj                                                       1 + t∗j




   4. The population of each community, j, is given by:


                                                             Z
                                                  n∗j    =        f (α, y)dydα                           (18)
                                                             Cj


  11
     Strictly speaking, all statements only have to hold for almost every household; deviations of behavior of
sets of households with measure zero are possible.




                                                                  12
  5. Public good qualities are determined in each community, j, by:

                                                  R                        !
                                                      Cj   yf (α, y)dydα
                                  qj∗ = q gj∗ ,                                          (19)
                                                              n∗j




  6. The budget of every community is balanced:


                       t∗j     ∗
                                 Z
                                     ∗ ∗
                                                                  .
                             p     h  (p   , y, α) f (α, y) dy dα   nj = c(gj∗ )         (20)
                     1 + t∗j j Cj        j




  7. There is a myopic voting equilibrium in each community: Over all levels of (gj , tj )

     that are perceived to be feasible allocations by the voters in community j, at least half

     of the voters prefer (gj∗ , t∗j ) over any other feasible (gj , tj ).



   If household preferences satisfy single-crossing properties, the existence of an intercom-

munity equilibrium has been shown in simpler versions of this model, e.g. models without

taste variation and peer effects considered in Epple, Filimon, and Romer (1993).


   Equilibria cannot be computed analytically. Instead we rely on numerical algorithms

to find them. Computing an equilibrium requires us to solve a system of 3J nonlinear

equations: J housing market equations, J budget-balance equations, and J equations char-

acterizing pivotal voters. Thus computation of equilibria only exploits necessary conditions


                                                      13
that equilibria must satisfy. Once the algorithm has found such an allocation, one still

needs to make sure that all second order conditions are satisfied.12


       From the perspective of empirical analysis, housing supply in each community is not

easily measured. By contrast, community populations are measured with a relatively high

degree of accuracy. Hence our approach in this paper is to take observed community pop-

ulations as equilibrium outcomes from the model that we have described. We take these

populations as measured without error. This permits us to focus on household location

and voting in our empirical analysis. More formally, we focus on allocations that satisfy

the J budget equalities, the J equations characterizing pivotal voters, and J − 1 equations

that constrain the observed populations to equal the predicted population sizes. These

allocations are equilibria in the following sense. For any allocation that satisfies the 3J − 1

equations above, there exist housing supply functions for each community such that hous-

ing markets are in equilibrium.13 An interesting extension, which we do not pursue in this

paper, is to investigate the housing supply implied by the model.


       The algorithm to compute equilibria takes observed community populations and the

hierarchy of communities (ordered by mean income) as known (i.e. observed in the data).

One advantage of this approach is that, for the parameterization we use for estimation (see

Section 3), we can prove uniqueness of the equilibrium that gives rise to a given set of

community populations and ordering of communities, taking voters to be myopic. For that

  12
    An appendix that explains how to compute equilibria numerically is available from the authors.
  13
    Since we are going from a system with 3J equations in 3J unknowns to a system with 3J − 1 equations
in 3J unknowns, one equilibrium variable is not determined. We solve this problem by normalizing the price
of housing in the lowest community to be equal to 1. The appendix details how to compute these types of
equilibria numerically for the parametrization introduced in Section 3.



                                                   14
parameterization, we have the following result:14


Proposition 1 Given a set of equilibrium community populations, the associated equilib-

rium ordering of communities, and myopic voters, the equilibrium is unique.


    Our estimation approach takes observed community populations and the hierarchy of

communities as known. We presume that the observed allocation is an equilibrium allo-

cation. The result above shows uniqueness of the equilibrium that gives rise to a given

set of community populations and ordering of communities, taking voters to be myopic.

This uniqueness result is useful in justifying our estimation approach. Estimation is based

on a full solution approach, i.e. at each parameter vector we compute the equilibrium of

the model and match the predicted equilibrium to the one observed in the data. If the

equilibrium were not unique, we would need to compute all equilibria at each parameter

vector and find the one that matches the data the best. Proposition 1 establishes that at

each parameter vector, there is only one equilibrium that is consistent with the observed

community sizes and the observed hierarchy.




3     Estimation


Since we are interested in empirical analysis, it is necessary to parameterize the model. Let

the joint distribution of ln(α) and ln(y) be bivariate normal. The means of the distribution

                                                      2
are denoted by µln(y) and µln(α) . The variances are σln(y)      2
                                                            and σln(α) , and the correlation is

  14
     A proof of Proposition 1 for the parametrization of the model used for the econometric analysis is given
in the appendix.


                                                     15
denoted by λ. Furthermore, assume that the indirect utility function is given by:


                                                         y 1−ν −1          η+1   i o1
                                                                       − Bp1+η −1 ρ ρ
                                     n              h
                  V (q, p, y, α) =    α qρ + e              1−ν        e                 (21)



where the quality index q is given by:


                                                              φ
                                                        ȳj
                                                
                                      qj = gj                                            (22)
                                                         ȳ


and ρ < 0, α > 0, η < 0, ν > 0, φ ≥ 0 and B > 0. We assume that while α can vary

across households, ν, η, ρ, B and φ are the same for all agents. Roy’s Identity applied

to equation (21) implies that the individual housing demand function can be written as

h(pj , y) = Bpη y ν . Given the utility function above, the locus of households indifferent

between communities j and j + 1 can be written as:

                                           !                                  !
                               y 1−ν − 1            Qj+1 − Qj
                 ln(α) − ρ                     = ln                               ≡ Kj   (23)
                                 1−ν                qjρ − qj+1
                                                           ρ




where


                                                         η+1
                                                    Bp       −1
                                                         j
                                               −ρ
                                     Qj = e              1+η                             (24)




   The first-order condition of the voting problem can be expressed as:

                                                                   !
                                               y 1−ν − 1
                             ln(α) − ρ                                     = Lj          (25)
                                                 1−ν



                                                    16
where the intercept, Lj , is given by

                                                              η+1
                                                                            
                                                         Bp       −1
                                                              j
                                               B e−ρ         pηj
                                                              1+η
                                                                       dpj
                                                                             
                                                                       dgj
                                 Lj   = ln                                                            (26)
                                                                            
                                                           ∂q
                                                      q ρ−1 j
                                                                             
                                                                            
                                                         j       ∂gj




    The cost function is linear:



                                             c(gj ) = gj                                               (27)



Thus the 10 parameters of the model are µln(y) , µln(α) , σln(y) , σln(α) , λ, ρ, η, ν, B, and φ.15


    The estimation procedure can be implemented in two stages. The first stage uses the

model’s implications regarding locational equilibrium, while the second stage incorporates

voting equilibrium. We will briefly describe the first stage of the estimation procedure

implemented in Epple and Sieg (1999), which we apply in this paper. We have made

parametric assumptions on the joint distribution of income and tastes for the population

of the metropolitan area and the indirect utility function of the households. With these

assumptions, the model determines a joint distribution of income and taste parameters for

every community. If the model is evaluated at the correct parameter values, the difference

between the empirical quantiles of the income distributions observed in the data and the

quantiles predicted by the model should be small. This provides the rationale for the first

stage of the estimation.

  15
     Note that the approach developed in this paper does not require us to specify a functional form for the
housing supply function.




                                                    17
    Equation (23) implies that quantiles of the income distribution of community j depend

on (qj , pj ) only through the community-specific intercepts Kj . We can, therefore, solve

equation ( 8) recursively to obtain the community-specific intercepts, Kj , as a function of the

parameters of the bivariate distribution of income and tastes, (µln(y) , µln(α) , λ, σln(y) , σln(α) ),

the parameters (ν, ρ), and the community sizes, n1 , ..., nJ . These community size restrictions

in the estimation procedure pin down the values for the community-specific intercepts. We

then estimate the parameters that are identified from community populations and income

distributions by matching the quantiles of the income distributions subject to the constraint

that community-specific intercepts are chosen to replicate observed community sizes.


    Heterogeneity in tastes and income in the metropolitan population, together with self-

selection of households into municipalities, means that income distributions will differ across

municipalities in the metropolitan area. In equilibrium, the self-selection of the metropolitan

population into municipalities results in boundary loci in the (α, y) plane that divide the

metropolitan population into the various municipalities in the metropolitan area. The

within-community income distributions that result thus depend on the shape and position

of the boundary loci and on the parameters of the joint distribution of (α, y). The empirical

differences in the within-community distributions of income across municipalities prove to

be sufficient to identify the parameters that determine the slope and shape of the boundary

loci (ρ/σln(α) , ν) and the correlation between tastes and income (λ) . The mean and variance

of tastes are not identified in this stage because we do not exploit information on public good

provision. The parameter ρ determines the slope of the indifference curve and hence affects

sorting in equilibrium. Less obviously, the lack of identification of σln(α) also implies that


                                                  18
we can identify only the ratio ρ/σln(α) in the first stage. Finally, ν determines the curvature

of the boundary indifference curves and hence the composition of populations within and

among communities. Identification of ν thus rests on functional form assumptions of the

indirect utility function since we do not exploit housing expenditure data at this stage of

the analysis.


   To summarize, in the first stage of the estimation procedure the following parameters,

denoted by θ1 , are identified: the mean and the standard deviation of the income distri-

bution (µln(y) , σln(y) ), the correlation between income and tastes (λ), the income elasticity

of demand for housing (ν), and the ratio of ρ to the standard deviation of the taste for

public goods (σln(α) ). The estimates from this stage typically have a relatively high degree

of precision because the relevant sample size is not the number of communities (J) but

rather the number of households (N ) sampled by the U.S. Census; i.e., the asymptotics of

the first stage estimator only require N to go to infinity, for any given value of J.


   That leaves us with five parameters to be estimated: the two remaining parameters of

the housing demand equation η and B, as well as the mean and the standard deviation of the

distribution of α and φ . In the absence of housing price data, it is hard to estimate η. We,

therefore, set η = −0.3 and conduct some sensitivity analysis to demonstrate that our main

results do not depend on the choice of η. Thus, in the second stage, we need to estimate

the following parameters θ2 = (µln(α) , σln(α) , B, φ). The rest of this section focuses on the

second stage of the estimator, which differs from our previous work. Epple et al. (2001)

derived necessary conditions that local public expenditures, housing prices, and tax rates

had to satisfy in equilibrium. Here we follow a different approach. We compute equilibria,

                                              19
thus forcing our predicted outcomes to satisfy all restrictions implied by theory. We then

investigate how closely our model can predict the observed outcomes.


   In the estimation, we incorporate the implications of the myopic voter assumptions.

These are embodied in equations (15), (25), and (26). Together they imply that the first-

order condition determining the level of expenditures in community j depends on (gj , pj )

but not directly on the property tax rate tj . Using the parameters and J − 1 boundary

loci estimated in the first stage of the estimation and given values for θ = (θ1 , θ2 ), we can

calculate the implied equilibrium (gj , pj ) for j = 1, ..., J, up to an arbitrary normalization.

(We adopt the normalization p1 = 1.) Note that the equilibrium (gj , pj ) pairs can be

calculated without using any information about community land areas or parameters of

the housing supply function. These are the key consequences of the property of myopic

voting noted above. Having calculated the (gj , pj ) pairs for all communities, the community

budget constraints can be solved to obtain tax rates. In particular, the budget constraint

for community j is



                                      tj phj h̄j (pj ) = gj                                 (28)



where


                                  Z   ∞   Z   yj (α)                             .
                     hj (pj ) =                        h(pj , y) f (α, y) dydα       nj     (29)
                                   −∞ yj−1 (α)




                                                       20
is per-household housing consumption in j. This and the identity pj = phj (1 + tj ) imply:



                                       tj pj h̄j (pj ) / (1 + tj ) = gj                                 (30)



Given (gj , pj ) and the community boundary loci, equation (30) can be solved for each j

to obtain tj . We do not observe the price per unit of housing services, phj . Hence, we

calculate the per capita annualized rental value of housing consumed in each community:

Rj = phj h̄j (pj ).16


       Let tj (θ2 |θ̂1 ), gj (θ2 |θ̂1 ), Rj (θ2 |θ̂1 ) denote, respectively, the tax rate, public expenditure

level, and mean housing expenditures predicted by the model as a function of the parameters

that have been estimated in the first round θ̂1 and the parameters that need to be estimated

in the second round θ2 . We assume that the observed levels of these three variables differ

from the ones predicted by our model because of measurement error:



                                          tj   = tj (θ2 | θ̂1 ) + tj

                                          gj   = gj (θ2 | θ̂1 ) + gj                                   (31)

                                         Rj    = Rj (θ2 | θ̂1 ) + R
                                                                   j




We assume that the measurement errors, (tj , gj , R
                                                     j ), are jointly normally distributed. For


each set of trial values of θ2 , and given the first stage estimator θ̂1 , we solve for (gj , tj , Rj )

in each community. We can then estimate the remaining parameters of the model using a

  16
       The algorithm used to compute equilibria is discussed in the appendix.




                                                      21
maximum likelihood estimator.            17   Obtaining these maximum likelihood estimates is the

second stage of our estimation procedure.


         We view the above estimation procedure as appealing for two reasons. First, it does not

require estimates of the amount of land in each community that is available for residential

development. Such measures are likely to be subject to substantial measurement error.

Instead, we use community populations and income distributions. While these are also

subject to measurement error, such measurement errors are likely to be small relative to

errors in measuring land areas. Second, the two-stage approach permits us to exploit,

in the first stage, the large sample (five percent of the metropolitan population) that is

available for estimating community income boundaries and parameters of the distribution

of income. The second stage then exploits the implications of household location and voting

in determining community property values and local government expenditures and tax rates.




4         The Data Set


The data set used in this paper is based on the Boston Metropolitan area in 1980. Table

1 reports some descriptive statistics of the most important variables in the sample. The

sample size of 92 equals the number of cities and townships in the Boston Metropolitan

    17
     Our model may be misspecified. One of the main objectives of the analysis is to determine and evaluate
the fit of the model. This exercise is well-defined even if our model is misspecified. In that case, it makes more
sense to interpret the MLE as a quasi-maximum-likelihood estimator. Basic asymptotic theory suggests that
the quasi- maximum-likelihood estimator is still well defined and converges almost surely to the parameter
vector that minimizes the Kullback-Leibler discrepancy which measures the distance between our class of
models and the true data generating process. Moreover, the limiting distribution of the quasi MLE is still
asymptotically normal. Of course, the standard formula that we use for estimating asymptotic standard
errors would need to be modified in this case to account for misspecification problems. For an introduction
to the theory of misspecified MLE see, for example, Gallant (1997).


                                                       22
Area.18


TABLE 1


    It is interesting to consider the relationship of the community budget constraint to res-

idential property tax revenue. We have arrayed communities in order of increasing median

household income and plotted residential property tax revenue and educational expenditure

per household in Figure 1. As the lower two lines of the plot below show, residential prop-

erty tax revenue and education expenditures per household track relatively well across the

communities. The correlation coefficient is 0.73. This is striking given that the data come

from different sources. The expenditure data are from the U.S. Census of Governments

while data for tax rates and assessed residential property tax bases are from state govern-

ment sources. Thus, we will view the residential property tax as earmarked for education

and property tax as the only source of revenue for education.


FIGURE 1


    Recall that housing consumption in our model is framed in terms of the flow of housing

services. We consider the conversion of property values to annualized implicit rental values

for the 1980 Boston data. Let R be annualized implicit rent and V be the housing value.

These are related by the following identity:



                                                 R = kp V                                                (32)

  18
     Since a detailed discussion of the data is published in Epple et al. (2001), we provide details here only
on issues that have not been previously discussed.




                                                     23
where, kp is the user-cost factor (Poterba, 1992) given by the following expression:



                                  kp = (1 − ty )(i + tv ) + ζ                             (33)



where ty is the income tax rate, tv is the tax rate on property value, i is the nominal

interest rate, and ζ = β + m + δ − π where β is the risk premium for housing investments,

m and δ are maintenance and depreciation costs, and π is the inflation rate. We wish to

calculate implicit rents net of the property tax, so we remove tv from the previous expression.

Following Poterba, let ζ = −.02 and i = .1286. We set ty = .15. Then,



                                   kp = .85 ∗ (.1286) − .02.                              (34)



Thus, the average user-cost factor for these communities is then:



                              kp = .85 ∗ (.1286) − .02. = .0893.                          (35)




   It is natural to question whether the assessed values (”equalized residential values”

or ERV) provide an adequate measure of actual property values in communities. While

this cannot be answered definitely, we can check the consistency between these values and

values that community residents report to the U.S. Census. We converted rents into housing

values using Poterba’s formula, as discussed above. We then regressed equalized residential

property value per household on aggregate owner-occupied property values (Census) and




                                              24
the imputed values from aggregate rents (Census).19 The overall fit is high, with R2 = .94.

The coefficients on each of the right-hand side variables should be 1. For owner-occupied

housing, we find that the estimated coefficient is 1.039 with an estimated standard error of

0.031. Thus we fail to reject the null hypothesis that the coefficient is equal to 1. Indeed,

for owner-occupied housing, the correspondence between property tax assessments made by

local and state government officials and the Census values obtained from individual owners’

estimates of the values of their properties is remarkable. For rental housing, we find that the

coefficient is equal to 0.7117 with an estimated standard error of 0.147. The null hypothesis

that the coefficient equals 1 has p-value = .058.


      We thus find that the user-cost factor seems to understate the extent to which rentals are

converted to property values. If we add .05 to the user-cost factor (i.e., let ζ = .03 instead

of -.02), then we get a coefficient on the rental variable very close to 1 in our regression.

Such an increase could be motivated by greater depreciation and maintenance costs than

Poterba assumed or greater risk factor in housing investments. Alternatively, it may be that

rental properties are under-assessed relative to owner-occupied properties. All in all, these

regressions are overall relatively reassuring about the alternative house value measures that

we have. In the empirical analysis of this paper, we use ERV as our measure of value.


FIGURE 2


      Finally, we also need to convert tax rates on property values to rates on annualized

implicit rental values to get a tax rate on the flow of housing services. The property tax

 19
      The regression results are available upon request from the authors.




                                                      25
rate on implicit rental, R, is related to the property tax rate on value, V by the following

identity:

                                               t r R = tv V                                           (36)


Thus,



                             tr = tv V /R = tv /kp = tv /[(1 − ty )i + ζ]                             (37)

                                 = tv /[.85 ∗ .1286 − .02]



Figure 2 plots the implied rates on imputed rental values.




5         Empirical Results


In the first stage of the estimation procedure, we match selected quantiles of the empirical

income distributions of the communities with their predicted counterparts. The mean of

log income, µln(y) , is 9.790 with an estimated standard error of 0.002. The estimate of the

standard deviation of log income, σln(y) , is 0.755 (0.004). The correlation between income

and tastes for local public goods is -0.019 (0.031). The ratio ρ/σln(α) is -0.283 (0.013).

Finally, the income elasticity of housing demand is estimated to be 0.938 (0.026).20


TABLE 2


         In this paper, we estimate the remaining parameters by matching the observed distri-

    20
    This part of the estimation procedure is identical to the one in Epple and Sieg (1999). These estimates
are reproduced from Table 1 in that paper.




                                                    26
bution of tax rates, expenditures, and imputed rents as discussed in section 3. To provide

a baseline, we first estimate the model without peer effects, i.e., setting φ = 0. Column

I of Table 2 reports the estimates for this baseline model. We find that the estimate for

σln(α) reaches the lower boundary of 0.1, which is set in the estimation algorithm to keep

σln(α) positive. With σln(α) = .1, the implied value of ρ is given by the first-stage coefficient

restriction that ρ = −.283∗σln(α) = −.0283 . Our estimate for µln(α) is -2.623. Our estimate

for B is 0.325. These estimates are not of great intrinsic interest, but they are needed to

calculate the predicted equilibrium quantities of interest.21


FIGURE 3


      Next we focus on the goodness of fit of the baseline model. First, Figure 3 plots observed

and predicted expenditures, rents, and tax rates. We find that the model fits the observed

expenditure patterns reasonably well, though with some overstatement of expenditures in

the poorer communities and some understatement in the higher-income communities.22 The

correlation between observed and predicted expenditures is 0.727. Imputed rents serve as

both equilibrium housing consumption and the tax base in our model. The model some-

what over-predicts rents for poor communities and under-predicts rents for high income

communities. The correlation coefficient is 0.94. Finally, we consider observed and pre-

dicted tax rates. Here the results are not favorable and point to a serious lack of fit. The

over-prediction of housing values in the poorer communities and under-prediction of expen-

ditures combine to create a severe under-prediction of tax rates in the poorer communities.

 21
      We have verified that the second-order conditions are satisfied for these estimates.
 22
      The term “expenditures” refers to local spending on education.




                                                       27
Similarly, in the wealthier communities, the under-prediction of housing values and over-

prediction of expenditures create an over-prediction of tax rates. Thus, while observed tax

rates decrease in community rank, the model predicts tax rates increasing in community

rank. The correlation between observed and predicted tax rates is -.67. This failure to fit

tax rates is a serious shortcoming of the baseline model. We also conducted some sensi-

tivity analysis. Changing the price elasticity, η, from -.3 to -.5 has negligible effect on the

likelihood function.


FIGURE 4


   We next turn to results obtained when peer effects are included. The parameter es-

timates are shown in Column II of Table 2. We find that the estimate of φ is large and

statistically significant. Expressing the exponent of the quality function in relative terms,

our estimates imply that the peer effects are 2.5 times as important as spending. Introduc-

ing peer effects into the model specification also markedly improves the fit of the model,

as documented in Figure 4. We find that the model with peer effects can not only explain

expenditures, but also tax rates and tax bases (rents) reasonably well. In particular, we

find that the correlation between actual and predicted tax rates is 0.747. We thus conclude

that the extended myopic voting model that allows for peer effects in public good provision

fits our data very well.


   In the estimation, we treat housing prices as latent. Our model predicts that housing

prices (per unit of housing consumption) vary from 1.0 in the lowest community to 5.14




                                              28
in the most expensive community.23 These price differences are similar compared to those

found by quite different methods in empirical work such as Sieg, Smith, Banzhaf, and Walsh

(2002).




6         Discussion


Epple et al. (2001), working with a model without peer effects, found that the parameter

estimates from the locational equilibrium and voting equilibrium components of the model

led to different results that were difficult to reconcile. Our results provide a resolution

of this puzzle: generalizing the model to incorporate peer effects eliminates the apparent

inconsistency. It is natural to ask whether explanations other than peer effects might be

responsible for the unsatisfactory results found when peer effects are not included. In

addition, if peer effects are operative, it is appropriate to ask whether it is possible to

provide evidence about the channels through which peer effects operate. We address both

of these questions below.


         Our model presumes that the marginal source of funds for increasing a community’s

educational expenditures is the community’s residential property tax. It is natural to wonder

whether the poor fit of the baseline model (i.e., the model without peer effects) may be due

to failure to incorporate factors that affect incentives for local property taxation.


         We explored whether intergovernmental aid formulas might have embodied features that

significantly affected marginal incentives for local taxation. After extensive investigation,

    23
         In the model without peer effects prices ranged from 1 to 1.6.



                                                         29
we concluded that this is not the case. The state aid formula applicable during the period

from which our data are drawn specified aid as a function of the local property tax base

and school enrollment.24 The school enrollment variable in the formula gave higher weight

to disadvantaged students. In addition, greater aid went to districts with lower property

tax base per capita. Thus, both components of the aid formula had the effect of directing

greater aid to lower-income municipalities. A key aspect of the formula is that, beyond a

threshold, aid was not conditioned on the local tax rate or local expenditures. Thus, because

it was not tied to local taxation or expenditure, the aid provided by the state would tend

to induce localities to respond by lowering their tax rates. Moreover, since aid was higher

to lower-income communities, the associated tax rate reduction would tend to be higher in

poorer communities. Recall that a major shortcoming of the fit of the model without peer

effects is that it substantially underpredicts tax rates in poorer communities. If anything,

incorporating state aid into the model would worsen the fit of the model to the data by

inducing even lower predicted tax rates in poorer communities.25


       We explored a second possibility, related to taxation of non-residential property. Sup-

pose poorer municipalities have proportionately more non-residential property than wealth-

ier municipalities. If localities were required to impose the same tax rate on both resi-

dential and non-residential property, then poorer municipalities might have an incentive

to raise the property tax rate in order to extract additional revenue from non-residential

  24
     The relevant statute is Acts and Resolves of Massachusetts, 1978, ch. 367, amending ch. 70, “School
Funds and State Aid for Public Schools.”
  25
     There is one potentially important caveat to the preceding discussion. In order to receive the full amount
of aid specified by the formula, a municipality was required to meet a threshold spending level from own
sources. Unfortunately, the data are not sufficient to permit us to determine whether that condition was
binding on any municipalities.


                                                      30
sources.26 During the time period from which our data are drawn, Massachusetts state law

did require that the same property tax rate be imposed on both types of property. How-

ever, municipalities routinely circumvented this requirement by assessing residential and

non-residential properties at different rates (Bradbury, 1988). The poorest municipalities

all imposed higher effective rates on non-residential than on residential property. Thus,

presence of non-residential property does not appear to have created incentives for poor

communities to increase tax rates on residential property.


       A third potential issue relates to the possibility that our peer measure (mean income)

is proxying for some other factor unrelated to peer influences. Dunz (1989) and Nechyba

(1997) appeal to heterogeneity of the housing stock, and the high degree of durability of the

stock, as an important factor generating income sorting within and across jurisdictions.27

It is undoubtedly the case that a household’s location is influenced by the character of

available housing. In our model, the role of housing in sorting is captured by the price

per unit of housing services. Thus, cross-community variation in mean housing quality is

captured by cross-community variation in this price variable. Might this representation be

an oversimplification, with the consequence that mean income serves as proxy for variation

across communities in the average quality of the housing stock? To provide some evidence

regarding this possibility, we investigated the cross-community relationship between mean

community income and the age distribution of the housing stock. In particular, we estimated

a regression of mean income against variables that reflect the proportion of houses built prior

  26
     The extent of any such incentive would depend on the relative ”exportability” of taxes on residential
and non-residential activities.
  27
     It is quite possible, of course, that both housing stock and peer effects drive sorting. In Nechyba’s model,
for example, sorting across communities in his analysis is presumed to be driven in part by such peer effects.


                                                       31
to 1940 and the proportions built in each subsequent decade. The results of this regression

are reported in Table 3. We see from this regression that mean community income bears

a non-monotonic relationship to age of the housing stock. The coefficient on fraction built

in the 1950’s is significantly higher than either the coefficient on fraction built before 1940

or the coefficient on the fraction built in the 1970’s. While age is an imperfect measure of

housing quality, these findings suggest that mean income is playing a role beyond serving

as a proxy for community housing stock.


TABLE 3


       While the evidence we have provided cannot conclusively rule out alternative interpre-

tations, viewing our findings as evidence for peer effects is a natural interpretation, and this

interpretation is very much in accord with most current models of inter-community choice.

Indeed, we see our approach, contrasting the fit of general equilibrium models with and

without peer effects, as an appealing strategy for investigating the importance of peer ef-

fects. If one provisionally accepts our findings as evidence of peer effects, it is then natural

to ask what mechanism gives rise to these peer effects. As is now well known, identifi-

cation in models with peer effects is exceedingly challenging.28 While we cannot resolve

these identification problems with the data available to us, we can provide some suggestive

evidence.29

  28
    See the discussion in Manski (1993), Moffitt (2001), Brock and Durlauf (2001).
  29
    Ideally, we would like to have measures of student aptitude and achievement, with students matched
to the households in which they reside. We could then augment our model, treating α as a vector, with
student ability as a component of that vector. Estimating the model to account for the effects of ability on
sorting, and the effects of school quality, including peers, on educational achievement, would then provide
value evidence for identifying peer effects.




                                                    32
       As we emphasized earlier, the peer effects that we find may be due either to ”production”

or ”consumption” externalities. Peer effects that have received particular emphasis are those

operating through schools.30 If that is the primary mechanism for peer effects, then one

would expect that households without children would locate where peer quality is low,

avoiding the housing price premium for externalities that are not of value to them. Thus,

we would expect that families with school-age children would tend to locate where the peer

variable is higher, and households without children would locate where the peer variable

is relatively low. To provide some evidence in this regard, we calculated the correlations

of the logarithm of mean household income with fraction of households that are families

(.57), school enrollment per household (.32), and fraction of the population over age 65

(-.38). To the extent that peer effects operate through education of children, the education

of the adult population may provide a measure of both the value attached to education and

the resources available to facilitate student learning. To investigate this, we regressed the

logarithm of mean household income on a constant, the fraction of the population with high

school education, and the fraction with more than high school education. The estimated

coefficients were 8.3, 1.4, and 2.4 respectively, all highly significant, and the R2 = .83.

Thus, the peer variable that we use, mean community income, is strongly related to the

education of the community population. While the evidence summarized in this paragraph

is only suggestive, it is consistent with the peer effects interpretation of the results from our

structural estimation.

  30
    Recent empirical studies include Arcidiacono and Nickolson (2005), Betts and Morell (1999), Dale and
Krueger (1998), Sacerdote (2001), and Zimmerman (2000). Rothstein (2004) considers the determinants of
school choice and the possible role of peer effects in a setting where sorting among communities may be
important.



                                                  33
7    Conclusions


Few empirical strategies have been developed that investigate public provision under major-

ity rule while taking explicit account of the constraints implied by mobility of households.

In this paper, we have explored the implications of the myopic voter model when peer effects

are important aspects of neighborhood quality. We have specified a locational equilibrium

model with peer effects, characterized its equilibrium properties, and derived a new algo-

rithm to compute equilibria. Moreover, we have developed a new empirical approach that

imposes all restrictions that arise from these equilibrium models on the data generating

process. This allows us to study the goodness of fit of the model and helps us determine

which dimensions of the data can or cannot be explained by our model.


    While the myopic voting model without peer effects can replicate many important styl-

ized features of the data, including the observed expenditure patterns, it yields distributions

of property tax rates that differ significantly from the ones observed in the data. Our model

predicts that tax rates are higher in high income communities than in low income communi-

ties. In the data, we observe the opposite: high income communities have on average lower

property tax rates than poor communities. We also find that the implied mean housing

expenditures are too low in the predicted equilibrium for rich communities and too high

for poor communities. This shortcoming is not present in a generalization of the model

that incorporates peer effects. Our findings are encouraging in demonstrating that a rela-

tively simple equilibrium model of sorting and public good provision fits all aspects of the

data well–community income distributions, housing expenditures, public good provision



                                              34
levels, and property tax rates. The results also suggest that peer effects may be important

components in determining the quality of local public good provision.


      A natural generalization in future research is to express α as a vector, and to ex-

ploit data on the distribution of household demographic variables such as age, education,

race/ethnicity, and family size in estimating the model. Of course, this adds to the challenge

of estimation, since solving for equilibrium is more computationally demanding in such an

extended framework. However, the computationally efficient strategy we have developed in

this paper extends quite naturally to such more general settings, opening the door to a much

broader range of applications of the framework. It is also useful to note that the communi-

ties in our model need not be separate municipalities. Neighborhoods within jurisdictions

that have distinct local amenities can be treated as separate communities, with the locally

provided good having both a governmentally provided and an endowed component.31


      In closing, it is important to return to an issue raised earlier in this paper, namely the

observational equivalence of alternative channels through which peer effects may operate.

In particular, our estimated peer effect may reflect both consumption externalities (rubbing

elbows with wealthy neighbors or enjoyment of proximity to attractive houses of wealthy

neighbors) and production externalities (enhanced learning of children due to peer interac-

tions in schools or the influence of positive role models in the neighborhoods). The peer

effect that we find may well reflect a combination of such factors. The policy implications

of these alternative mechanisms are clearly quite different. Thus, an important continuing

agenda for research on local communities is development of data and identification strategies

 31
      See, for example, Sieg et al. (2004).


                                               35
that can separate these alternative interpretations.




Acknowledgments


This is a revised version of a paper that was prepared for the TAPES Conference on Fiscal

Federalism in Munich, May 2004. We thank Tim Besley, Soren Blomquist, Roger Gordon,

Antonio Merlo, James Poterba, Richard Rogerson, and Jesse Rothstein for comments and

suggestions. We also thank participants at TAPES and a PIER conference on political

economy at the University of Pennsylvania, and workshops at Arizona State, the University

of Florida, and UCLA for their comments. Frederico Gil Sander and Fernando Botelho

provided research assistance. We would also like to thank the National Science Foundation

and the MacArthur Foundation for financial support.




                                             36
Appendix: Existence, Uniqueness, and Computation of Equi-

librium


We first draw together key results that will be used in our proof. Let (pj , qj ), j = 1, ..., J

be arrayed in ascending order. For each adjacent pair of communities in this ordering,

there is a locus of household types in the (ln y, ln α) plane that is indifferent between those

communities. Our utility function is:


                                                                      1−ν −1             η+1    1
                                                      ρ           ρy              −ρ Bp1+η −1         ρ
                                     V = αq + e                        1−ν        e                                                    (38)



Hence, the condition determining the locus of households indifferent between adjacent com-

munities is:

                               η+1
                                          1                                                        η+1
                                                                                                              1
             1−ν           Bp       −1    ρ                                    1−ν             Bp       −1   ρ
          ρ y 1−ν−1
                                j
                                                                             ρ y 1−ν−1
                                                                                                   j+1
                      −ρ                                                                   −ρ
  αqjρ + e            e         1+η               =      ρ
                                                       αqj+1 +e                           e          1+η           for j = 1, ..., J − 1(39)
                                                                                                           



Solving the above boundary-indifference condition for ln α and evaluating at the point where

ln y = 0 (i.e., y = 1), we obtain the vertical intercept of the boundary locus in the (ln y, ln α)

plane. We denote the intercept of the locus between communities j and j + 1 as Kj . From

equation (39) we obtain:

                                                  η+1                      η+1       
                                              Bp       −1              Bp       −1
                                                   j+1                      j
                                 e−ρ              1+η
                                                          −   −ρ
                                                              e             1+η       
                Kj = ln            y ρφ                         y             ρφ           j = 1, ..., J − 1                     (40)
                                    gjρ                  ρ
                                             j                             j+1
                                                                                      
                                           y          − gj+1                y




                                                                            37
The Kj are estimated in the first stage of Epple and Sieg (1999) (ES, 1999) and are taken

as given for our analysis in this paper. As a shorthand below, we will refer to equation (40)

as the condition for mobility equilibrium.


   Within each community, voting equilibrium is characterized by the requirement that

there be a locus of households all sharing the same most-preferred local public goods bundle,

such that half of the community population lies on either side of the locus. The first-order

condition for gj for a household on that locus is:


                                                                 η+1
                                              1−ν −1        Bp       −1
                            dqj          ρy            −ρ        j                dpj
                    αρqjρ−1       −e          1−ν      e         1+η      ρBpηj       =0   (41)
                            dgj                                                   dgj


The identity relating gross- and net-of-tax housing prices combined with the community

budget constraint yields:


                                                                          g
                               p = ph + tph = ph +                                         (42)
                                                                    H d /n


The preceding and the myopic voting assumption yield:


                            dp   1         1          1
                               = d   =            =                                        (43)
                            dg  H /n   Bpη Y ν /n   Bpη Y ν


where


                                     Z
                             Yjν =        y ν f (α, y)dαdy/nj                              (44)
                                     cj




                                                           38
The production function for quality of the local public good is:


                                                                             φ
                                                                        yj
                                                                    
                                                      qj = gj                                                         (45)
                                                                        y


This in turn implies:


                                                                             φ
                                                       dqj             yj
                                                                   
                                                           =                                                          (46)
                                                       dgj             y


Hence, the first-order condition for a voter on the pivotal locus is:

                                                       η+1
                                                  Bp       −1                                          η+1
                                                       j
                                          −ρ                                                               −1
                                                                 Bpηj Bpη1Y ν
                                                                                                  Bp
                        y 1−ν −1
                                         e             1+η                                   −ρ        j
                                                                                           e           1+η
                αe−ρ      1−ν       =                     φ ρ−1  y φ =
                                                                              j   j
                                                                                                         φρ         (47)
                                                                                                     yj
                                                                                         gjρ−1                  Yjν
                                                  
                                                      yj                      j
                                             gj       y                      y                       yj



The vertical intercept of the preceding locus in the (ln y, ln α) plane is the value of ln α

when ln y = 0. We denote this intercept Lj . From the preceding:

                                                                η+1          
                                                            Bp       −1
                                                                 j
                                                       −ρ
                                                  e             1+η          
                          Lj = ln                          y ρφ                   j = 1, ..., J                   (48)
                                              gjρ−1
                                                                             
                                                             j
                                                             y          Yjν


The Lj are thus determined from the stage-one estimates. As a shorthand, we denote

equation (48) as the voting equilibrium condition.


   Finally, within each community, budget balance requires:


                                          pj
                                   tj          Bpηj Yjν = gj j = 1, ..., J                                            (49)
                                        1 + tj



                                                                     39
   A necessary condition for equilibrium is that qj , pj , and Kj ascend across communities

in the same order. The loci defined by equation (39) do not cross. Thus, ascension of the

Kj impounds the property of income stratification. That is, all individuals of type α in

community j have higher incomes than the wealthiest individual of type α in community

j − 1. In light of this income stratification property, it is natural to expect that the y j and

Yjν will ascend across communities in the same order as the Kj . We find this to be the case

in the first-stage estimates in ES (1999). However, it is possible to contrive distributions of

(y, α) such that this is not the case. The following assumption rules out such distributions.



Assumption 1 (A1) y j and Yjν ascend across communities in the same order as Kj .



We also assume:


Assumption 2 (A2) The price elasticity of housing demand satisfies −1 < η < 0.


Proposition 1: Given community populations and the ordering of mean incomes, y j , across

communities, equilibrium exists and is unique.


Proof: In light of A1, the Kj ascend across communities in the same order as the y j . Given

community populations and the ordering of communities, the Kj are uniquely determined

by the recursion described in detail in ES, 1999, Equation (14) . Given the community-

specific intercepts, the boundary loci delineating communities are as given by equation (39).

This in turn implies that the distribution of (α, y) types in each community is known. The

community-specific voting intercepts are then uniquely determined by the requirement that

half the population of each community lie on either side of the locus of pivotal voters.

                                              40
    It remains to show that, given the preceding, the internal equilibrium in each community

is unique. Thus, we must show existence and uniqueness of the solution to equations (40),

(48), and (49). We denote this solution (pbj , gbj , tbj ), j = 1, ..., J.                    We first show existence

and uniqueness of (pbj , gbj ), j = 1, ..., J in equations (40) and (48).


    Given the normalization p1 = 1, equation (48) can be solved to yield a unique closed-

form solution for g1 . The remainder of the proof is by induction. Given (pb1 , gb1 ) , the

following conditions determine (g2 , p2 ).

                                                     η+1
                                                                                          
                                                 Bp
                                                      2
                                                          −1                Bp  bη+1
                                                                                 1
                                                                                     −1
                                          −ρ                 −        −ρ
                                      e              1+η           e            1+η     
                             K2 = ln                    ρφ                       ρφ                        (50)
                                                     y1                         y2
                                          gb1ρ                  − g2ρ
                                                                                        
                                                     y                          y




                                                                   η+1              
                                                               Bp       −1
                                                          −ρ        2
                                                      e             1+η
                                  L2 = ln                                                                       (51)
                                                                                    
                                                                y 2 ρφ ν
                                                                       
                                                 g2ρ−1          y     Y2



Solve equation (48) for gj :

                                                         η+1           1/(ρ−1)
                                                     Bp       −1
                                                          j
                                             −ρ
                                      e                  1+η           
                                gj = 
                                       yj ρφ
                                                                        
                                                                                                                (52)
                                            y             Yjν eLj


Using the preceding equation for j = 1 and j = 2, we substitute for gb1 and g2 in equation




                                                           41
(50) to obtain:

                                                                 η+1
                                                            Bp
                                                                 2
                                                                     −1             Bp  bη+1
                                                                                         1
                                                                                             −1
                                                       −ρ               −   −ρ
                                                   e             1+η        e            1+η
        K2 = ln                              ρ/(ρ−1)                                                    ρ/(ρ−1)                            (53)
                                bη+1
                               Bp
                                 1
                                     −1
                                                                                         η+1
                                                                                         2
                                                                                          Bp  −1
                       e−ρ 1+η                                y 1 ρφ                −ρ
                                                                                                                          y 2 ρφ
                                                                                       1+η
                                                                                                                            
                                                                                    e
                                                                          −  
                                                                                                         
                        ρφ                                 y                        ρφ                               y
                          y1                                                         y2
                           y
                                    Y1ν eL1                                           y
                                                                                           Y2ν eL2



Simplifying and exponentiating:

                                                                    η+1
                                                               Bp
                                                                    2
                                                                        −1               bη+1
                                                                                        Bp
                                                                                          1
                                                                                              −1
                                                        −ρ                 −    −ρ
                                                       e            1+η         e            1+η
eK2 =                     !ρ/(ρ−1)                            ρ                                           !ρ/(ρ−1)                           ρ
                                                                                                                                                       (54)
                bη+1
               Bp    −1                                   − ρ−1                            Bp
                                                                                                  η+1
                                                                                                      −1                                  − ρ−1
                 1                                     y1 φ                                       2                                    y2 φ
                                                                                                                                  
          −ρ                                                                            −ρ
         e          1+η                  Y1ν eL1       y                  − e                     1+η                  Y2ν eL2         y



Candidate solutions to equation (54) must satisfy the requirement that prices ascend in the

same order as the Kj , implying p2 > pb1 . In addition, since the LHS of (54) is positive,

candidate values of p2 must yield a positive expression for the RHS. Denote the RHS by

R2 (p2 ). The numerator of R2 (p2 ) is positive for all p2 > pb1 . Thus, for admissible values of

p2 , the denominator must be positive. This in turn requires:




                                                                                              y2 φ
                                                                                                    
                                                                              ν L2
                                                            1+η            Y2 e              y
                               pη+1 < B pbη+1 −                 ln                                                                            (55)
                                                                                                   
                                2         1                                                   φ 
                                                             ρ       Y ν eL1                  y    1
                                                                                    1              y



                                                                                                                     y2 φ                     y1 φ
                                                                                                                                             
The Lj ascend in the same order as the Yjν and the y j . Thus, Y2ν eL2                                               y      > Y1ν eL1         y    .

In addition, by Assumption 2, − 1+η
                                 ρ > 0. Thus the right-hand side of equation (55) is




                                                                     42
greater than B pbη+1      x
                 1 . Let p2 solve:


                                                                                    1
                                                                  y2 φ
                                                                         
                                                                          η+1
                                                                   
                                                         ν L2
                                        1+η           Y2 e       y
                     px2 = B pbη+1 −       ln                                                                  (56)
                                                                      
                                1                                 φ 
                                         ρ       Y ν eL1          y  1
                                                          1          y



The range of potential solutions of equation (54) must satisfy p2 ∈ (p1 , px2 ). Note that

R2 (p2 ) is continuous on (p1 , px2 ), limp2 →pb1 R2 (p2 ) = 0, and limp2 →px2 R2 (p2 ) = ∞. This

establishes existence of a solution to equation (54).


   Let R2n (p2 ) and R2d (p2 ) be respectively the numerator and denominator of R2 (p2 ). Dif-

ferentiating R2 (p2 ) we obtain:


                                                dR2n (p2 )            dR2d (p2 )
                        dR2 (p2 )   R2d (p2 )     dp2      − R2n (p2 ) dp   2
                                  =                           2                                                 (57)
                          dp2                            d
                                                      R2 (p2 )


where


                                                              η+1
                            dR2n (p2 )             Bp
                                                 −ρ 21+η
                                                         −1
                                       = −ρBpη2 e           >0                                                   (58)
                              dp2



                                                   !ρ/(ρ−1) "                              ρ
                                          η+1                                       φ #− ρ−1
          dR2d (p2 )    ρ2         Bb
                                    p    −1
                                                                               y2
                                                                           
                                 −ρ 21+η
                     =     Bpη2 e                                Y2ν eL2                        <0               (59)
            dp2        ρ−1                                                     y


                                                                                                     dR2 (p2 )
The above conditions coupled with R2n (p2 ) > 0 and R2d (p2 ) > 0 imply that                           dp2       > 0.

This establishes uniqueness of the solution to equation (54).


   Completing the induction argument, suppose there is a unique (pbj , gbj ). Repeating the

preceding argument replacing subscripts 1 and 2 with j and j + 1 respectively then serves


                                                    43
to demonstrate that there exists a unique (pbj+1 , gbj+1 ).


    Given existence of unique (pbj , gbj ), j = 1, ..., J, tax rates are uniquely determined by

equation (49).             QED


    Computation of equilibrium: Our proof of equilibrium leads to a simple strategy for

computation of equilibrium. Given pb1 = 1, the following univariate nonlinear equation is

solved recursively for pb2 , pb3 ,..., pbJ .

                                                               η+1
                                                          Bp
                                                               j+1
                                                                   −1           bη+1
                                                                               Bp
                                                                                 j
                                                                                     −1
                                                     −ρ               −   −ρ
                                                     e         1+η        e         1+η
eKj =                         ρ                                                               ρ                                       (60)
               Bpbη+1
                  j
                      −1       ρ−1                       ρ
                                                y φ − ρ−1                   Bp
                                                                                    η+1
                                                                                    j+1
                                                                                        −1       ρ−1              y                ρ
                                                                                                                              φ − ρ−1
        e−ρ        1+η             Yjν eLj     j
                                                                 − e
                                                                          −ρ        1+η                 ν eLj+1
                                                                                                       Yj+1             j+1
                                                 y                                                                      y




Given the pbj , j = 1, ..., J, equation (52) yields unique values of gbj , j = 1, ..., J.


    Given the (pbj , gbj ), j = 1, ..., J, tax rates, tj , j = 1, ..., J, are obtained from the commu-

nity budget balance equation (49) above.




                                                                44
References

Arcidiacono, P. and Nickolson, S. (2005). Peer Effects in Medical Schools. Journal of Public Economics, 89,

      327–350.

Bajari, P. and Kahn, M. (2004). Estimating Housing Demand with an Application to Explaining Racial

      Segregation in Cities. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 23(1), 20–33.

Barr, J. and Davis, O. (1966). An Elementary Political and Economic Theory of Expenditures of State and

      Local Governments. Southern Economic Journal, 33 (2), 149–165.

Bayer, P., McMillan, R., and Reuben, K. (2004). The Causes and Consequences of Residential Segregation:

      An Equilibrium Analysis of Neighborhood Sorting. Working Paper.

Bayer, P. and Timmins, C. (2005). On the Equilibrium Properties of Locational Sorting Models. Journal of

      Urban Economics, 57, 462–77.

Benabou, R. (1993). Workings of a City: Location, Education, and Production. Quarterly Journal of

      Economics, 108, 619–652.

Bergstrom, T. and Goodman, R. (1973). Private Demands for Public Goods. American Economic Review,

      63, 280–296.

Bergstrom, T., Rubinfeld, D., and Shapiro, P. (1982). Micro-Based Estimates of Demand Functions for

      Local School Expenditures. Econometrica, 50, 1183–1205.

Betts, J. and Morell, D. (1999). The Determinants of Undergraduate GPA: The Relative Importance of

      Family Background, High School Resources, and Peer Group Effects. Journal of Human Resources,

      107, 797–817.

Bradbury, K. (1988). Shifting Property Tax Burdens in Massachusetts. New England Economic Review,

      Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.

Brock, W. and Durlauf, S. (2001). Discrete Choice with Social Interactions. Review of Economic Studies,

      68 (2), 235–260.




                                                    45
Cutler, D., Glaeser, E., and Vigdor, J. (1999). The Rise and Decline of the American Ghetto. Journal of

      Political Economy, 107, 455–506.

Dale, S. and Krueger, A. (1998). Estimating the Payoff to Attending a More Selective College: An Appli-

      cation of Selection on Observables and Unobservables. Working Paper.

deBartolome, C. (1990). Equilibrium and Inefficiency in a Community Model with Peer Group Effects.

      Journal of Political Economy, 98(1), 110–133.

Dunz, K. (1989). Some Comments on Majority Rule equilibria in Local Public Goods Economies. Journal

      of Economic Theory, 47, 228–234.

Durlauf, S. (1996). A Theory of Persistent Income Inequality. Journal of Economic Growth, 1, 75–93.

Epple, D., Filimon, R., and Romer, T. (1984). Equilibrium Among Local Jurisdictions: Towards an Inte-

      grated Approach of Voting and Residential Choice. Journal of Public Economics, 24, 281–304.

Epple, D., Filimon, R., and Romer, T. (1993). Existence of Voting and Housing Equilibrium in a System of

      Communities with Property Taxes. Regional Science and Urban Economics, 23, 585–610.

Epple, D. and Platt, G. (1998). Equilibrium and Local Redistribution in an Urban Economy when Households

      Differ in both Preferences and Incomes. Journal of Urban Economics, 43(1), 23–51.

Epple, D. and Romano, R. (1998). Competition Between Private and Public Schools, Vouchers and Peer

      Group Effects. American Economic Review, 88, 33–63.

Epple, D., Romano, R., and Sieg, H. (2004). Admission, Tuition, and Financial Aid Policies in the Market

      for Higher Education in Equilibrium. Working Paper.

Epple, D., Romer, T., and Sieg, H. (2001). Interjurisdictional Sorting and Majority Rule: An Empirical

      Analysis. Econometrica, 69, 1437–1465.

Epple, D. and Sieg, H. (1999). Estimating Equilibrium Models of Local Jurisdictions. Journal of Political

      Economy, 107 (4), 645–681.

Fernandez, R. and Rogerson, R. (1996). Income Distribution, Communities, and the Quality of Public

      Education. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111 (1), 135–164.



                                                   46
Ferreira, F. (2005). You Can Take It with You: Proposition 13 Tax Benefits, Residential Mobility, and

      Willingness to Pay for Housing Amenities. Working Paper.

Ferreyra, M. (2005). Estimating the Effects of Private School Vouchers in Multi-District Economies. Working

      Paper.

Gallant, R. (1997). An Introduction to Econometric Theory. Princeton University Press.

Hanushek, E., Kain, J., Markman, J., and Rivkin, S. (2000). Do Peers Affect Student Achievement? Working

      Paper.

Henderson, V., Mieszkowski, P., and Sauvageau, Y. (1978). Peer Group Effects and Educational Production

      Functions. Journal of Public Economics, 10, 97–106.

Hoxby, C. (2000). Peer Effects in the Classroom: Learning from Gender and Race Variation. Working Paper.

Manski, C. (1993). Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection Problem. Review of Economic

      Studies, 60, 531–542.

Moffitt, R. (2001). Policy Interventions, Low-level Equilibria, and Social Interactions. In Social Dynamics.

      MIT Press.

Nechyba, T. (1997). Local Property and State Income Taxes: the Role of Interjurisdictional Competition

      and Collusion. Journal of Political Economy, 105 (2), 351–84.

Nechyba, T. (2000). Mobility, Targeting and Private School Vouchers. American Economic Review, 90,

      130–146.

Poterba, J. (1992). Taxation and Housing: Old Questions, New Answers. American Economic Review, 82

      (2), 237–242.

Rothstein, J. (2004). Good Principals or Good Peers? Parental Valuation of School Characteristics, Tiebout

      Equilibrium, and the Incentive Effects of Competition Among Jurisdictions. Working Paper.

Rubinfeld, D., Shapiro, P., and Roberts, J. (1987). Tiebout Bias and the Demand for Local Public Schooling.

      Review of Economics and Statistics, 69, 426–437.

Sacerdote, B. (2001). Peer Effects with Random Assignment: Results from Dartmouth Roommates. Quar-

      terly Journal of Economics, 116(2), 681–704.


                                                     47
Sethi, R. and Somanathan, R. (2004). Inequality and Segregation. Journal of Political Economy, 112(6),

      1296–1322.

Sieg, H., Smith, V. K., Banzhaf, S., and Walsh, R. (2002). Interjurisdictional Housing Prices in Locational

      Equilibrium. Journal of Urban Economics, 50, 131–153.

Sieg, H., Smith, V. K., Banzhaf, S., and Walsh, R. (2004). Estimating the General Equilibrium Benefits

      of Large Changes in Spatially Delineated Public Goods. International Economic Review, 45 (4),

      1047–1077.

Summers, A. and Wolfe, B. (1977). Do Schools Make a Difference? American Economic Review, 67, 639–652.

Zimmerman, D. (2000). Peer Effects in Private and Public Schools: A Cross Country Empirical Analysis.

      Working Paper.




                                                    48
                      Table 1: Descriptive Statistics of the Sample

Variable                                 Mean                         Std. Deviation
Population size                          30036                            59719
Number of households                     10769                            23335
Mean incomea                             27402                            8024
Median incomea                           24108                            6481
Education expenditurea                    1479                             435
Property tax rateb                        0.031                           0.009
Median property valuea                   64923                            21515
Median gross renta                       314.35                           58.22
Fraction of renters                       0.28                             0.16
Table 1 provides summary statistics for the 92 communities in the Boston Metropolitan
Area in 1980. The notation   a   indicates that the value is per household. The notation   b


indicates that the variable is measured per dollar of value.




                                             49
                      Table 2: Estimation Results


                              I                       II
parameters             baseline model         extended model
µln(α)                     -2.622                   -2.643
                           (0.021)                  (0.017)
σln(α)                       0.1                      0.1
                             —–                      —–
B                           0.325                   0.175
                           (0.006)                  (0.007)
φ                            0.0                    2.623
                             —–                     (0.147)
likelihood function       -1360.92                  -996.51
R2 expenditures             0.680                   0.739
R2 rents                    0.786                   0.930
R2 taxes                   - 0.301                  0.728
Column I reports the estimates for the model without peer effects.
Column II reports the estimates for this model with peer effects.
Estimated standard errors are given in parentheses.




                                     50
                 Table 3: Mean Income and Age of Housing



                                 Coefficient                       t-statistic
Before 1939                       17186.66                            4.016
1940-49                            6892.59                            0.270
1950-59                           56489.98                            4.716
1960-69                           37179.83                            3.058
1970-80                           18513.01                            1.779
R2 = .26, J = 92.
This table reports the parameter estimates from a regression of mean income
against variables that reflect the proportion of houses built prior to 1940 and
the proportions built in each subsequent decade




                                      51
Figure 1: Residential Property Tax Revenue and Educational Expenditure per Household


                                               800




                                               700
expenditures and taxes (measured in dollars)




                                               600




                                               500




                                               400




                                               300




                                               200
                                                            10        20         30        40         50        60        70         80      90
                                                                                                comunity
                                                     Notation: — expenditures per household on education, - - property taxes per household
                                                     Communities are arrayed in order of increasing median household income.




                                                                                                52
                                                 Figure 2: Equalized Residential Tax on Imputed Rental Values




                                     0.6




                                     0.5
rental taxes (measured in percent)




                                     0.4




                                     0.3




                                     0.2




                                     0.1




                                      0
                                                 10         20        30         40       50         60         70   80   90
                                                                                   communities

                                           Communities are arrayed in order of increasing median household income.




                                                                                    53
                             Figure 3: Observed versus predicted Expenditures, Rents, and Taxes: Baseline Model

                                       3000




                                       2500
 expenditures (measured in dollars)




                                       2000




                                       1500




                                       1000




                                        500




                                             0
                                                         10          20      30         40         50       60        70        80        90
                                                                                             community

                                       11000


                                       10000


                                        9000


                                        8000
         rents (measured in dollars)




                                        7000


                                        6000


                                        5000


                                        4000


                                        3000


                                        2000


                                        1000


                                                 0
                                                            10         20      30        40         50       60        70        80       90
                                                                                              community




                                       0.6
tax rates (measured in percent)




                                       0.5




                                       0.4




                                       0.3




                                       0.2




                                       0.1
                                                       10         20        30         40         50       60         70        80        90
                                                                                            community

                                                 Notation: * actual, – predicted. Communities are arrayed in order of increasing median
                                                 household income.
                                                                                             54
                    Figure 4: Observed versus predicted Expenditures, Rents, and Taxes: Extended Model

                                       3000




                                       2500
 expenditures (measured in dollars)




                                       2000




                                       1500




                                       1000




                                        500




                                             0
                                                         10          20      30         40         50       60        70        80        90
                                                                                             community

                                       11000


                                       10000


                                        9000


                                        8000
         rents (measured in dollars)




                                        7000


                                        6000


                                        5000


                                        4000


                                        3000


                                        2000


                                        1000


                                                 0
                                                            10         20      30        40         50       60        70        80       90
                                                                                              community




                                       0.6
tax rates (measured in percent)




                                       0.5




                                       0.4




                                       0.3




                                       0.2




                                       0.1
                                                       10         20        30         40         50       60         70        80        90
                                                                                            community

                                                 Notation: * actual, – predicted. Communities are arrayed in order of increasing median
                                                 household income.
                                                                                             55
