                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            USING EXPERIMENTAL ECONOMICS TO MEASURE THE EFFECTS
              OF A NATURAL EDUCATIONAL EXPERIMENT ON ALTRUISM

                                              Eric Bettinger
                                              Robert Slonim

                                          Working Paper 11725
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11725


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2005




We are grateful for research support from James Carlson, Luke Coffman, Samir Dalia, Matthew Dellibovi,
Muhammid El-Zoghbi, Matt Ennis, Liz Falvo, Alissa Kumley, Stephen Leider, Rohit Reddy, Erin Riley and
Christine Uhlmansiek. We also thank Ellen Garbarino and Jim Rebitzer for many helpful comments on
earlier versions of this paper and seminar participants at Case Western Reserve University, the Education
Program at the NBER's Summer Institute 2002, the Midwestern Economic Association Meetings 2001, the
International Economic Science Association Meetings 2002, the Middlebury Conference on Field
Experiments 2003, and the Research Environment Development Series at Case Western Reserve University
2003. We greatly appreciate the financial support of The Armington Fund, The National Science Foundation
Grant No. 0214308, The Russell Sage Foundation, The Upjohn Institute, and The Weatherhead School of
Management. We also greatly appreciate Central Catholic High School in Toledo for use of their facilities.
Bettinger completed much of this research while a visiting scholar at the American Academy of Arts and
Sciences. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Eric Bettinger and Robert Slonim. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Using Experimental Economics to Measure the Effects of a Natural Educational Experiment on
Altruism
Eric Bettinger and Robert Slonim
NBER Working Paper No. 11725
October 2005
JEL No. I2, C9

                                       ABSTRACT
Economic research examining how educational intervention programs affect primary and secondary
schooling focuses largely on test scores although the interventions can affect many other outcomes.
This paper examines how an educational intervention, a voucher program, affected students'
altruism. The voucher program used a lottery to allocate scholarships among low-income applicant
families with children in K-8th grade. By exploiting the lottery to identify the voucher effects, and
using experimental economic methods, we measure the effects of the intervention on children's
altruism. We also measure the voucher program's effects on parents' altruism and several academic
outcomes including test scores. We find that the educational intervention positively affects students'
altruism towards charitable organizations but not towards their peers. We fail to find statistically
significant effects of the vouchers on parents' altruism or test scores.

Eric Bettinger
Weatherhead School of Management
Peter B. Lewis Building, RM 266
Case Western Reserve University
Cleveland, OH 44106-7235
and NBER
bettinger@cwru.edu

Robert Slonim
262 Peter B. Lewis Building
Department of Economics
Case Western Reserve University
11119 Bellflower Road
Cleveland, OH 44106-7235
robert.slonim@cwru.edu
                                                    I.        Introduction

Educational interventions can affect both academic and non-academic outcomes [Figlio and Ludwig

2000, Greene 2000, Angrist, Bettinger, Bloom, King, and Kremer 2002, Jacob and Lefgren 2003].

Test scores are certainly one of the more important measures of the success of an educational

intervention since they reflect academic achievement and potential future earnings [Levy, Murnane

and Willet 1995]. Yet, test scores are not the only measure of the success of an educational

intervention.1 Bowles, Gintis and Osborne [2001, pp. 158] argue that test scores are an imperfect

measure of the effects of schooling and that economists “need broader indicators of school success,

including measures based on the contribution of schooling to behavioral and personality traits.”

Heckman [2000, pp. 4] further argues that “[t]he preoccupation with cognition and academic

‘smarts’ as measured by test scores to the exclusion of social adaptability and motivation causes a

serious bias in the evaluation of human capital formation.” Indeed, if the effect of an educational

intervention on test scores and non-academic outcomes are not highly correlated, then educational

programs can be successful without ever affecting test scores.

     To understand the possible non-academic effects of educational interventions, this paper studies

the effect of a voucher program on altruism. We study the effect of this educational intervention on

altruism for several reasons. First, economists increasingly recognize the role altruism plays in the

economy. For example, altruism can generate positive externalities [Bergstrom, Blume and Varian,

1986; Andreoni 1988] and can positively influence capital accumulation, intergenerational transfers,

marriage, and the environment [e.g. Dynan et al. 2002, Andreoni et al. 2003, MacDonald and Koh

2003, Jouvet et al. 2000]. Second, research by economists [e.g. Harbaugh and Krause 2000] and


1
  For example, Angrist et al. [2002] evaluate the effect of educational vouchers on both test scores and additional outcomes such as
teen pregnancy and marriage rates; Figlio and Ludwig [2000] examine the effects of private schooling on teenage sexual activity and
drug use; Greene [2000] looks at the effects of private schooling on future voting; and Jacob and Lefgren [2003] examine the effects
of school holidays on juvenile crime. In addition, Becker [1993] noted that empirical evidence shows that more education, among
other outcomes, improves health, reduces smoking, increases voting and increases knowledge about birth control.


                                                                  1
psychologists [e.g. Bryan and Walbek 1968, Froming 1985] suggest that altruism is developing

among young school-age children. Third, schools and educational interventions such as the voucher

program we study may affect altruism. A school’s role in socialization may increase altruism by

teaching pupils to share and help others in their classroom, school and community. For instance,

both private and public schools claim to teach charity or altruism as part of their curriculum.2

Moreover, many educational initiatives provide free or discounted charitable services to students and

their families which may affect students’ subsequent level of altruism by increasing a sense of

reciprocity to society due to the programs’ charitable services.

      Even though educational interventions can affect the development of altruism (and other non-

academic outcomes), economists continue to primarily use test scores as the central metric of their

success. This is especially the case for educational voucher programs where research has largely

focused on whether voucher winners' test scores improve relative to some control group [Rouse

1998, Myers, Peterson, Mayer, Chou, and Howell 2000, Angrist et al. 2002, Krueger and Zhu

2003].3 In the case of vouchers, this focus on test scores is easy to understand. Test scores are

relatively inexpensive to collect and, with the advent of high-stakes testing, they are the primary

metric by which the federal and most state governments judge schools. However, the focus on test

scores seems at odds with voucher proponents’ claims that greater choice is justifiable by the fact

that non-academic outcomes and programs (e.g. safety, discipline, peers or curricula that promote

health or a specific moral code) influence parents' educational decisions for their children [Harrison

and Kennison 1993]. While we concur that test scores are important and provide some estimates of

2
  Almost all of the private schools in our sample are Catholic, and in our pilot study interviews, private school principals claimed that
their schools teach children to be "charitable." Additionally, many public schools also attempt to teach altruism through such
programs as "Character Counts" (http://www.charactercounts.org/) or other "character education" initiatives (e.g. Williams, Yanchar,
Jensen, Lewis 2003).
3
  Most voucher programs use randomization to allocate vouchers. The research to date takes advantage of this randomization to
estimate the effects of the voucher. Most studies, like this one, focus on the reduced form effect of the voucher since voucher
programs often affect several facets of students' lives (e.g. private schooling, motivation, income). We discuss this further in Section
3 of this paper.


                                                                    2
the effect of a voucher program on children, given the importance of altruism and its development

and given the claims that vouchers may affect non-academic behaviors including altruism [Greene

1998], we investigate the effects of vouchers on altruism.

      Measuring children’s altruism is not without difficulty, however, since economists typically

measure altruism through gifts that are observable in adults, e.g., through household surveys or tax

records, but that are typically unobservable in children. Fortunately, economists have developed

laboratory methods to help measure and quantify altruism. Specifically, economists have developed

“dictator” games [e.g., Hoffman, McCabe and Smith 1996] to present subjects with situations in

which they can exhibit altruism [Eckel and Grossman 1996, 1998]. Besides testing theory and

quantifying altruism, these experiments study the determinants of altruism such as gender, race, age,

deservingness of recipients, social distance and the relative costs of altruism [e.g., Andreoni and

Vesterlund 2001, Eckel and Grossman 1998, Harbaugh and Krause 2000].4 Using similar methods,

we measure the effect of vouchers on altruism. Thus, this paper measures the effect of an

educational intervention on altruism and presents a novel use for the experimental economic

laboratory to assess policy intervention.5

      Our use of laboratory experiments in a field setting extends recent efforts by economists. For

example, experimental laboratory methods have been used in the field to study discrimination

[Fershtman and Gneezy 2001 and List 2004], discount rates [Eckel, Johnson and Montmarquette

2005 and Harrison, Lau and Williams 2002], social capital [Karlan 2003], auction theory [List and



4
  Studying altruism using decision-making experiments is also potentially beneficial compared to survey methods since research
shows that respondents tend to overestimate their charitable contributions [Fehr et al. 2003]. Additionally, psychologists have studied
reciprocity and generosity in children for decades, with experimental studies demonstrating that children share with "charities"
without receiving external rewards for their generosity [e.g. Midlarsky and Bryan 1967].
5
  Of course, economists frequently use natural and randomized field experiments, such as negative income tax and audit studies, to
examine economic phenomena. The distinction made here is the laboratory setting. The laboratory setting not only allows us to
measure outcomes of interest in populations in which the outcomes would otherwise be hard to observe, but also allows us to measure
the outcomes quickly, which is perhaps a relatively more important concern for policy makers than for researchers.



                                                                  3
Lucking-Reiley 2000 and Lucking-Reiley 1999] and charitable giving [List and Lucking-Reiley

2002]. We extend this line of laboratory field research to test an intervention program.

     Data for this research come from the Children’s Scholarship Fund (CSF) of Toledo, Ohio. CSF

offers 4-year renewable, private school scholarships to K-8th grade students in Northwest Ohio. To

be eligible, students must qualify for federal reduced/free lunch programs. In 1998, almost 2,500

families applied for CSF scholarships, and CSF awarded more than 1,500 scholarships by lottery.6

Within this population, we use experimental economic methods to compare levels of altruism

between voucher lottery winners and losers. We also use similar methods to measure altruism of

parents whose children applied for scholarships. Gathering the same experimental data for both

parents and children allows us to detect the extent to which family background versus the

educational intervention affects the children’s altruism. Further, the extent to which children’s

behavior is correlated with parental outcomes is of interest itself.

     We find that voucher lottery winners were more altruistic towards charitable organizations than

unsuccessful applicants: voucher winners gave over 20 percent (or about $0.75/$3.33) more than

losers to charitable organizations. This increased altruism, however, does not extend to greater

generosity to peers. We also find that parent’s altruism does not explain children’s altruism. Similar

to some past studies [e.g. Krueger and Zhu 2003], we find little evidence that voucher winners have

significantly higher test scores although the estimated effects on test scores are noisy. Finally, we

find that test scores and altruism are not correlated. These latter two findings (that vouchers

significantly affect altruism and that test scores are uncorrelated with altruism) suggest that studies

focusing exclusively on test scores may understate the overall impact of an educational intervention

program.


6
 The national office of CSF controlled the application process. In Northwest Ohio, the scholarships were advertised through radio,
newspaper, and television advertisements.



                                                                 4
                                      II.       Experimental Protocols and Data

     We focus on the sample of applicants to the Children's Scholarship Fund of Toledo (CSF) in

1998. CSF offers 4-year, renewable, private school scholarships to low-income families in

Northwest Ohio. To be eligible, students had to qualify for federal reduced/free lunch programs and

either be entering or attending elementary or junior high school. Scholarships are renewable so long

as students attend private school. We focus on the 2,424 families who applied for scholarships in

1998.7 CSF partitioned this group into two parts: those who had self-reported that at least one child

was attending private school at the time of the lottery (1,265) and those who had none in private

schools (1,159). CSF held separate lotteries for each group. We refer to these lotteries as the

"private" and "public” school lottery. If a family won the lottery, all children were eligible to use the

voucher. For each child using the voucher, the voucher would pay for one-half of the private school

tuition. The random assignment of scholarships facilitates identification by allowing us to use

unsuccessful applicants as a comparison/control group for the scholarship winners.

     We attempted to contact a random sample of 438 families representing almost 900 children.

We attempted to survey and invite this sample to attend an "evaluation event" where we conducted

our experiments, administered a standardized test (California Achievement Test) and administered

an additional survey to parents.8


A. Experimental Protocols for Altruism




7
  The program was small enough relative to the size of Toledo's public schools that it likely did not affect the neighboring public
school system. In years before and after 1998 the number of scholarships CSF offered was substantially smaller than in 1998, thus we
focus on the 1998 sample.
8
  Angrist et al. [2002] and Myers et al. [2000] gathered test score data at similar events. We also gathered data on time-preferences
and self-confidence and these other measures are discussed in Bettinger and Slonim [2004] and Slonim and Bettinger [2005],
respectively. Appendix 1 describes the data collection procedures in more detail.




                                                                 5
     To measure altruism, we had all subjects make decisions in six “dictator” games.9 For the first

three, we matched subjects to different non-profit organizations: The American Red Cross, The

Make-A-Wish Foundation and The Children’s Scholarship Fund. We used three organizations to

control for the possibility that different degrees of personal association can influence generosity (for

instance, greater personal association may cause greater reciprocity). In each decision, children

were endowed with $10 (in Toys-R-Us gift certificates) and parents were endowed with $50 in cash.

After reading instructions aloud and reviewing a brief written description of each organization,

including a simplified version for children, subjects chose how much of their endowment to keep for

themselves and how much to give to the organization.10 Appendix 2 shows the decision sheet and

description of each charity we presented to the students. Eckel and Grossman [1996 and 2003] and

Eckel, Grossman and Johnston [2005] use a similar pairing of college students with charitable

organizations to measure other determinants of altruism.11

     In the last three dictator games, we again endowed children with $10 in gift certificates and

parents with $50 in cash. In each of these decisions, each subject chose how much of the

endowment to keep and how much to give to another person. Any amount given was multiplied by

an exchange rate before being given to the other person. The exchange rate varied from 50 percent

(so each dollar given became $0.50 to the other person) to 100 percent and then to 150 percent. The

recipient of the amount given away (i.e., the other person) was another child at the event for the

children and another parent at the event for the parents. At the end of the session we randomly and

anonymously selected who these recipients would be. Subjects did not know who they would be

9
  The decision-making protocols for the generosity measures were adapted from Harbaugh and Krause [2000].
10
   To maximize the likelihood that the subjects believed we would send the organization the money, we had envelopes prepared. We
also gave subjects the option to receive a “thank you” letter from the organization.
11
   We verified that parents felt that benefits from the charitable organizations went to deserving people. At the completion of the
decision-making exercises we had parents (in the survey) respond on a scale from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree) to the
statement “(t)he recipients of the [charitable organization name] are deserving of support.” For the Red Cross, Make-A-Wish and
Children’s Scholarship Fund, the average responses were 4.72, 4.80 and 4.79, respectively and only 3.4 percent of respondents
assessed the deservingness of these organizations less than 4.



                                                                 6
paired with at the time of the decision, nor did they ever find out. We did not collect this generosity-

to-other-children measure in sessions with fewer than 5 children. To control for wealth effects, at

the end of each session we randomly selected approximately one parent and one child per every five

attendees and paid them for one of the decisions they made.12 To avoid experimenter bias, during

the sessions the experimenters did not know whether subjects were voucher lottery winners or

losers.13

      We examine the amounts given to the three specific organizations to potentially capture

different aspects of altruism. Generosity to charities often comes from an appreciation for non-profit

organizations’ goals and especially the neediness of the recipients that the organizations attempt to

help. However, direct and/or indirect reciprocity can also be a motivation to give to non-profit

organizations. Thus, among the three charities that we included in the experiment, we include the

Children's Scholarship Fund – the same organization that gives the scholarships. Comparison of

amount given to each organization between lottery winners and losers will allow us to partially

distinguish between the amounts given being motivated by the organizations’ goals and the amounts

given being motivated by reciprocity.14

      We further examine the two constructs of amount given to charities and amount given to peers

to capture additional dimensions of altruism. Economists recognize that individuals may show

different levels of altruism to charities than they show to peers: for instance, Eckel and Grossman

12
   Wealth effects in an experimental context occur when payments made to a given subject in an early decision impact their behavior
in subsequent decisions. The experimental economics literature extensively discusses the use of a random selection mechanism to
control for wealth effects [e.g., Davis and Holt, 1993]. The idea is that by being paid for a random subset of decisions, or just one,
subjects anticipated wealth for a given decision, based on all other decisions, is essentially identical, thus placing them at the same
point on their utility curves.
13
   All data was collected single blind (subjects did not know the research objectives) and single anonymous (subjects did not know
any other subject’s choices).
14
   In all sessions, we presented the charities in the same order – American Red Cross, Children's Scholarship Fund, and then Make-A-
Wish Foundation. While this ordering may have influenced students' donations to individual charities, the ordering was symmetric
across winners and losers of the voucher lottery. Hence, the ordering should not bias the estimates of the differences between winners
and losers, though it may skew some comparisons of overall donations across the three charities. We will find that students give
slightly more (marginally significant) to Make-A-Wish than CSF, which could be due to differences in the perceived deservingness of
the charities, or possibly due to the order in which the Make-A-Wish decision came before the CSF decision.


                                                                  7
[1996] show that college students give more to a non-profit organization than to peers in anonymous

dictator games. While generosity to charities may come from an appreciation for non-profit

organizations’ goals, generosity to peers may come from concern for fairness [e.g., Fehr and

Schmidt 1999, Bolton and Ockenfels 2000]; for example, people may be motivated to give to peers

who are less fortunate than themselves to reduce a loss of utility from inequitable outcomes. Giving

to peers therefore captures an element of altruism motivated by concern for others and/or for fairness

whereas giving to charities captures an element of altruism motivated by concern for non-profit

organizations’ goals. Thus, vouchers lottery winners may demonstrate greater altruism differentially

across the amounts given to each charity and/or give different amounts to the charities than to peers

depending on the relative importance of the voucher programs’ influence on each dimension of

altruism.


B. Descriptive Statistics

    Table 1 shows descriptive statistics for the 2,424 families who applied to CSF in 1998. In the

public school lottery, successful applicants (lottery winners) had statistically similar household sizes

and proportions of children previously attending a private school, but averaged about $2,200 less

income. While the income difference at the means is significant, the difference between the medians

is not significant and is only about $600. A few outlier observations cause the difference in means.

    As we mentioned earlier, the public lottery included families where no child was enrolled in

private school at the time of the lottery while the private lottery included any family with at least one

child currently enrolled in private school. This division between families with previous private

school experiences and those without was not a perfect sorting. As Table 1 shows, about 10 percent

of the public school lottery had at least one child who was attending private school prior to the

lottery. These "leakages" occurred because at the beginning of the application process, some phone



                                                   8
workers assigned families to the public school lottery if at least one of their children was currently

attending public school. These incorrectly assigned families participated in the public school lottery

but were not more likely than other public school lottery winners to have won the voucher lottery.

        In our pilot data collection, we found that the voucher had little effect on private school

attendance among students in the private school lottery. In fact, almost all of the applicants attended

private school at the time of the lottery. If one objective of the voucher program is to change

attendance from public to private school, then focusing on the lottery among the private school

attendees would not yield a true treatment since they were all already attending private schools. In

our sample, we include a small number of these students because they may help us distinguish

between possible mechanisms for the voucher to have affected students. However, since we are

primarily interested in measuring the effects of the voucher on students who may have changed from

public to private schools, our attempted survey and experimental sample focused largely on families

from the public school lottery (390 of the 438).

        For the preliminary survey, we contacted a majority of families by phone, mail, and household

visits between March and October 2001.15 Our survey response rate in the public school lottery was

61 and 67 percent for unsuccessful and successful applicants, respectively. This was much higher

than anticipated since our contact information was 3 to 4 years old and was especially higher than

anticipated given that more than 25 percent of the sample had moved during these 3 to 4 years.

Moreover, the response rate is similar (if not better) than other voucher studies: for instance, Angrist

et al. [2002] report a response rate of 52 percent for students contacted after 3 years and Myers et al.

[2000] reports a 65 percent response rate after 2 years. The 67 and 61 percent response rates across

voucher winners and losers are symmetric (i.e., statistically identical), thus increasing the likelihood

of the internal consistency of the estimates of the voucher effect [Angrist 1997]. Further, we find no
15
     The complete protocol (attempts, contact methods, resources for locating addresses) is available upon request from the authors.



                                                                     9
significant differences between winners who responded and winners who did not and we find no

significant differences between losers who responded and losers who did not.

      Table 1 shows that 39 percent of unsuccessful families were single parent homes in the public

school lottery, 23 percent had one parent who graduated from college and that African-Americans

made up 57 percent of the sample. Race is the only variable in Table 1 that suggests differences

between lottery winners and losers. There were a lower proportion of blacks among winners who

responded than among losers who responded. This cannot be the result of non-random voucher

assignment, however, since CSF did not collect information on race prior to the lottery.16 The

difference is possibly due to some non-response pattern in our survey. We control for race

throughout our empirical results to control for this difference.

      Table 2 shows student characteristics among the surveyed families. We surveyed the parents of

471 students of which 218 had not won the voucher lottery. On average, these students were 10

years old, in the fourth grade, and just over half were female. Column 2 compares the differences

between lottery winners and losers. There are no significant differences between lottery winners and

losers in age, gender or grade, but consistent with the data in Table 1, African-American voucher

winners were less likely to respond than African-American lottery losers.

      Columns 3 and 4 of Table 2 compare students who attended our “evaluation events.” Students

who attended were insignificantly younger than those not attending, and African-Americans were

more likely to attend. Column 5 reports the differences among winners and losers who attended. As

before, African-American lottery winners were less likely than African-American lottery losers to

attend the event, and we had more representation from winners than losers in the private school

lottery.

16
  Since CSF observed names, they may have been able to discriminate by observing distinctively African-American names; however,
the magnitude of CSF's operation makes this discrimination unlikely (e.g., Bertrand and Mullianathan 2004). CSF had over 1.25
million applicants nationwide in 1998 and had only one person to manage the lists and conduct the selection lotteries for all their sites.


                                                                   10
                                  III.      Voucher Effects on Academic Outcomes

      Before reporting the voucher effects on altruism, we show estimates of the voucher effects on

educational outcomes and the correlations between educational outcomes and altruism. The effect

on educational outcomes from the intervention provides comparison to previous studies. The

correlation between educational outcomes and altruism provides an indicator of whether educational

outcomes may be sufficient statistics for the voucher program's broader effects.

      Throughout the paper, we estimate the effect of the "intention to treat" rather than the effect of

the "treatment on the treated" (i.e. the effect of using the voucher) or the effect of private schooling.

The "intention to treat" is often referred to as the effect of receiving the voucher, and to measure the

effect, we compared outcomes of lottery winners and losers, even if the winners declined the

scholarship. Besides being perhaps the parameter of most interest to policymakers [Rouse 1998],

the "intention to treat" is one effect for which we can produce an unbiased estimate. 17 Because of

randomization, simple t-test comparisons of voucher winners and losers can identify the effects of

the voucher [Angrist and Krueger 1999]. We also use the following regression to assess the effects

of the voucher:

(1)        yi = α + β (WonVoucher )i + γX i + ε i

where yi is an outcome for student i and Xi includes controls for race, gender, age, family income,

house size, and whether the family was part of the private school lottery. Throughout the tables, we

report standard errors that correct for correlation across siblings.

17
   The “intention to treat” parameter is not the only parameter of interest to policy-makers or researchers. The effect of the "treatment
on the treated" estimates the effect of voucher usage on student outcomes. Unbiased estimation of the effect of the "treatment on the
treated" requires that we compare winners who took up the voucher to losers who would have taken up the voucher had they been
offered. Since unobservable characteristics may determine take-up, creating an appropriate control group may be implausible, and
any estimates that we may generate of this effect would not be defensible without additional information. Economists have also long
been interested in estimating the effects of private school [e.g. Neal 1997]. Some have debated whether vouchers may facilitate
identification of the effect of private schools [e.g. Rouse 1998, Angrist et. al 2002]. While vouchers may affect the likelihood of
attending private schooling, it still may not be a suitable instrument since winning a voucher lottery may affect students' outcomes for
reasons other than the voucher (e.g. income effects, reciprocity to charities).


                                                                   11
      Table 3 reports estimates of Equation 1 on academic outcomes. The first two rows show the

effects that the voucher had on the type of school that students attended. At the time of our survey

3-4 years after applications were made, 21 percent of unsuccessful voucher applicants were

attending private school. The voucher intervention increased private school attendance by an

additional almost 23 percent. This effect is highly significant. We also find significantly less

voucher winners than losers were suspended. Fewer voucher winners being suspended may be a

positive outcome but may also be due to differences in public/private school disciplinary policies

and thus may not be a "true" change in behavior. We also find no evidence that voucher winners

were more or less likely to have repeated a grade.

      Table 3 also shows results for the mathematics exams administered to most of the event

participants.18 We administered exams and computed the normal curve equivalents for each student

on each exam. Because we have a small sample size, we "stack" the test scores creating two

observations for most of our sample. Students scored on average in the 48th percentile with a

standard deviation of 23 percentage points. When we compare test scores without controlling for

student covariates, we find that voucher winners scored just under one percentage point higher.

With covariates, students who won the voucher lottery score an insignificant 0.11 percentage points

higher than unsuccessful applicants. The standard error bands are generous on these estimates

because of the small sample size and we cannot rule out test score effects that may be positive or

negative and as large as 1/3 of a standard deviation in magnitude. Nonetheless, the test score results

are qualitatively consistent to those found in voucher studies from New York City [Mayer, Peterson,

Myers, Tuttle, and Howell 2002, Myers et. al 2000, Krueger and Zhu 2003] where no significant test

score effects were detected.

18
  There were 212 students who actually attended the "evaluation events." These events lasted up to 2.5 hours and several families left
before the test administration. In the initial events, we also did not anticipate a need for tests for students above 7th grade. We were
thus unable to test a few students who came to these initial events.



                                                                  12
      A typical voucher study might stop at this point. We found no significant effects on test scores.

Thus, if test scores are a sufficient statistic for all outcomes of interest, then we need not proceed

further. However, this is not the case. If test scores were a sufficient statistic for other outcomes,

then we should see test scores correlate with outcomes even if there is a "true" test score effect that

is not measurable because of our small sample size. When we compare student test scores to our

measures of altruism, we find small correlations. The correlation between students’ math scores and

the amount they give to the Red Cross, the Make-a-Wish Foundation, and the Children's Scholarship

Fund are only .06, .06, and .09 respectively. The correlations with the three measures of giving to

their peers are all slightly negative at -.02, -.01, and -.13. Thus, test scores are not a sufficient

statistic for our measures of generosity, and the next section explores the extent to which vouchers

may affect students' altruism.


                                            IV. Voucher Effects on Altruism

      Table 4a presents OLS regressions that show the determinants of the amount children give to

charitable organizations and to each other. The dependent variable is the amount that a student gives

to the respective entity. The first three columns report estimates of Equation 1 where the dependent

variable is the amount given to the respective charity. Columns 4 and 5 report the effects of vouchers

when we "stack" the regressions across the charities.19 Column 6 reports the estimated amount

given to peers. We report the means for the voucher lottery losers in the first row.

      On average, voucher lottery winners give 40 percent ($1.19/$3.00) more to the Red Cross than

voucher lottery losers, and likewise 14 percent ($0.52/$3.73) and 22 percent ($0.71/$3.27) more to

Make-A-Wish and CSF, respectively. Averaging across all three charities, voucher winners give 23

percent ($.75/$3.33) more than voucher losers. Controlling for the covariates, we find that winning

19
   In the stacked regressions, we include dummy variables for the respective charities. As before, we control for correlation across
siblings.



                                                                  13
the voucher significantly increases giving to the Red Cross (t=2.66, p=.009). The voucher also has a

positive though insignificant effect on giving to Make-A-Wish and the Children's Scholarship Fund

(CSF: t=1.43, p=.157; Make-A-Wish: t=0.99, p=.322). Column 4 shows that in the “stacked”

regressions voucher lottery winners give a marginally significant amount more than voucher lottery

losers (t=1.77, p=.076). When we control for the size of the child's parental contribution to the same

charity in the stacked regression (Column 5), we find that the estimated voucher effect slightly

increases from 0.75 to 0.78 and is slightly more significant (t=1.87, p=.061).

    The final column of Table 4a shows the determinants of how much children gave to other

children. In contrast to the amounts children gave to the charitable organizations, we fail to find a

significant effect of the voucher on the amount children gave to each other. The point estimate is

negative, close to zero and statistically insignificant. This result suggests that the reason lottery

winners gave more to charities is not motivated solely by a concern for fairness.

    The estimates in Table 4a also present results that previously have been undocumented as well

as other results that we can compare to past studies for robustness. Previously undocumented, we

find a positive but insignificant relationship between parental and child giving to charities and peers

in the stacked regressions (Columns 5 and 6). This relationship is marginally significant for the

amount that children give to the Red Cross and is directionally positive for the amount children give

to Make-A-Wish and CSF.

    To validate our measures, we compare coefficients presented in Table 4a with those examined

by other researchers in similar experiments. Our age and gender estimates on giving are consistent

with results reported in Harbaugh et al. [2000]; older children give more (significantly to the




                                                    14
charities) and boys give less (significantly to their peers).20 The current data thus show that

Harbaugh et al.’s results, which focus on a relatively suburban white population, are robust to our

sample consisting of a majority of urban African-American children. Also, similar to the behavior

of college students reported in Eckel and Grossman [1996], we find that children in first through

eleventh grade, as well as their parents, give more to charities than to peers. For instance,

aggregating across voucher winners and losers, we find that children on average gave $3.77 (38

percent) of their $10 endowment to the charities but only $2.61 (26 percent) to other children.

Regressions (not shown) indicate that these differences are highly significant. Finally, similar to

college student’s behavior reported in Andreoni and Vesterlund [2001], we find that the exchange

rate has a negative but insignificant affect on the amount children give to their peers. These

comparisons indicate that our measures are externally valid with, and provide robustness to, the

previous experimental evidences on the determinants of altruism with different populations.

     In Table 4b, we test alternative specifications for the robustness of these results. These estimates

of the stacked regressions are based on ordered probits and tobits. These approaches are more

parametric in nature and thus may have advantages over the OLS estimates. The ordered probit

model may capture the fact that increasing one's contribution by $1 may have a different

significance when, for instance, the base contribution was $0 as opposed to $9. The tobit model may

capture the fact that students could not give more than $10 or less than $0: in students' overall

generosity, there may be censoring relative to the range we assign in the experiment.

     In all specifications, OLS, ordered probits and tobits, we find similar results. We find

significant effects of the voucher on students' gifts to charities. The marginal effects in the tobit

model are even larger than the marginal effects reported in Table 4a.

20
  Harbaugh, et al. [2002] report regressions that do and do not control for height. The lower generosity of boys disappears when they
control for height. However, since we did not measure height, we compare our results to those in which the previous study also did
not control for height.



                                                                 15
              V. Discussion: Mechanisms for the Observed Voucher Effect on Altruism

     We found that voucher winners give more to charities than voucher losers but not more to peers.

These reduced-form findings tell us the net impact of the voucher program (i.e., the effect of the

"intention-to-treat”). These effects may have been caused by several potential mechanisms. While

the voucher program we investigated was not designed to identify a particular mechanism, we can

speculate on a few possible mechanisms as a guide to future research and program design.21

Previous research discusses a variety of mechanisms by which vouchers may affect students

including private schooling [Rouse 1998], student incentives [Angrist et al. 2002], peer effects

[Hsieh and Urquiola 2003], and income shocks [Angrist et al. 2002]. In addition, mechanisms such

as reciprocity and inequity aversion [Bolton and Ockenfels 2000 and Fehr and Schmidt 1999] may

also explain these reduced-form findings. The voucher program we investigated allows us to

consider three of these possible mechanisms: private schooling, reciprocity, and inequity aversion.


Private Schooling

     Private schooling is one potential way the voucher may have affected students. Voucher

recipients were twice as likely to attend private school as a result of the voucher. Identifying the

effect of private school is difficult since selection bias precludes direct comparisons of voucher

lottery participants who attended or did not attend private school. Even if we had data for other

private school students who may appear similar to lottery participants but who did not apply for

vouchers, there may be unobserved characteristics that led to the application for the voucher lottery

(e.g. parental motivation).




21
  Most voucher research provides little discussion of the possible mechanisms because of the difficulty in identifying an unbiased
estimate of the effects of a specific mechanism [e.g. Angrist et al. 2002].


                                                                 16
      We can test, however, whether private schools is the only mechanism by which the voucher had

an effect. To conduct this test, recall that some students were already attending private school prior

to the voucher lottery. If the voucher lottery did not affect the future likelihood of attending private

school among these students, and private schooling is the only mechanism through which the

voucher affected behavior, then among these students winning the voucher lottery should have no

effect.

      To proceed, recall that CSF conducted two lotteries – one among families with children

currently enrolled in private school and another among families without children enrolled in private

school. Among the families in the "private lottery," most students continued to attend (77 percent of

losers, 82 percent of winners, t-stat on difference equals 0.53). Thus, the voucher lottery did not

affect the likelihood of private school attendance among applicants in the "private lottery." Further,

there were also a small number of participants who were in the public school lottery but had

previous private school experience and should have participated in the private lottery. The voucher

had no effect on their private school attendance patterns either. Among these "previously private

school" applicants, voucher winners experienced a modest income shock (½-tuition per child in

private school) and the voucher may have affected their feelings toward reciprocity or inequity

aversion (discussed below).22 However, if private school is the only driving force behind the

voucher effect, then we would expect to see no effect of the voucher among these students since

there is no difference in private school attendance patterns for them.

      We examine this hypothesis by regressing the amount students gave against voucher status

identical to the regressions presented in Table 4a except we examine only the students who had been

attending private school prior to the voucher lottery. In these regressions (with 43 students and 27


22
  The ½ tuition savings averaged $1,141. There is also no evidence that voucher winners "traded up" to more expensive private
schools. Almost all the voucher winners in this group continued to attend the same private school they attended prior to the lottery.


                                                                  17
families), we find positive effects of the voucher. In the stacked regressions without covariates, the

voucher effect on giving to charities is positive (1.60) but not significant (t=1.38, p=.167). In the

stacked regressions with covariates, the effect is positive (2.16) and significant (t-stat=2.17, p=.030).

These results suggest that private schooling cannot be the sole force behind our reduced-form

results. At least among these students there are other mechanisms driving the effects of the voucher.

There still could be a private school effect that raised donations for the students who were not

previously in private schools, but other mechanisms besides, or in addition to, private schooling may

be driving differences in the amounts given to charities among these voucher winners and losers.

    In sum, our results cannot reject or confirm that there is a private schooling effect. It can,

however, establish that other factors besides, or in addition to, private schooling are present.


Reciprocity

    One of these other mechanisms by which the voucher affected students may be the result of

voucher winners reciprocating the gift received from the Children's Scholarship Fund. If the amount

children gave is motivated by reciprocity to the non-profit organizations, then we might expect the

largest increase in the amount given by lottery winners than lottery losers to occur for CSF since this

would be direct reciprocity (to the organization that provided them with the scholarship) whereas the

amount given to the Red Cross and Make-A-Wish would be indirect reciprocity. Past research

generally finds that direct reciprocity is greater than indirect reciprocity (see Bolton, Katok and

Ockenfels 2004 and references therein). However, Table 4a shows that the estimated mean

additional amount that lottery winners gave to the Red Cross and Make-A-Wish {$0.85

[=($1.19+$0.51)/2]} is greater than the additional amount lottery winners gave to CSF ($0.71).

Further, among voucher winners, the average donation to CSF was nominally smaller but not

statistically different from their donations to Make-A-Wish or the Red Cross. Moreover, among the



                                                   18
students who were already attending private schools, the estimated effect is nearly identical for the

additional amount given to each charity by voucher winners than voucher losers. These results

suggest that if reciprocity is the motivation explaining why lottery winners gave more to charities,

then the students did not make a distinction between direct and indirect reciprocity.

    If there is no distinction between direct and indirect reciprocity, but reciprocity is a mechanism

for the voucher effect for the charities, then another potential way to test for reciprocity is to

examine the effect of the voucher on parental giving since parents were not exposed to the schooling

but yet were beneficiaries of the charity. This strategy implicitly assumes that parents and children

have a similar psychology of giving.

    Table 5 reports the stacked regressions on the effects of the voucher for parents’ choices. In this

case, we find no significant effects of the voucher on the amount parents gave to charities or peers.

The point estimates on the amount that parents gave to the charities is in fact negative in the OLS

and ordered probit specifications, but insignificant (p > .20). If the psychology of giving is similar

for parents and children, then the fact that voucher winning parents did not respond by giving more

money to charities like the students responded suggests two possible explanations. First, student’s

altruism may be more malleable than adults. This explanation is consistent with the literature

suggesting altruism is still developing during these student years [e.g. Bryan and Walbek 1968,

Froming 1985, Harbaugh and Krause 2000]. Second, the voucher effect in children is more likely

the result of some other voucher mechanism than reciprocation for being voucher lottery winners.

    A final reciprocity explanation might be that the reduced-form voucher effect is driven by

lowering the losers' level of reciprocity rather than by increasing the winners’ level of reciprocity.

For instance, voucher lottery losers may have sought to "punish" CSF for having not selected them

and consequently caused them to give less. This punishment theory, however, seems unlikely for a




                                                    19
few reasons. First, if voucher lottery losers were punishing CSF, we would expect them to give the

least to CSF; however, voucher losers gave more to CSF than to the Red Cross. Second, this theory

would require that applicants remember losing the voucher lottery. However, when we interviewed

applicants (the parents), we asked them if they remembered applying and whether they won or not,

and over 2/3 of voucher lottery losers did not recall the process of applying nor did they recall

whether they had lost the voucher lottery. This is not too surprising given it was extremely easy to

apply; families only needed to call a toll-free number and answer a short set of questions. Further,

after applying families only received communication from CSF if they won. Given that more than

2/3 of parents did not recall applying, it seems perhaps even less likely that children would recall

losing the lottery 3 to 4 years before our sessions were run. For these reasons, it seems unlikely that

the losing the voucher lottery caused less charitable actions.

    In sum, we cannot find evidence that the voucher effect was due to direct rather than indirect

reciprocity (i.e. the voucher effect did not have the biggest affect in the amount given to CSF);

however, we cannot reject that the voucher effect arises from indirect reciprocity (i.e. giving to

charities in general versus only to CSF). Further, we argued that if reciprocity is the cause of the

reduced-form results, it is unlikely to be due to negative reciprocity of voucher losers decreasing the

amount they gave.


Inequity Aversion

    Another possible explanation for increased gifts by voucher winners may be that voucher

winners attempted to reduce negative utility due to inequity aversion [e.g., Bolton and Ockefels

2000 or Fehr and Schmidt 1999]; inequity aversion implies that individual i receives utility ui(xi, xj)

from outcomes to themselves, xi, and person j, xj, such that ui is increasing in their own outcomes xi

but decreasing in inequity |xi-xj|. If participants' utility of their own outcome is concave and they are



                                                   20
better off than the receiver of their giving, then to reduce the negative effect of inequity on utility,

participants would give more to others the better off they are and the worse off the recipients are.

There is some support for inequity aversion in our data. For instance, inequity averse subjects would

give less money to their peers as the exchange rate increased to reduce the inequity of the outcomes.

Consistent with this prediction, we found a negative though insignificant decrease in the amount

given to others as the exchange rate increased.23 Further, inequity averse subjects would also be

expected to give more money to charities than to peers if the recipients of the charities are perceived

as more disadvantaged than their peers (who they know little about). Again, consistent with this

prediction, voucher lottery winners and losers (parents and students) gave more to charities than to

their peers.

      With respect to inequity arising from the voucher, voucher winners may have felt "more

privileged," and consequently the same division of money may have seemed more inequitable to the

voucher winners than losers. In this case, we would expect the voucher winners to give more to

others to reduce the voucher winner’s perceived greater inequity. While this inequity aversion is

consistent with voucher winners giving more than voucher losers to the charities, it seems

inconsistent with other results we have found. For instance, we would expect this inequity aversion

to hold for the amounts sent to peers also since there should be no difference among voucher

winners and losers in expectations regarding peers, but we found that winners and losers sent to

similar amounts to their peers. Further, we would also expect to observe this inequity aversion in

the parents’ decisions, yet we found that parents of voucher winners and losers sent the same amount




23
  For these children, giving less the higher the exchange rate will maximize utility (i.e., give $6 or $7 when the exchange rate is 50%
so each child receives almost $3.50, give $5 when the exchange rate is 100% so each child receives $5, and give $4 when the
exchange rate is 150% so each child receives $6.00). Additional evidence consistent with this behavior is presented in Andreoni and
Vesterlund [2001] using college students and theoretical developments are in Charness and Rabin [2002].


                                                                  21
to the charities.24 Thus, inequity aversion explains some of the observed behavior, but it is not clear

that it provides a mechanism to explain the differential behavior between lottery winners and losers.


      In sum, there are several potential mechanisms that may underlie the reduced form effect that

voucher lottery winners gave more to charitable organizations than voucher lottery losers. We know

from the results among the students who were previously attending private school that there are

other mechanisms besides, or in addition to, private schooling that may affect the students. Further,

although we cannot definitively preclude reciprocity as a mechanism, we find evidence suggesting

direct reciprocity is not driving our results.


                                                       VI.       Conclusion

      Education research largely focuses on the effects of interventions on student test scores.

However, educational interventions may affect other academic and non-academic outcomes. Using

experimental economic methods, this paper documents the significant effects of an educational

intervention on the amount children give to charities. This result, in conjunction with virtually no

correlation between test scores and this altruism, suggests that studies that primarily focus on test

scores can understate the overall effect of educational intervention.

      We do not find voucher effects on the amount children give to other children, suggesting that

the voucher effect on altruism does not extend to all forms of giving. We also find that voucher

lottery winners on average gave the same additional amount to each charity than voucher losers and

no significant voucher effects on parent’s generosity to charities, both suggesting that children’s

increased altruism towards charities may not be driven by reciprocity but rather by some other

24
  Although it is clear that voucher lottery winners are “better off” by having the option to use the scholarship (compared to not having
the option), the effect of winning the voucher on disposable income is ambiguous since the scholarship only pays ½-tuition. Families
who won the voucher lottery and then chose to enroll their children in private school might be less well off financially since they still
pay half of the private school tuition. For these families, disposable income may be lower than that of voucher lottery losers who kept
their children in public school. Thus, if participants are inequity averse, then the poorer voucher lottery winning families may indeed
prefer to give less than voucher lottery losers.


                                                                  22
mechanism such as increased schooling. However, we also found that among students who were in

private school at the time of the lottery that voucher lottery winners also gave more than voucher

lottery losers, suggesting that there are other mechanisms in addition to private schooling that may

account for the increased altruism towards the charities. We hope that future voucher programs are

designed such that researchers can clarify the role of reciprocity and private schooling as specific

voucher mechanisms.

    While the experimental methods and protocols used in the current study were developed

primarily to test theory, the current paper presents an alternative use for these methods. The paper

combines these methods with modern program evaluation techniques and exploits a natural

experiment to demonstrate the possible effects of an educational program on altruism. Moreover,

the use of experimental methods allowed us to measure altruism in a more timely and reliable way

than we would have been able to measure it had we used traditional measures of charitable giving

(e.g. charitable donations on tax records or through household expenditure surveys).

    In addition to our main contributions, we report several results regarding children’s behavior

that extend this growing literature [e.g., Harbaugh et al. 2000, 2001, 2002, and 2003]. We confirm

several previous findings regarding children’s behavior using an ethnically diverse urban group of

children. We also find results previously only observed in the literature for adults: children give

more to charitable organizations than they give their peers. Finally, we find that age and gender are

important covariates for altruism: girls gave more than boys to their peers, while older children gave

more to charities. Thus, behaviors observed in experimental economic studies of adults are observed

with children who are in their 1st-8th grade years.




                                                      23
Appendix 1. Description of data collection.

Applicant Data and Lottery
          The national headquarters of the Children's Scholarship Fund collected the applicant list and
conducted the randomization. They assigned families random numbers and then released winners' names in
three separate waves. The first wave was the largest and included most winners. Applicants received
notification of the award by mail and phone. Applicants were required to submit tax records to verify income
eligibility. After seeing that many scholarships would not be claimed, the national headquarters released a
second wave of names and eventually a small third wave. There were 39 winners who did not appear in the
applicant list yet all received the scholarship. A majority of these families had children previously attending
private school. It is not clear when these people were added and whether these people were added at the
national or local levels. Because of potential non-randomness, we excluded these people in our analyses.
Our estimates of the effects of the voucher on generosity do not change when we include these people.

Experimental Procedures
          We collected all outcomes single blind (subjects are unaware of what choices other subjects make)
and single anonymous (subjects are unaware of the objective of the experiment). To avoid bias, the
experimenters were unaware of the subjects' voucher status during the experiments. We also simultaneously
and separately collected similar experimental measures for parents.
         We compensated each parent $15 in cash for attending and each child $5 in Toys-R-Us gift
certificates. Towards the end of our data collection procedures, we increased the show-up fee to $50. In all
of our regressions, we include session fixed effects to control for differences across sessions, including
differences in the show-up fee. We do not report session effects since they are a function of the show-up fee,
the types of individuals attending the meeting, and any influence that might distinguish one session from
another (e.g. different sets of individuals, times, or dates of our data collection). Other researchers have
found that compensating children with money may not hold children’s attention as effectively as
compensating them with toys. Not only do some children, especially young ones, not fully comprehend the
value of money, but children may also fear that their parents will confiscate their earnings or at least partially
influence how the money will be spent. All of the children in our sample were familiar with Toys-R-Us store.
The use of Toys' R Us gift certificates may not fully eliminate the concern that parents will ultimately
influence the children's purchases, but it mitigates it.
         In addition to the show up fee, we compensated parents and students for decisions they made during
the session. Each decision had tangible, financial consequences. Since we examine several measures, and
since the subjects’ incomes are low, we reduced possible wealth effects by using a random selection payment
mechanism across most of the tasks, including all generosity choices. The random selection payment
mechanism is a common experimental economics procedure to control for wealth effects (see Davis and Holt
1993).
         Most events were conducted within groups (101 families), although a few sessions were conducted
privately with individual families (26 families). In our regression analysis, we control for the type of session
that students attended to account for any differences in behavior that may result from these different types of
sessions. In the group sessions, we randomly and anonymously chose one or more participants at the end of
each session to compensate for each decision. We selected the specific number of participants to compensate
for every decision so that within each session a subject’s decision for each set of tasks had approximately the
same likelihood (about 1 in 5 chance) of being selected for compensation. When conducting individual
sessions and at the end of all tasks, we randomly selected one task to compensate the subjects. We informed
all subjects of these procedures before they made any decisions.
         In the parent room, we administered the generosity tasks followed by a manipulation check and
attitudinal survey which is available upon request. In the manipulation check, we asked parents to assess on
a scale from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree) whether they felt that the procedures had preserved
anonymity, had confidence that we would pay the money as promised, and whether the instructions were
clear and easy to follow. The average responses were 4.63, 4.63, and 4.78 respectively. Only three parents


                                                       24
(2.4 percent) gave a response less than 3 for any of these statements and over 90 percent of all responses were
4 or 5.
        The specific schedule and order of tasks we ran for each session were identical and were as follows:

    1. Registration
       a. Parents and children randomly given identification tags
       b. Consent and Accent Forms Provided, Read and Signed

    2. Everyone gathered in “central” room
       a. Refreshments (fruit, drinks, cookies) available
       b. Informal description of where each family member would be located

    3. Subjects separated into different rooms where decision-making data were collected:

                                                  1st – 2nd   Higher                 Time (in
                 Decision-Making Events                                   Parents
                                                  Graders     Grades                 minutes)
                 1. Penny jar guessing game
                                                    Yes         Yes         Yes         15
                 (ice-breaker event)

                 2. Generosity to Non-profit
                                                    Yes         Yes         Yes         15
                 Organizations

                 3. Generosity to Peers             Yes         Yes         Yes         10

                 4. Other experimental data
                                                    Yes         Yes         Yes         30
                 collected for related projects

                 5. Standardized achievement
                                                    Yes         Yes         No          40
                 Test
                 6. Survey: manipulation
                 checks and attitudinal
                                                     No         No          Yes         15
                 indicators. Plus informal
                 discussion


    4. Everyone returns to central room
          a. Pizza, fruit, cookies and beverages provided
          b. Parents and children called one at a time for private payments




                                                      25
Appendix 2. Children's Decision-making sheet for the American Red Cross dictator game.

The Organization you are put together with for this decision is:

                                       (First Decision) The American Red Cross
The American Red Cross tries to make people’s lives better. It tries to make people’s lives better by helping
people be prepared for disasters, such as fires, earthquakes and flooding. The American Red Cross also helps
people survive after a major disaster by providing food and a place to sleep.

                                             (Second Decision) Make-A-Wish
Make-A-Wish tries to do something very special for children who have very bad health. The bad health usually causes
the children to live fewer years than other people. What Make-A-Wish does is let’s these children to do something that
they especially want to do, such as go to Disneyland or to meet someone very special.

                              (Third Decision) The Children’s Scholarship Fund of Toledo
The Children’s Scholarship Fund provides money to families that want to send their children to a school of their choice.
The families that the Children’s Scholarship Fund usually tries to help sometimes do not have enough money to be able
to send their children to the school they would want to send them to.


                I want to divide the $10 in Toys-R-Us gift certificates as follows (mark one choice only):

                                                       KEEP              SEND

                                    My Choice      For Myself      To Organization

                                                        $10                $0

                                                         $9                $1

                                                         $8                $2

                                                         $7                $3

                                                         $6                $4

                                                         $5                $5

                                                         $4                $6

                                                         $3                $7

                                                         $2                $8

                                                         $1                $9

                                                         $0               $10


                        Do you want the organization to send you a thank you letter?   No     Yes




                                                              26
References
Andreoni, James, "Why Free Ride? Strategies and Learning in Public Goods Experiments," Journal of Public
       Economics, XXXVII (1988), 291-304.
Andreoni, James, Eleanor Brown and Isaac Rischall, "Charitable Giving by Married Couples: Who Decides
       and Why Does it Matter?" Journal of Human Resources, XXXVIII (2003), 111-133.
Andreoni, James and Lise Vesterlund, "Which is the Fair Sex? Gender Differences in Altruism," Quarterly
       Journal of Economics, CXVI (2001), 293-312.
Angrist, Joshua, “Conditional Independence in Sample Selection Models.” Economic Letters, LIV(2) (1997),
        103-112.
Angrist, Joshua and Alan Krueger, “Empirical strategies in labor economics”, in Orley Ashenfelter and David
        Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, III (1999), 1277-1366
Angrist, Joshua, Eric Bettinger, Eric Bloom, Elizabeth King, and Michael Kremer, “Vouchers for Private
        Schooling in Colombia: Evidence from a Randomized Natural Experiment”, American Economic
        Review, XCII(5) (2002), 1535-1558.
Becker, Gary, Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis, with Special Reference to Education
        (Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press, 1993).
Bergstrom, Theodore, Larry Blume and Hal Varian, “On the Private Provision of Public Goods,” Journal of
        Public Economics, XXIX (1986), 25-49.
Bertrand, Marianne and Sendhil Mullainathan. “Are Emily and Greg more Employable than Lakisha and
        Jamal? A Field Experiment on Labor Market Discrimination,” American Economic Review, 94:4,
        (2004), 991-1013.
Bettinger, Eric, and Robert Slonim (2004), Bettinger, Eric, and Robert Slonim (2004), “Patience Among
        Children: Evidence from a Field Experiment,” Working Paper, Case Western Reserve University.
Bolton, Gary, and Axel Ockenfels, “ERC: A Theory of Equity, Reciprocity and Competition.”
       American Economic Review, XC (2000), 166-193.
Bolton, Gary, Elena Katok and Axel Ockenfels, “How effective are Electronic Reputation
       Mechanisms? An Experimental Investigation.” Management Science, 50(11) (2004), 1587-
       1602.
Bowles, Samuel, Herbert Gintis and Melissa Osborne, “Incentive-Enhancing Preferences:
      Personality, Behavior and Earnings,” American Economic Review, XCI(2) (2001), 155-158.
Bryan, J. and N. Walbek, "Preaching and Practicing Generosity: Children's Actions and Reactions." Child
        Development, XLI (1968), 329-353.Charness, Gary, and Mathew Rabin, “Understanding Social
        Preferences.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXVII (2002), 817-869.


Davis, Douglas and Charles Holt, "Experimental Economics: Methods, Problems, and Promise,"
       Estudios Economicos, VIII(2) (1993), 179-212.
Dynan, Karen, Jonathon Skinner and Stephen Zeldes, "The Importance of Bequests and Life-Cycle Saving in
       Capital Accumulation: A New Answer." American Economic Review, XCII(2) (2002), 274-278.
Eckel, Catherine and Philip Grossman, “Altruism in Anonymous Dictator Games” Games and Economic
        Behavior, XVI (1996), 181-191.
———, and ———, “Are Women Less Selfish Than Men? Evidence From Dictator Games,” Economics
    Journal, CVIII (1998), 726-735.



                                                    27
———, and ———, “Rebate versus matching; does how we subsidize charitable contributions matter,
    ”Journal of Public Economics, LXXXVII (2003), 681-701.
Eckel, Catherine and Philip Grossman and M. Rachel Johnston, “An Experimental test of the crowding out
        hypothesis,” Forthcoming, Journal of Public Economics (2005).
Eckel, Catherine, Cathleen Johnson and Claude Montmarquette, “Human Capital Investment by the Poor:
        Calibrating Policy with Laboratory Experiments,” SRDC Working Paper (2005).
Fehr, Ernst, Urs Fischbacher, Bernhard von Rosenbladt, Jürgen Schupp, and Gert G. Wagner, “A Nation-
        Wide Laboratory: Examining Trust and Trustworthiness by Integrating Behavioral Experiments into
        Representative Survey,” CESifo Working Paper Series Number 866, IZA Discussion Paper Number
        715 (2003).
Fehr, Ernst, Schmidt, Klaus, “A Theory of Fairness, Competition and Cooperation,” The Quarterly
       Journal of Economics 114 (1999), 817-868.
Fehr, Ernst and Klaus Schmidt, “Fairness, Incentives and Contractual Choices,” European Economic Review,
        XLIV(2) (2000), 393-421.
Fershtman, Chiam and Uri Gneezy, “Discrimination in a Segmented Society: An Experimental Approach,”
       The Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXVI (2001), 351-377.
Figlio, David and Jens Ludwig, "Sex, Drugs, and Catholic Schools: Private Schooling and Non-Market
         Adolescent Behaviors," NBER Working Paper Number 7990 (2000).
Froming, William, L. Allen and R. Jensen, “Altruism, Role-Taking, and Self-Awareness: The Acquisition of
       Norms Governing Altruistic Behavior.” Child Development, LVI(5) (1985), 1223-1228.
Greene, Jay, “Civic Values in Public and Private Schools,” Chapter in Learning from School Choice, Paul
        Peterson and Bryan Hassel eds. Washington, D.C., Brookings Institution Press (1998).
———, “A Survey of Results from Voucher Experiments: Where We Are and What We Know.” Civic
    Report No. 11, Center for Civic Innovation, The Manhattan Institute, New York, NY (2000).
Harbaugh, William, and Kate Krause, “Children’s Altruism in Public Good and Dictator Experiments,”
       Economic Inquiry, XXXVIII(1) (2000), 95-109.
Harbaugh, William, Kate Krause, and Tim Berry, “GARP for kids: On the development of rational choice
       behavior,” American Economic Review, XCI(5) (2001), 1539-1545.
Harbaugh, William, Kate Krause and Steve Liday, “Bargaining by Children,” University of Oregon,
       Department of Economics, Working Paper (2002).
Harbaugh, William, Kate Krause, Steven Liday, and Lise Vesterlund, “Trust in Children,” Chapter in Trust,
       Reciprocity and Gains from Association Elinor Ostrom and James Walker eds. New York City,
       Russell Sage Foundation, (2003)
Harrison, Glenn and David Kennison, “A School Voucher Scheme, Parental Education Empowerment for
        South Carolina,” University of South Carolina, (1993).
Harrison, Glenn, Morten Lau and Melanie Williams, “Estimating Individual Discount Rates for Denmark: A
        field experiment,” American Economic Review, XCII (2002), 1606-1617
Heckman, James, “Policies to Foster Human Capital,” Research Economics, LIV(1) (2000), 3-56.
Hoffman, Elizabeth, Kevin McCabe, Vernon L. Smith, “Social Distance and Other-Regarding
      Behavior in Dictator Games,” American Economic Review, LXXXVI(3) (1996), 653-660.
Hsieh, Chang, and Miguel Urquiola, “When schools compete, how do they compete? An assessment
       of Chile’s nationwide voucher program,” NBER Working Paper No. 10008 (2003).



                                                    28
Jacob, Brian, and Lars Lefgren, "Are Idle Hands the Devil's Workshop? Incapacitation, Concentration, and
        Juvenile Crime," American Economic Review, 93(5) (2003), 1560-1577.
Jouvet, Pierre-Andre, Philippe Michel, and Pierre Pestieau, "Altruism, Voluntary Contributions and
        Neutrality: The Case of Environmental Quality." Economica, LXVII (2000), 465-475.
Karlan, Dean, "Using Experimental Economics to Measure Social Capital and Predict Finance Decisions,"
        forthcoming in The American Economic Review, (2003).
Krueger, Alan and Pei Zhu, "Another Look at the New York City Voucher Experiment," NBER Working
       Paper Number 9418 (2003).
Levy, Frank, Richard Murnane and John Willett, "The Growing Importance of Cognitive Skills in Wage
       Determination," Review of Economics and Statistics, (1995).
List, John, “The Nature and Extent of Discrimination in the Marketplace: Evidence from the Field,”Quarterly
         Journal of Economics, CXIX (2004), 49-89.
List, John, and David Lucking-Reiley, “Demand Reduction in Multi-Unit Auctions: Evidence from a
         Sportscard Field Experiment," American Economic Review, XC(4) (2000), 961-972.
———, and ———, “The Effects of Seed Money and Refunds on Charitable Giving: Experimental
    Evidence from a University Capital Campaign,” Journal of Political Economy, CX(1) (2002), 215-
    233.
Lucking-Reiley, David, “Using Field Experiments to Test Equivalence Between Auction Formats: Magic on
       the Internet," American Economic Review, LXXXIX(5) (1999), 1063-1080.
MacDonald, Maurice and Sun-Kang Koh, "Consistent Motives for Inter-family Transfers: Simple Altruism."
      Journal of Family and Economic Issues, XXIV (2003), 73-97.
Midlarsky, E and J. Bryan, "Training Charity in Children." Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, V
       (1967), 408-415.
Myers, David, Paul Peterson, Daniel Mayer, Julia Chou, and William G. Howell, "School Choice in New
       York after Two Years: An Evaluation of the School Choice Scholarships Program." Harvard's PEPG
       Occasional Paper Series (2000).
Mayer, Daniel, Paul Peterson, David Myers, Christina C. Tuttle, and William G. Howell, "School Choice in
       New York after Three Years: An Evaluation of the School Choice Scholarships Program." Harvard's
       PEPG Occasional Paper Series (2002).
Neal, Derek, "The Effect of Catholic Secondary Schools on Educational Achievement." Journal of Labor
       Economics, XV(1) (1997), 98-123.
Rouse, Cecilia Elena, "Private School Vouchers and Student Achievement: An Evaluation of the Milwaukee
       Parental Choice Program." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXIII (1998), 553-602.
Slonim, Robert and Eric Bettinger (2005), “The Effect of Educational Vouchers on Confidence: A field
        experiment to assess outcomes of educational policy,” in Field Experiments in Economics, Jeffrey
        Carpenter, Glenn W. Harrison and John A. List, eds., Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, Research in
        Experimental Economics, Volume 10, p291-336.
Williams, David D., Stephen C. Yanchar, Larry C. Jensen, and Cheryl Lewis, "Character Education in a
       Public High School: A Multi-year Inquiry into Unified Studies." Journal of Moral Education, 32(1)
       (2003), 3-33.




                                                    29
                                                    Table 1
                       Personal Characteristics and Voucher Status. CSF 1998 Applicants

       Dependent Variable                                 Public School Lottery         Private School Lottery
                                                           Loser’s     Diff for        Loser’s       Diff for
                                                            Mean       Winners          Mean         Winners
                                                             (1)         (2)             (3)           (4)

       A. Applicant List
                                                           21,782     -2,179***         25,740      2,665***
            Income
                                                          (14,738)       (885)         (14,032)      (1,168)
                                                             3.7        -.066             3.7         .284**
            Household Size
                                                            (1.4)       (.093)           (1.6)         (.127)
            Proportion w/ Any Child Previously              .103         .013            .966          .011
              Attending Private School                     (.304)       (.021)          (.182)        (.015)
            N                                                 331        1126            1085          1259
       B. Attempted Survey Sample
                                                           20,944         169           25,652        1,297
            Income
                                                          (15,094)      (1,460)        (16,115)      (4,481)
                                                             3.7         0.18             3.6          0.01
            Household Size
                                                            (1.3)       (0.14)           (1.2)        (0.32)
            Proportion w/ Any Child Previously              0.10         .037
                                                                                          1             --
              Attending Private School                      (.30)       (.033)
                                                                          .06                          -.15
            Survey Response Rate                              .61                         .72
                                                                         (.05)                         (.14)
            N                                                 200        390              25            48
       C. Survey Sample
                                                           21,379         679           24,335         961
            Income
                                                          (15,025)      (1,786)        (15,320)      (4,927)
                                                             3.7          .26             3.6          0.37
            Household Size
                                                            (1.4)        (.18)           (1.3)        (0.41)
            Proportion w/ Any Child Previously              .123         .025
                                                                                          1             --
              Attending Private School                     (.330)       (.043)
                                                            .393         .036            .500         -.115
            Single Parent Household
                                                           (.491)       (.062)          (.514)        (.185)
                                                            .230         .067            .333         -.103
            One parent is College Grad
                                                           (.422)       (.056)          (.485)        (.167)
                                                            .400         .105            .875          .125
            Oldest Child Attended Private (if Applied)
                                                           (.492)       (.070)          (.342)        (.086)
                                                            .574        -.144**          .278         -.047
            African-American
                                                           (.045)        (.063)         (.461)        (.163)
            N                                                 122        250              18            31
Standard deviations appear in Columns 1 and 3. Standard errors appear in Columns 2 and 4. Unit of observation is a
family applying for the scholarship program. The sample size in Columns 1 and 3 is for the population of unsuccessful
lottery applicants. The sample in Columns 2 and 4 is the sample of both winners and losers.



                                                         30
                                                      Table 2
                         Children's Characteristics, Event Attendance and Voucher Status

                              Survey Sample Means
                                                               Event          Diff for       Diff for Winners
                                                              No-Show      Event Attenders   (w/i Attenders)
                         Loser’s Mean    Diff For Winners                        (4)                (5)
                                                                (3)
                              (1)               (2)

                             10.1              -.11            10.2             -.342              .013
       Age
                             (2.7)             (.26)           (2.9)            (.263)            (.385)

                              .447             .049             .446             .064             .123*
       Male
                             (.498)           (.047)           (.498)           (.047)            (.072)

                              4.4              -.02             4.5             -.278              .139
       Grade
                             (2.6)             (.25)           (2.6)            (.251)            (.374)

                              .546           -.170***           .411           .099**             -.155**
       Black
                             (.499)            (.046)          (.493)           (.046)             (.068)

                              .110             .005             .106             .014             .112**
       Private Lottery
                             (.314)           (.029)           (.309)           (.030)             (.044)

       N                      218              471              263              471                208
Standard deviations appear in Columns 1 and 3. White standard errors appear in Columns 2, 4 and 5 in parentheses.
The unit of observation is the child applying for the scholarship program. (*, **, ***: p<.10, p< .05, p<.01,
respectively.)




                                                         31
                                                     Table 3
                      Children's Characteristics and Voucher Status. CSF 1998 Applicants

                                                                   Diff for Winners     Winners' Diff
                                                   Loser’s Mean
                Dependent Variable                                 With No Covar       With Basic Covs
                                                        (1)
                                                                          (2)                (3)

                                                        .208            .227***            .208***
                Private School at time of Survey
                                                       (.407)            (.042)             (.040)

                                                        .389            .261***            .243***
                Attended Private Since 1997
                                                       (.489)            (.046)             (.043)

                                                        .218             -.058              -.052
                Ever Repeated
                                                       (.414)            (.039)             (.039)

                                                        .184            -.080**            -.063**
                Suspensions
                                                       (.389)            (.034)             (.031)
                Math Scores (N=349)                     48.5              .970               .111
                                                       (22.7)            (3.37)             (3.53)

                N                                       216               466                466
Standard deviations appear in Column 1. White standard errors appear in Columns 2 and 3. Unit of observation is a
child applying for the scholarship program. Covariates include age, gender, race, family income, private school lottery
dummy, and session dummies. The math scores include two observations for 163 students who took both parts of a test
and 23 observations for students who took only one part of the test in our pilot. (*, **, ***: p<.10, p< .05, p<.01,
respectively.)




                                                          32
                                               Table 4a
                         OLS Estimates of Voucher Effects on Children's Generosity
                                                                                                            Amount
                             Amount Given to Each Charity               Amount Given to Charities          Given To
                                                                                                             Peers
                                                                         (Stacked Regressions)
                              Red        Make-                                                             (Stacked
                                                       CSF
                             Cross       Wish                                                             Regressions)

                              (1)          (2)          (3)              (4)                   (5)            (6)

                            $3.00        $3.73        $3.27                        $3.33                     2.74
Losers’ Mean (SD)
                            (3.00)       (3.42)       (3.07)                       (3.17)                   (2.79)
                            1.19**        .515         .708             .750*                 .779*          -.112
Voucher Effect
                            (.448)       (.518)       (.497)            (.418)                (.411)         (.440)

                                                                                                             -.221
Exchange Rate
                                                                                                             (.235)

                                                                        -.079                 -.042
Red Cross
                                                                        (.200)                (.207)

                                                                        .318*                 .381*
Make-A-Wish
                                                                        (.173)                (.174)

Family Income                .027         .005         .016              .018                  .017          -.007
(In thousands)              (.018)       (.019)       (.017)            (.015)                (.014)         (.015)

Number Children             -.202        -.474*       -.439            -.422**               -.378*          -.100
Living at Home              (.201)       (.280)       (.257)            (.202)               (.205)          (.202)

                            1.30**       1.27*         .270             .942*                 .913*           .890
Private Lottery
                            (.645)       (.667)       (.594)            (.510)                (.512)         (.633)

                           -1.07**       -.259        -.182             -.533                 -.513         -.788**
Male
                            (.467)       (.529)       (.458)            (.425)                (.418)         (.385)

                            -.723        -.950        -.280             -.769                 -.663          -.655
African-American
                            (.440)       (.578)       (.495)            (.406)                (.422)         (.454)

                           .426***      .409***      .289***           .369***              .374***          -.033
Age
                            (.095)       (.112)       (.098)            (.099)               (.089)          (.088)

Amount Parents Gave         .034*         .014         .008                                    .018           .015
(On same decision)          (.018)       (.022)       (.017)                                  (.014)         (.019)
N                            191          190          191               572                   572            443
Notes: Standard errors clustered within families reported in parentheses, session effects not reported.
(*, **, ***: p<.10, p< .05, p<.01, respectively.)




                                                              33
                                                 Table 4b
                    Alternate Specification of Voucher Effects on Children's Generosity

                                              Amount Given to charities        Amount Given To Peers
                                               (Stacked Regressions)            (Stacked Regressions)

                                                  (1)                 (2)         (3)                (4)
                                               O. Probit             Tobit     O. Probit            Tobit

                                                           $3.33                            2.74
                    Losers’ Mean (SD)
                                                           (3.17)                          (2.79)

                                                .272*               1.16**       .013                .207
                    Voucher Effect
                                                (.157)              (.492)      (.184)              (.573)

                                                                                -.034               -.275
                    Exchange Rate
                                                                                (.100)              (.275)

                                                -.039                -.078
                    Red Cross
                                                (.078)               (.228)

                                                .110*               .516**
                    Make-A-Wish
                                                (.064)               (.227)

                    Family Income                .004                 .010      -.003               -.005
                    (In thousands)              (.005)               (.017)     (.006)              (.020)

                    Number Children             -.101                -.055      -.034                .113
                    Living at Home              (.073)               (.267)     (.086)              (.293)

                                                .360**                .212       .310                1.15
                    Private Lottery
                                                 (.177)              (.586)     (.270)              (.941)

                                                -.161               -1.36**    -.324**          -1.58**
                    Male
                                                (.156)               (.588)     (.154)           (.687)

                                                -.219               -1.26***    -.316           -1.47**
                    African-American
                                                (.154)               (.422)     (.208)           (.715)

                                               .144***              .477***      .001               -.058
                    Age
                                                (.032)               (.113)     (.033)              (.093)

                    Amount Parents Give          .007                 .054       .026               -.051
                    (On same decision)          (.005)               (.054)     (.039)              (.102)
                   N                             572            572            443             443
Notes: Ordered Probit controls for correlation with families. Tobit includes effects for children, session effects not
reported. Tobit regressions censored at giving $0 and $10. (*, **, ***: p<.10, p< .05, p<.01, respectively.)




                                                              34
                                                 Table 5
                                   Voucher Effects on Parents' Generosity
                                  Amount Given to Charities
                                                                              Amount Given To Peers
                                   (Stacked Regressions)
                                                                               (Stacked Regressions)

                                 (1)         (2)           (3)            (4)              (5)          (6)
                                OLS       O. Probit       Tobit           OLS           O. Probit      Tobit

                                            $32.37                                     $20.93
       Losers’ Mean (SD)
                                            (16.49)                                    (7.86)

                                -1.71       -.116         .950            .458            .077          .847
       Voucher Effect
                               (2.83)       (.127)       (1.85)          (1.52)          (.123)        (.727)

                                                                        -6.11***         -1.20       -6.20***
       Exchange Rate
                                                                         (.553)          (.148)       (.527)

                               -2.09**      -.182        -3.31**
       Red Cross
                                (1.01)      (.141)        (1.34)

                                .323         .008         .609
       Make-A-Wish
                               (1.01)       (.143)       (1.36)

       Family Income           .094*         .007         .021            .087            .014       .132***
       (In thousands)          (.134)       (.006)       (.083)          (.072)          (.006)       (.032)

       Number Children          -2.70     -.193***      -3.88***          .572            .036         .976**
       Living at Home          (1.57)       (.070)       (.847)          (.845)          (.068)         (.408)

                                -3.45       -.303        -4.80*           2.61            .418          .536
       Private Lottery
                               (4.83)       (.213)       (2.60)          (2.59)          (.209)        (1.03)

                                -3.62       -.230      -10.48***          -1.13          -.137         -1.35
       Male
                               (3.90)       (.174)       (2.77)          (2.09)          (.168)        (.956)

                                -4.71     -.376***     -11.11***         3.29**           .389       5.69***
       African-American
                               (3.05)       (.138)       (2.18)          (1.64)          (.132)       (.817)

                                -1.78       -.130         5.12            -.038          -.045          .105
       Religion
                               (5.09)       (.233)       (4.43)          (2.73)          (.219)        (1.12)
       N                         333         333           333             333              333         333
Notes: Heteroskedasticity corrected standard errors in parentheses, session effects not reported.
Tobit regressions censored at giving $0 and $50. (*, **, ***: p<.10, p< .05, p<.01, respectively.)




                                                          35
