HAS FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENT
MADE THE WORLD RISKIER?
Raghuram G. Rajan
Working Paper 11728

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HAS FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENT
MADE THE WORLD RISKIER?
Raghuram G. Rajan
Working Paper 11728
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11728
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2005

]

The author is the Economic Counselor and Director of Research of the International Monetary Fund. This
paper reflects the author’s views and not necessarily those of the International Monetary Fund, its
management, or its Board. I thank Laura Kodres for extremely useful conversations and suggestions, Sergei
Antoshin for valuable research assistance, and Douglas Diamond, Jonathan Fiechter, Laura Kodres, Donald
Kohn, Hyun Shin, Jeremy Stein, and Hung Tran for valuable comments on a previous draft. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
©2005 by Raghuram G. Rajan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Has Financial Development Made the World Riskier?
Raghuram G. Rajan
NBER Working Paper No. 11728
October 2005
JEL No. G0, G1, G2, G3
ABSTRACT
Developments in the financial sector have led to an expansion in its ability to spread risks. The
increase in the risk bearing capacity of economies, as well as in actual risk taking, has led to a range
of financial transactions that hitherto were not possible, and has created much greater access to
finance for firms and households. On net, this has made the world much better off. Concurrently,
however, we have also seen the emergence of a whole range of intermediaries, whose size and
appetite for risk may expand over the cycle. Not only can these intermediaries accentuate real
fluctuations, they can also leave themselves exposed to certain small probability risks that their own
collective behavior makes more likely. As a result, under some conditions, economies may be more
exposed to financial-sector-induced turmoil than in the past. The paper discusses the implications
for monetary policy and prudential supervision. In particular, it suggests market-friendly policies that
would reduce the incentive of intermediary managers to take excessive risk.
Raghuram G. Rajan
International Monetary Fund
Research Department, Rm 10-700
700 19th Street, N.W.
Washington, DC 20431
and NBER
rrajan@imf.org

-1-

In the last thirty years, financial systems around the world have undergone revolutionary
change. People can borrow greater amounts at cheaper rates than ever before, invest in a
multitude of instruments catering to every possible profile of risk and return, and share risks
with strangers from across the globe. Have these undoubted benefits come at a cost? How
concerned should central bankers and financial system supervisors be, and what can they do
about it? These are the issues examined in this paper.
Consider the main forces that have been at work in altering the financial landscape.
Technical change has reduced the cost of communication and computation, as well as the
cost of acquiring, processing, and storing information. One very important aspect of technical
change has been academic research and commercial development; Techniques ranging from
financial engineering to portfolio optimization, from securitization to credit scoring, are now
widely used. Deregulation has removed artificial barriers preventing entry, or competition
between products, institutions, markets, and jurisdictions. Finally, the process of institutional
change has created new entities within the financial sector such as private equity firms and
hedge funds, as well as new political, legal, and regulatory arrangements.
These changes have altered the nature of the typical transaction in the financial sector,
making it more arm’s length and allowing broader participation. Financial markets have
expanded and become deeper. The broad participation has allowed risks to be more widely
spread throughout the economy.
While this phenomenon has been termed “disintermediation” because it involves moving
away from traditional bank centered ties, the term is a misnomer. Though in a number of
industrialized countries, individuals do not deposit a significant portion of their savings
directly in banks any more, they invest indirectly in the market via mutual funds, insurance
companies, and pension funds, and indirectly in firms via (indirect) investments in venture
capital funds, hedge funds, and other forms of private equity. The managers of these financial
institutions, whom I shall call “investment managers” have displaced banks and
“reintermediated” themselves between individuals and markets.
What about banks themselves? While banks can now sell much of the risk associated with
the “plain-vanilla” transactions they originate, such as mortgages, off their balance sheets,
they have to retain a portion, typically the first losses. Moreover, they now focus far more on
transactions where they have a comparative advantage, typically transactions where explicit
contracts are hard to specify or where the consequences need to be hedged by trading in the
market. In short, as the “plain vanilla” transaction becomes more liquid and amenable to
being transacted in the market, banks are moving on to more illiquid transactions.
Competition forces them to flirt continuously with the limits of illiquidity.
The expansion in the variety of intermediaries and financial transactions has major benefits,
including reducing the transactions costs of investing, expanding access to capital, allowing
more diverse opinions to be expressed in the marketplace, and allowing better risk sharing.
However, it has potential downsides, which I will explore in this paper. This focus is not
meant to minimize the enormous upsides that have been explored elsewhere (see, for
1

-2-

example, Rajan and Zingales (2003) or Shiller (2003)), or to suggest a reversion to the days
of bank dominated systems with limited competition, risk sharing, and choice. Instead, it is to
draw attention to a potential source of concern, and explore ways the system can be made to
work better.
My main concern has to do with incentives. Any form of intermediation introduces a layer of
management between the investor and the investment. A key question is how aligned are the
incentives of managers with investors, and what distortions are created by misalignment. I
will argue in this paper that the changes in the financial sector have altered managerial
incentives, which in turn have altered the nature of risks undertaken by the system, with
some potential for distortions.
In the 1950s and 1960s, banks dominated financial systems. Bank managers were paid a
largely fixed salary. Given that regulation kept competition muted, there was no need for
shareholders to offer managers strong performance incentives (and such incentives may even
have been detrimental as it would have tempted bank managers to reach out for risk). The
main check on bank managers making bad investment decisions was the bank’s fragile
capital structure (and possibly supervisors). If bank management displayed incompetence or
knavery, depositors would get jittery and possibly run. The threat of this extreme penalty,
coupled with the limited upside from salaries that were not buoyed by stock or options
compensation, combined to make bankers extremely conservative. This served depositors
well since their capital was safe, while shareholders, who enjoyed a steady rent because of
the limited competition, were also happy. Of course, depositors and borrowers had little
choice, so the whole system was very inefficient.
In the new, deregulated, competitive environment, investment managers cannot be provided
the same staid incentives as bank managers of yore. Because they have to have the incentive
to search for good investments, their compensation has to be sensitive to investment returns,
especially returns relative to their competitors. Furthermore, new investors are attracted by
high returns. Dissatisfied investors can take their money elsewhere, but they do so with
substantial inertia. Since compensation is also typically related to assets under management,
the movement of investors further modulates the relationship between returns and
compensation.
Therefore, the incentive structure of investment managers today differs from the incentive
structure of bank managers of the past in two important ways. First, the way compensation
relates to returns implies there is typically less downside and more upside from generating
investment returns. Managers therefore have greater incentive to take risk.2 Second, their
performance relative to other peer managers matters, either because it is directly embedded in
2

In the jargon, investment manager compensation is likely to be convex in returns, while
bank manager compensation in the past was more concave. This difference creates a
difference in risk preference.

2

-3-

their compensation, or because investors exit or enter funds on that basis. The knowledge that
managers are being evaluated against others can induce superior performance, but also a
variety of perverse behavior.
One is the incentive to take risk that is concealed from investors -- since risk and return are
related, the manager then looks as if he outperforms peers given the risk he takes. Typically,
the kinds of risks that can most easily be concealed, given the requirement of periodic
reporting, are risks that generate severe adverse consequences with small probability but, in
return, offer generous compensation the rest of the time. These risks are known as tail risks.
A second form of perverse behavior is the incentive to herd with other investment managers
on investment choices, because herding provides insurance the manager will not under
perform his peers. Herd behavior can move asset prices away from fundamentals.
Both behaviors can reinforce each other during an asset price boom, when investment
managers are willing to bear the low probability “tail” risk that asset prices will revert to
fundamentals abruptly, and the knowledge that many of their peers are herding on this risk
gives them comfort that they will not under perform significantly if boom turns to bust. An
environment of low interest rates following a period of high rates is particularly problematic,
for not only does the incentive of some participants to “search for yield” go up, but also asset
prices are given the initial impetus, which can lead to an upward spiral, creating the
conditions for a sharp and messy realignment.
Will banks add to this behavior or restrain it? The compensation of bank managers, while not
so tightly tied to returns, has not remained uninfluenced by competitive pressures. Banks
make returns both by originating risks and by bearing them. As plain vanilla risks can be
moved off bank balance sheets into the balance sheets of investment managers, banks have
an incentive to originate more of them. Thus they will tend to feed rather than restrain the
appetite for risk. Banks cannot, however, sell all risks. They often have to bear the most
complicated and volatile portion of the risks they originate, so even though some risk has
been moved off bank balance sheets, balance sheets have been reloaded with fresh, more
complicated, risks. In fact, the data suggest that despite a deepening of financial markets,
banks may not be any safer than in the past. Moreover, the risk they now bear is a small
(though perhaps the most volatile) tip of an iceberg of risk they have created.
But perhaps the most important concern is whether banks will be able to provide liquidity to
financial markets so that if the tail risk does materialize, financial positions can be unwound
and losses allocated so that the consequences to the real economy are minimized. Past
episodes indicate that banks have played this role successfully. However, there is no
assurance they will continue to be able to play the role. In particular, banks have been able to
provide liquidity in the past, in part because their sound balance sheets have allowed them to
attract the available spare liquidity in the market. However, banks today also require liquid
markets to hedge some of the risks associated with complicated products they have created,
or guarantees they have offered. Their greater reliance on market liquidity can make their

3

-4-

balance sheets more suspect in times of crisis, making them less able to provide the liquidity
assurance that they have provided in the past.
Taken together, these trends suggest that even though there are far more participants today
able to absorb risk, the financial risks that are being created by the system are indeed
greater.3 And even though there should theoretically be a diversity of opinion and actions by
participants, and a greater capacity to absorb the risk, competition and compensation may
induce more correlation in behavior than desirable. While it is hard to be categorical about
anything as complex as the modern financial system, it is possible these developments may
create more financial-sector-induced procyclicality than the past. They may also create a
greater (albeit still small) probability of a catastrophic meltdown.
What can policymakers do? While all interventions can create their own unforeseen
consequences, these risks have to be weighed against the costs of doing nothing and hoping
that somehow markets will deal with these concerns. I offer some reasons why markets may
not get it right, though of course there should be no presumption that regulators will. More
study is clearly needed to estimate the magnitude of the concerns raised in this paper. If we
want to avoid large adverse consequences, even when they are small probability, we might
want to take precautions, especially if conclusive analysis is likely to take a long time.
At the very least, the concerns I raise imply monetary policy should be informed by the effect
it has on incentives, and the potential for greater procyclicality of the system. Also, bank
credit and other monetary indicators may no longer be sufficient statistics for the quantity of
finance-fuelled activity. I discuss some implications for the conduct of monetary policy.
Equally important in addressing perverse behavior are prudential norms. The prudential net
may have to be cast wider than simply around commercial or investment banks. Furthermore,
while I think capital regulation or disclosure can help in some circumstances, they may not
be the best instruments to deal with the concerns I raise. In particular, while disclosure is
useful when financial positions are simple and static, it is less useful when positions are
complex and dynamic. Ultimately, however, if problems stem from distorted incentives, the
least interventionist solution might involve aligning incentives. Investors typically force a
lengthening of horizons of their managers by requiring them to invest some fraction of their
personal wealth in the assets they manage. Some similar market-friendly way of ensuring
3

One might think that the amount of real risk in the economy should limit the amount of
financial risk – after all, the underlying cash flows have to be shared amongst participants,
and for every financial instrument that inflicts a loss, there is a counterparty who gains. This
is true in a static sense only if financial distress does not cause economic distress. If,
however, financial losses cannot be allocated smoothly – for example, because of illiquidity - they may have real consequences. Obviously, in a dynamic sense, greater financial
expansion can create greater real risk as, for example, when too many projects are started
only for many of them to be shut down prematurely.

4

-5-

personal capital is at stake could be contemplated, and I discuss the pros and cons of some
approaches to incentive alignment.
The rest of this paper is as follows. In section I, I start by describing the forces that have
driven the changes. In section II, I discuss how financial transactions have been changed, and
in section III how this may have changed the nature of financial risk taking. In section IV, I
discuss potential policy responses, and then conclude.
I. The Forces Driving Change
Technology
Technology has altered many aspects of financial transactions. In the area of lending, for
instance, information on firms and individuals from a variety of centralized sources – such as
Dun and Bradstreet – is now widely available. The increased availability of reliable timely
information has allowed loan officers to cut down on their own monitoring. While,
undoubtedly, some soft information that is hard to collect and communicate – direct
judgments of character, for example -- is no longer captured when the loan officer ceases to
make regular visits to the firm, it may be more than compensated by the sheer volume and
timeliness of hard information that is now available. Moreover, because it is hard information
– past credit record, accounting data, etc. -- the information can now be automatically
processed, eliminating many tedious and costly transactions. Technology has therefore
allowed more arm’s length finance, and therefore expanded overall access to finance.
Such methods undoubtedly increase the productivity of lending, reduce costs, and thus
expand access and competition. Petersen and Rajan (2002) find that the distance between
lenders and borrowers has increased over time in the United States, and the extent to which
this phenomenon occurs in a region is explained by an increase in the bank loan to bank
employee ratio in that region, a crude proxy for the increase in productivity as a result of
automation.
... Deregulation, and Institutional Change
Technology has spurred deregulation and competition. In the 1970s, the United States had
anti-competitive state banking laws. Some states did not allow banks to open more than one
branch. Many states also debarred out-of-state banks from opening branches. Banks were
small, risky, and inefficient. The reason, quite simply, for these laws was to ensure that
competition between banks was limited so that existing in-state banks could remain
profitable and fill state coffers.
As information technology improved the ability of banks to lend and borrow from customers
at a distance, however, competition from out-of-state financial institutions increased, even
though they had no in-state branches. Local politicians could not stamp this competition out
since they had no jurisdiction over it. Rather than seeing their small, inefficient, local

5

-6-

champions being overwhelmed by outsiders, they eliminated the regulations limiting
branching (see Kroszner and Strahan (1999)).
Thus technology helped spur deregulation, which in turn created a larger market in which
technologies could be utilized, creating further technological advances. Both forces have
come together to spur institutional change. For example, not only has there been an enormous
amount of bank consolidation but also the activities of large banks have undergone change.
As deregulation has increased competition for the best borrowers, and shaved margins from
offering “plain-vanilla” products to these customers, large banks have reached out to nontraditional customers, or to traditional customers with innovative products.
Taken together, all these changes have had beneficial real effects, increasing lending,
entrepreneurship, and growth rates of GDP, while reducing costs of financial transactions
(see Jayaratne and Strahan (1996, 1998) and Black and Strahan (2001)). Such developments
can be seen throughout the world. Let me now turn to how they have changed the nature of
interaction in the financial sector and then in section III, how they may have altered the
nature of risks.
II. How Financial Transactions have Changed
Arm’s length transactions or “disintermediation”
A number of financial transactions have moved from being embedded in a long-term
relationship between a client and a financial institution to being conducted at arm’s length in
a market. In many parts of the world where banking has been the mainstay, arm’s length
corporate bond markets and equity markets have expanded relative to the more stable private
credit markets. While long-term relationships do lead to greater understanding and trust
between parties, they do constrain each party’s choices. Increasingly, only the most
complicated, innovative, or risky financial transactions are embedded in relationships – I will
have more to say on this shortly.
Greater availability of public information (not just about the client but also about the
outcome of the transaction and the behavior of each party), the standardization of financial
contracts, and the ability of financial institutions to carve up streams of cash flows (both
contingent and actual) into desirable portions have contributed to this process of
“commodification” of financial transactions. Consider each of these.
The publicly available credit history of a potential borrower not only expands the set of
potential lenders who can screen the borrower, but also serves as a punishment for those
borrowers who default by significantly raising the cost and limiting access to future credit.
Credit histories are now collateral. Of course, public information does not just constrain
borrowers, it also constrains lenders. Large financial institutions dealing with the public are
closely scrutinized by the press. They cannot afford to be tainted by unsavory practices. In
turn, this knowledge gives retail customers the confidence to enter freely into transactions
with these financial institutions.
6

-7-

Figure 1: Credit Derivatives and Credit Default Swaps 1/
(In Percent of Private Sector Bank Credit 2/)
35

30

1/ Credit derivatives from British Banker's Association Credit Derivatives Reports. Credit default
swaps from International Swaps and Derivatives Association Market Surveys.
2/ Includes IFS data on deposit money banks and--where available--other banking institutions
for Australia, Canada, the euro area, Japan, the United Kingdom and the United States.

25

ISDA Credit Default Swaps

20

15

BBA Forecast
10

BBA Credit Derivatives
5

0
1999H1

1999H2

2000H1

2000H2

2001H1

2001H2

2002H1

2002H2

2003H1

2003H2

2004H1

2004H2

The standardization of contractual terms allows a loan to be packaged with other contracts
and sold as a diversified bundle to passive investors who do not have origination capability.
Alternatively, the cash flows from the bundle can be carved up or “tranched” into different
securities, differing in liquidity, maturity, contingency, and risk, each of which appeals to a
particular clientele.4 This process of “securitization” allows for specialization in financial
markets – those who have specific capabilities in originating financial transactions can be
different from those who ultimately hold the risk.5 Securitization thus allows the use of both
the skills and the risk bearing capacity of the economy to the fullest extent possible.
4

In the jargon, pooling reduces adverse selection -- the probability that the seller cherry picks
the bad assets to sell. Since the performance of a pool is more predictable than the
performance of any individual asset, the buyer (and the market) can attribute any
underperformance of the pool to misbehavior by the seller. Since sellers are typically repeat
sellers in this market, this is enough to keep them honest. The tranching of the cash flows
from the pool allows the risk of default to be stratified with the first loss borne by the seller.
This reduces moral hazard, that is, the risk that the seller will not monitor the risks carefully
after selling much of his stake.

5

A typical synthetic collateralized debt obligation (CDO) has an equity or first loss tranche
(absorbing approximately the first 3 percent of the losses), a mezzanine tranche (absorbing
(continued)
7

-8-

While the collection of data on the growth of the credit derivatives and credit default swaps
in the last several years is still in early stages and probably underestimates their usage, the
takeoff of this market is a testament to how financial innovation has been used to spread
traditional risks (see Figure 1).
Integration of Markets
The growth of arm’s length transactions, as well as the attendant fall in regulatory barriers to
the flow of capital across markets has lead to greater integration between markets. As Figure
2 suggests, the gross external assets held by countries (claims of citizens on foreigners) has
grown seven-fold over the last three decades.

Figure 2. External Gross Assets
(In Percent of World GDP)
140
120

External assets

100
80

External assets excl. U.S.

60
40
20
0
1970 1972 1974 1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002
S our c e : La ne a nd Mile si-Fe r re t t i (2005) ; a nd IMF st a f f e st ima t e s.

The advantages of interlinked markets are many. With pools of capital from all over the
world becoming available, transactions no longer depend as much on the availability of local
liquidity but on global liquidity. A world interest rate is now close to a reality, with capital
flowing to where returns seem the most attractive. In a seminal paper in 1980, Feldstein and
Horioka pointed out that there seemed to be a much closer correlation between a country’s
savings and its investment than might be suggested by the existence of global capital markets
– national investment seemed to be constrained by national savings. The correlation between
between 3 precent and 7 percent of the losses), a senior tranche and possibly a super senior
tranche absorbing the rest. Thus the senior tranche will not suffer a loss unless losses exceed
7 percent of the notional amount of the assets.

8

-9-

savings and investment rates within each region, has fallen off, dropping from an average of
0.6 in the period from 1970-1996 to 0.4 in the period 1997-2004 (see IMF, 2005b, World
Economic Outlook, forthcoming Fall 2005).
Reintermediation
That more financial transactions are conducted at arm’s length does not mean that
intermediaries will disappear. For one, intermediation can reduce the costs of investing for
the client, even if the relationship between the client and the investment manager is purely
arm’s length. “Reintermediation” is given further impetus as the sheer complexity of
financial instruments and the volume of information about them increases – investors prefer
delegating to a specialist. Transparent institutions like mutual funds or pension funds save
transactions costs for investors. Less transparent institutions like venture capital funds or
hedge funds have emerged to search for returns in newer, more exotic areas, as excess returns
in more traditional investments have been competed away. Thus, for example, even as equity
markets have grown, the share of direct investment by households in markets has fallen off in
the United States (see Figure 3).

Figure 3. Ownership of Corporate Equities in the United States
(In percent of total market value)
100

100

90

90

80

80

70

70

Other institutions

60

60

50

50

40

40

Life insurance
companies
State & local
pension funds
Private pension
funds
Foreign sector

30

30

20

20

10

10

0

0

1969

1973

1977

1981

1985

1989

1993

1997

2001

Mutual funds

Households &
nonprofit orgs

2005

Source: U.S. Flow of Funds.

9

- 10 -

Banking relationships in origination, product customization, and innovation
As more and more financial products migrate to markets, and more transactions are
undertaken at arm’s length, are commercial banks (and their increasingly close cousins,
investment banks) becoming redundant? To understand the role banks play, we need to
understand the special nature of their capital structure and the relationships they build.
The Role of Banks
Traditionally, a bank has been defined in terms of its twin functions – lending to difficult
credits and offering demand deposits, or more generally, payment services. Yet these
functions seem contradictory. Why offer depositors liquidity on demand when assets are tied
up in illiquid bank loans? Does narrow banking not make more sense – where money market
funds invested in liquid securities offer demand deposits while finance companies funded
through long-term liabilities make loans? Calls for “breaking up the bank” resurface every
few years (see, for example, Simons (1948) and Bryan (1988)).
Yet the form of the banking organization has remained virtually unchanged over a thousand
years, suggesting some rationale for the organizational form. Diamond and Rajan (2001a)
argue that it is the credibility obtained from the fragile capital structure that allows the bank
to take on the risks associated with illiquid loans. If the bank mismanages funds, it knows it
will be shut down in a trice by its depositors and counterparts in the money and inter-bank
markets. It has a very strong incentive to be careful. Since this is widely known and
understood, the bank will be trusted by the money market, other banks, and depositors. Its
continued access to liquidity then enables it to provide it on demand to those who desire it.6
Risk Transfer
Abstracting further to make this discussion more relevant to an industrial economy, the
purpose of the bank is to warehouse risks that only it can manage, while financing with a
capital structure that gives its management credibility. This means that if some risks become
more “vanilla” and capable of being offloaded to the rest of the financial sector, the banking
system will offload them and replace them with more complicated risks, which pay more and
better utilize its distinct warehousing capabilities. After all, investment managers, who have a
6

Note that the depositor in this framework could be replaced by anyone who demands
liquidity – a firm that demands the bank honor a draw-down on a line of credit tests the bank
as much as a depositor who demands his money back. It is in this sense that the bank gains
credibility by promising liquidity. In fact, to the extent that the bank attracts both those who
demand liquidity and those who supply it, it can offset one against the other, going to the
market or its reserves only for the net amount (see Kashyap, Rajan, and Stein (2002)). Gatev
and Strahan (2004) find that banks were at the center of liquidity inflows during the 1998
crisis, which enabled them to provide liquidity to stressed firms.

10

- 11 -

relatively focused and transparent investment strategy, have a lower cost of capital in
financing liquid assets and plain-vanilla risks than banks, whose strategies and balance sheets
are more opaque (see Myers and Rajan (1998)). 7
Consider an example. A fixed rate bank loan to a large corporate client has a number of
embedded risks such as the risk that interest rates will rise reducing the present value of
future repayments and the risk that the client firm will default. There is no reason the bank
should hold on to interest rate risk – why not offload it to an insurance company or a pension
fund who is looking for fixed income flows. Increasingly, default risk is also being
transferred.8 The bank may, however, want to hold on to some of the default risk, both to
signal the quality of the risk to potential buyers, and to signal it will continue monitoring the
firm, coaxing it to reduce default risk. The lower the credit quality of the firm, the stronger
the role of the bank in monitoring and controlling default risk, as also the greater the need to
signal to buyers. Hence the size of the first loss position the bank retains is likely to increase
as the credit quality of the loan falls (see Franke and Krahnen (2005) for evidence).
Thus risk transfer, through loan and default risk sales, does not completely eliminate risk
from bank balance sheets. In fact, bank earnings variability in the United States has not
fallen (see Figure 4) and average bank distance to default in a number of countries has not
increased (see Figure 5). It is apparent that banks have not become safer despite the
development of financial markets and despite being better capitalized than in the past. In fact,
they may have well become riskier in some countries. Finally, if we think bank earnings are
likely to grow at the rate at which market earnings will grow over the foreseeable future, the
declining price earnings ratio of banks in the United States relative to the market suggest that
the market is discounting bank earnings with an increasing risk premium (see Figure 6). This
again suggests bank earnings have not become less risky.
Instead of reducing bank risk, risk transfer allows the bank to concentrate on risks that it has
a comparative advantage in managing, making optimal use of its capital, while hiving off the
rest to those who have a natural appetite for it or to those with balance sheets large enough or
transparent enough to absorb those risks passively. It also implies that the risk held on the
balance sheet is only the tip of an iceberg of risk that is being created.

7

An interesting study in this regard is Morgan (2002), who finds that uncertainty about bank
ratings (as reflected in splits between Moody’s and S&P about the rating of a bank’s bonds)
have increased markedly since 1986. Uncertainty about banks is also markedly higher than
about other industries.

8

For an extensive analysis of risk transfer, see the Global Financial Stability Reports
published by the IMF, 2003-2005.

11

- 12 -

Figure 4. S&P 1500 Banks: Earnings Volatility
Sample Average of Estimated
AR(1)-Process Residuals
0.6

All banks with some
missing data
Smaller sample without
missing data

0.4
0.2
0.0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6
-0.8
1981

1983

1985

1987

1989

1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

2001

2003

Sample Average of Rolling 3-Year Standard Deviations
of Estimated AR(1)-Process Residuals

0.9
All banks with some
missing data

0.8
0.7

Smaller sample without
missing data

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
1981

1983

1985

1987

1989

1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

Notes: The residual is obtained from regressing annual bank earnings against lagged earnings. In the top panel,
each residual is normalized by dividing by the average for that bank across the entire time frame then averaged
across banks in the same period. In the bottom panel, a rolling standard deviation of the residuals is computed
for each bank and then averaged across banks.

12

- 13 -

Figure 5. Bank Distance to Default and Trend Component

United States

Canada

20

20

18

18

16

16

14

14

12

12

10

10

8

8

6

6

4

4

2

2

0

0

1991

1994

1997

2000

2003

1991

1993

1995

Germany

1997

1999

2001

2003

1999

2001

2003

1999

2001

2003

France

20

20

18

18

16

16

14

14

12

12

10

10

8

8

6

6

4

4

2

2

0

0

1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

1991

1993

United Kingdom

1995

1997

Netherlands

20

20

18

18

16

16

14

14

12

12

10

10

8

8

6

6

4

4

2

2

0

0

1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

1991

1993

1995

1997

Source: Datastream; and IMF staff estimates.

13

- 14 -

Figure 6. S&P 500 Banks: Price-to-Earnings Ratios
(In percent of S&P 500 P/E Ratios)
180

160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20
1980

1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

Source: Datastream.

Innovation and Customization
Apart from originating traditional products, banks also have a role in creating new products.
The range of financial needs far exceed the range of financial products that are traded on
exchanges. Customized over-the-counter products cannot always be created simply by
mixing and matching existing exchange-traded instruments. Instead, banks have to create
products tailored to specific client needs.
If there is sufficient demand on both sides for a customized product, it may make sense to
eventually let it trade on an exchange. Before that, however, glitches have to be ironed out.
New financial contracts will not immediately be accepted in the market, because the
uncertainties surrounding their functioning cannot be resolved by arm’s length participants,
who neither have money nor goodwill to spare. For instance, a key uncertainty for a credit
default swap is what determines the event of default. Is it sufficient that the borrower miss a
payment? Will a late payment on an electricity bill or a refusal to pay a supplier because of a
dispute over quality suffice to trigger default? Will a negotiated out-of-court rescheduling of
debt constitute default? These are the kinds of issues that are best settled through experience.
If a bank offers the contract to large clients with whom it has a relationship, the unforeseen
contingencies that arise can be dealt with amicably in an environment where both parties to
the contract are willing to compromise because they value the relationship (this is not to say
the occasional dispute will not end in court). Only when contractual features have been
14

- 15 -

modified to address most contingencies can consideration be given to trading the contract on
an exchange. Thus banks are critical to the process of customization and financial innovation,
using their relationships and reputations to test-drive new contracts.
Sometimes the ambiguities in contracts can never be resolved, so the contracts do not migrate
to the markets. Take, for instance, a loan commitment – that is, a contract through which a
bank agrees to lend at a pre-specified rate if the client demands a loan. Many loan
commitments have an escape clause, termed the “material adverse change” clause. This
allows the institution to duck the commitment if there is a material adverse change in the
client’s condition – a feature that protects the bank from having to make loans in
circumstances where they would clearly not be repaid. In turn, this allows the bank to offer
cheaper loan commitments. Of course, the loan commitment would mean little if the bank
could renege with impunity. Every time an institution invokes the clause without adequate
cause, however, its reputation will suffer a bit, and its future commitments will be worth less.
This gives it the incentive to invoke the material adverse change clause only in the most
necessary circumstances, and the credibility to offer a plausible commitment. Banks, unlike
markets, can offer “incomplete” contracts (see Boot, Greenbaum, and Thakor (1993), Rajan
1998).
Finally, there are contracts for which there is only demand on one side. In such cases, banks
may be willing to create the necessary contracts, offer them to clients, and hedge the ensuing
risks, often through dynamic trading strategies in financial markets.9
This last point suggests that in addition to its traditional role in offering liquidity to clients
and the market, banks now also rely on the liquidity of all sorts of other markets to keep
themselves fully hedged. We will return to the risks this poses later.
Summary
Let me summarize. Technical change, regulatory change, and institutional change have
combined to make arm’s length transactions more feasible. More transactions are now done
on markets, as well by institutions that have an arm’s length relationship with their clients.
9

It is worth noting that financial institutions that create financial products to serve a general
clientele may have a tendency to become more complex. The least cost financial product
often makes use of multiple markets. For instance, the solution to a client firm’s problem
may require the financial institution to sell the firm a customized over-the-counter option,
which is then hedged dynamically using other markets. The more markets the financial
institution operates in, the easier it will be to come up with the right solution (and the fewer
the conflicts of interest in pushing it), and the easier it will be to hedge. Of course, the
diseconomies of scope and of organization will eventually kick in, increasing the transactions
costs of doing business within the institution. Whether financial institutions have become
overly complex is an issue I will not address in this paper.

15

- 16 -

This has not, however, marginalized traditional institutions like banks and their relationships.
The changes have allowed such institutions to focus on their core business of customization
and financial innovation, as well as risk management. As a consequence, the risks borne by
traditional institutions have not become any lower. New risks are, however, now spread more
widely in the economy, and traditionally excluded groups have benefited.
III. Are Financial Systems Safer?
I have outlined a number of changes to the nature of financial transactions. While these have
created undoubted benefits, and on net are likely to have made us significantly better off,
they have opened up new vulnerabilities, to which I now turn.
Let me start by pointing out some vulnerabilities created by the greater reliance of economies
on arm’s length transactions and markets. I will then turn to changes in incentives of
financial sector managers, which will be my main focus.
Greater demand on markets.
Markets have become more integrated, have drawn in a greater variety of participants, and as
a result, usually have more depth. Yet the demands made of these markets are not static, and
typically increase over time.
One reason is that with the exception of one time spot deals, arm’s length transactions rely
enormously on the superstructure of the market – on trustworthy and timely dissemination of
public information, on reliable performance by counterparties (failing which parties expect
rapid and just enforcement), on the smooth functioning of the payments and settlements
system, and on the availability of reasonable exit options when needed -- that is, the
availability of liquidity.
The expectation of a reliable superstructure draws participants who are not necessarily
financially sophisticated or aware of local nuances – not just the proverbial Belgian dentist
but also the return-hungry foreign fund comes to mind. For these investors continued
reliability is extremely important since they do not have recourse to other means of ensuring
the security of their transactions.10
Most markets can provide reliability some of the time to all participants and all of the time to
some participants. Few can provide it all of the time to all of the participants. So critical to
the resilience of these markets is whether, at times when universal reliability cannot be
assured, those who have assurance of reliability can substitute for those who do not; For
example, can domestic financial institutions who have a greater ability to manage without the
10

For example, Qian and Strahan (2005) find that foreign bank’s ownership of a country’s
loans is higher when the costs of using the country’s legal system are lower.

16

- 17 -

superstructure underpinning markets, and who have their own sources of information and
enforcement substitute for potentially more dependent foreign retail investors or funds?11
The very forces that broaden access to the markets may, unfortunately, inhibit such
substitution. First, growing perceptions of reliability, accentuated by good times, which tend
to paper over all shortcomings, can draw in significant numbers of unsophisticated investors.
The tolerance of these investors for ambiguity or for any counterparties who are “nonconforming” may be very limited. As a result, these investors may take fright at the first sign
the superstructure or counterparties are under stress, increasing the volume of transactions
that have to be substituted for in such times.
Second, the supply of those who can substitute may also fall as a market builds a record of
reliability. Knowing that the unsophisticated focus on certain pieces of public information,
and that they tend to move markets in ways that are hard to counteract, the sophisticated may
reduce their search for alternative, less public sources of information. The market may
become informationally less diverse as it becomes more arm’s length, increasing risks if
public information becomes less reliable (in actuality or perception).12 In other words, while
a “Hayekian” market, aggregating all manner of information is the ideal of market
proponents, the incentives for information acquisition may become muted and, instead,
market participants may focus excessively on some readily available sources that they
believe everyone else is focusing on (also see Allen, Morris, and Shin (2004)).
Equally worrisome, the traditional skills of the sophisticated in managing without a reliable
superstructure may fall into disuse. When the accounts of all companies are suspect as a
matter of course, each financial institution has plenty of forensic accountants who can
untangle the good firms from the bad. As confidence in accounts increases, however, the
forensic accountants are let go, leaving institutions less capable of discrimination between
firms when corporate scandals emerge.
Put differently, the longer a market’s superstructure proves to be reliant, the more reliance
will be placed on it. If it does not improve its systems constantly, it could find that the
demands for reliability that are placed on it exceeds its capability of supplying them. The
consequence is greater fragility: to errors, to misinformation, and to simple bad luck.

11

Mian (2004), for example, finds that domestic banks in Pakistan are much more likely to
restructure a troubled loans using a private workout whereas foreign banks are more prone to
use courts.

12

One example of a focus on easily available public information is the use of corporate
bonds ratings in the CDO market, even though such ratings may be misleading when applied
to highly leveraged instruments (see BIS 2005).

17

- 18 -

Incentives Leading to Riskier Markets
Let me now turn to incentives. In my opinion, a potentially greater concern than the market’s
superstructure being unreliable is that the managers of the new intermediaries, as well as
managers of today’s banks have vastly different incentive structures than bank managers of
the past. This is not a bad thing in and of itself. I will argue, though, that these structures
could well create perverse incentives under certain situations, and those should be a source of
concern.
As I argued earlier, investors have departed banks only to delegate management of their
financial investments to a new set of investment managers. Delegation, however, creates a
new problem, that of providing incentives to the investment manager. Investors can reward
managers based on the total returns they generate. However, managers can always produce
returns by taking on more risk, so investors have to ensure managers do not game them. One
common theoretical measure of performance is Jensen’s alpha, that is, the excess returns
produced by the manager over the risk free rate, per unit of risk taken. A sensible way of
implementing a performance system based on alpha is to constrain the investment manager to
investments in a particular category or style, and evaluate him based on how he performs
relative either to others who follow the style or to an appropriate benchmark portfolio with a
similar level of risk. In short, the most practical method of providing incentives to managers
is to compare their return performance relative to other competing managers who follow
broadly similar investment strategies.
Furthermore, the market provides its own incentives. Given that there are economies of scale
in investment management (at least up to a point), it makes sense for managerial
compensation to be positively related to assets under management, and it typically is. And
assets under management are determined by return performance: even though there is little
systematic evidence that past performance by investment managers ensures future
performance, investors do chase after managers who generate high returns because they think
(incorrectly) the managers have “hot hands”.13 And current investors, if dissatisfied, do take
their money elsewhere although they often suffer from inertia in doing so. In Figure 7, I
present the flows into an average U.S. mutual fund as a function of the returns it generates
(see Chevalier and Ellison (1997)). As the figure suggests, positive excess returns (the
amount by which returns exceed the returns on the market) generate substantial inflows while
negative returns generate much milder outflows – in short, inflows are convex in returns.
Thus an investment manager’s compensation is directly related to the returns he generates,
but it is also indirectly related to returns via the quantum of assets he manages, which are
also influenced by returns. The superimposition of these two effects leads to a compensation

13

See Agarwal et al. (2004), Chan et al. (2005), and Chevalier and Ellison (1997), for
example.

18

- 19 Figure 7. U.S. Mutual Funds' Returns and Net Flows 1/
1.5

1.2

Expected Year t+1 Net Flow

0.9

0.6

90% confidence bands

0.3

Flow-performance relationship

0.0

-0.3

-0.6
-0.25

-0.20

-0.15

-0.10

-0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

0.15

0.20

0.25

Year t Excess Return
Source: Chevalier and Ellison (1997).
1/ Data for young funds (age 2 years).

function that is convex in returns, that is, one that encourages risk taking because the upside
is significant, while the downside is limited. 14
The incentive to take risk is most pronounced for managers of young, small, funds, where hot
high return strategies, even those that are sure to collapse eventually, may be preferable to
steady strategies. The high return strategy attracts inflows and enhances compensation in the
short run, when the cost of failure in terms of foregone future fees is relatively limited.
Eventually, if the fund survives, it will have grown large enough that inflows are no longer as
welcome because they make the fund unwieldy. The relative cost of losing the franchise
through risky investments will then loom much larger and the fund will become more
conservative. Brown, Goetzmann, and Park (2001) show that the probability of liquidation of
hedge funds increases with increasing risk, while Chan et al. (2005) find that younger hedge
funds tend to get liquidated significantly more often, suggesting they do take on more risk.
The emphasis on relative performance evaluation in compensation creates further perverse
incentives. Since additional risks will generally imply higher returns, managers may take
14

Not all developments take us in the direction of increasing short term behavior. For
example, as the GFSR September 2005 points out, insurance companies are increasingly
looking for long term investment strategies, and longer term instruments, so as to hedge their
long term liabilities. My arguments should be seen as reflecting where I think the central
tendency is rather than a universal trend.

19

- 20 -

risks that are typically not in their comparison benchmark (and hidden from investors) so as
to generate the higher returns to distinguish themselves. While choosing the more observable
investments within the benchmark, however, managers typically will be wary of being too
different from their peers, for they insure themselves against relative underperformance when
they herd. Let us examine these behaviors in greater detail.
Hidden Tail Risk
Consider the incentive to take on risk that is not in the benchmark and is not observable to
investors. A number of insurance companies and pension funds have entered the credit
derivatives market to sell guarantees against a company defaulting.15 Essentially, these
investment managers collect premia in ordinary times from people buying the guarantees.
With very small probability, however, the company will default, forcing the guarantor to pay
out a large amount. The investment managers are thus selling disaster insurance or,
equivalently, taking on “peso” or “tail” risks, which produce a positive return most of the
time as compensation for a rare very negative return.16 These strategies have the appearance
of producing very high alphas (high returns for low risk), so managers have an incentive to
load up on them.17 Every once in a while, however, they will blow up. Since true
performance can only be estimated over a long period, far exceeding the horizon set by the
average manager’s incentives, managers will take these risks if they can.
One example of this behavior was observed in 1994, when a number of money market
mutual funds in the United States came close to “breaking the buck” (going below a net asset
value of $1, which is virtually unthinkable for an ostensibly riskless fund). Some money
market funds had to be bailed out by their parent companies. The reason they came so close
to disaster was because they had been employing risky derivatives strategies in order to
goose up returns, and these strategies came unstuck in the tail event caused by the Federal
Reserve raising interest rates quickly.
15

Of course, much of the exposure of these firms comes from holding senior tranches –
where they will suffer loss only if there is a serious downturn in the economy and the
protection afforded by the originator’s equity and the mezzanine levels proves insufficient.

16

Peso risk is named after the strategy of investing in Mexican pesos while shorting the U.S.
dollar. This produces a steady return amounting to the interest differential between the two
countries, although shadowed by the constant catastrophic risk of a devaluation. Another
example of a strategy producing such a pattern of returns is to short deep out-of-the money
S&P 500 put options (see Chan, Getmansky, Haas, and Lo (2005)).
17

Certainly, the pattern of returns of hedge funds following fixed income arbitrage strategies
suggested they were selling disaster insurance. The worst average monthly return between
1990 and 1997 was a loss of 2.58 percent, but losses were 6.45 percent in September 1998
and 6.09 percent in October 1998.

20

- 21 -

If firms today are implicitly selling various kinds of default insurance to goose up returns,
what happens if catastrophe strikes? Will they start defaulting on obligations to policyholders
and pensioners precisely when such protection is most needed? It may well be that the
managers of these firms have figured out the correlations between the various instruments
they hold and believe they are hedged. Yet as Chan et al. (2005) point out, the lessons of the
summer of 1998 following the default on Russian government debt is that correlations that
are zero or negative in normal times can turn overnight to one – a phenomenon they term
“phase lock in”. A hedged position can become unhedged at the worst times, inflicting
substantial losses on those who mistakenly believe they are protected.
Herding
Consider the second distortion, herding. Established fund managers who are evaluated
against a common benchmark like the S&P 500 index have an incentive to buy the stocks
included in the index as a form of insurance since only severe underperformance triggers
dismissal.18 Even if they suspect the stocks are overvalued, they know they will be excused if
they perform very poorly when their benchmark also performs poorly.
Would a few enterprising managers not want to buck the trend and thus return prices to
fundamentals? Unfortunately, few would want to go up against the enormous mass of
managers pursuing the trend. The reason is that their horizon is limited. If the mispricing in
stocks does not correct itself in a relatively short while, the investment manager will see an
erosion of his customers as he underperforms. It takes a very brave investment manager with
infinitely patient investors to fight the trend, even if the trend is a deviation from fundamental
value. Increasingly, finance academics are coming to the conclusion that prolonged
deviations from fundamental value are possible because relatively few resources will be
deployed to fight the herd (see, for example, Shleifer and Vishny (1997) or Lamont and
Thaler (2001)).
To summarize, overall incentives to take risk have increased. In addition, however,
incentives to take tail risk as well as incentives to herd and move prices away from
fundamentals, have increased. Different managers may suffer from each of these distortions
to a different extent – the young and unproven are likely to take more tail risk, while the
established are likely to herd more. The two distortions are, however, a volatile combination.
If herd behavior moves asset prices away from fundamentals, the likelihood of large
realignments – precisely the kind that trigger tail losses – increases. One last ingredient can
make the cocktail particularly volatile, and that is low interest rates after a period of high
rates – either because of financial liberalization or because of extremely accommodative
monetary policy.
18

See Chevalier and Ellison (1997) for evidence.

21

- 22 -

Low interest rates and incentives
Low interest rates induce an additional degree of procyclical risk taking into financial
markets. Let me illustrate with some examples.
Example 1: Insurance companies may have entered into fixed rate commitments. When
interest rates fall, they may have no alternative but to seek out riskier investments – if they
stay with low return but safe investments, they are likely to default for sure on their
commitments, while if they take riskier but higher return investments, they have some chance
of survival. This phenomenon, known as risk shifting (see, for example, Jensen and Meckling
(1976)), tends to induce participants to ignore collective downside risks (including
illiquidity) since their attention is focused on the upside, the only circumstances under which
they survive. Of course, if risk free interest rates start moving back up, insurance companies
can meet their obligations without taking undue risk. Thus they have an incentive to search
for risk when interest rates are low, and to become more conservative when they are high.
Example 2: A second form of induced “risk shifting” can be seen in hedge funds. The typical
compensation contract for a hedge fund manager is 1 percent of assets under management
plus 20 percent of annual returns in excess of a minimum nominal return (often zero). When
risk free returns are high, compensation is high even if the fund takes on little risk, while
when risk free returns are low the fund may not even exceed the minimum return if it takes
little risk. Thus low rates will increase fund manager incentives to take on risk. Since the cost
of borrowing can also be low at such times, fund managers can goose up returns by adding
leverage. In doing so, they also add risk.19
In addition to the incentives of managers changing, the quantity of capital seeking riskier
investments can also increase when interest rates are low only to pull back when interest
rates rise. Insurance companies, pension funds, and endowments may look to invest in hedge
funds so as to increase returns. Young hedge funds are likely to attract significant flows, not
just because they are more open to them, but also because everyone knows they will take on
additional risk.
Simple proxies such as the VIX index for the risk aversion of financial markets in the United
States do seem to be positively correlated with the level of short-term interest rates.20 Also,
19

None of this is to take away from the positive role hedge funds play in searching for the
highest yields and in providing liquidity to markets.

20

A GARCH model with ARMA terms in the mean equation (thereby correcting for autocorrelation and heteroskedasticity) finds a positive and statistically significant correlation
between the first differenced 3-month U.S. T-Bill yield and the implied volatility of the
CBOE S&P 500 Index options contract.

22

- 23 -

Kodres and Kashiwasi (GFSR 2005, Box 2.4), among others, show emerging market spreads
fall significantly when industrial country interest rates fall unexpectedly, and when interest
rate volatility is low (as it is when interest rates are low). This suggests that risk appetites
may well increase as interest rates fall, inducing a degree of procyclicality into the financial
sector, over and above other sources of procyclicality such as collateral values (see, for
example, Hoshi, Kashyap and Scharfstein (1993), Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) or Shin
(2005)).
Example 3: The natural question then is why do recipients accept such “hot” money and
finance long term illiquid projects or consumption with them? Don’t they realize that these
investors are fickle and likely to evaporate when interest rates rise?
Emerging markets are perhaps the recipients most likely to be damaged by a “sudden stop”
imposed by a movement of investment managers towards lower risk as developed country
rates rise. Maybe these governments do not realize the risk they are taking by financing with
such “hot” flows. After all, their credit rating improves when global interest rates are low
since debt service is easier at low rates. This, in turn, implies they will pay lower risk premia
than normal on their borrowing. Spreads can be further compressed if industrial country
investors have the additional desire to take on risk that we have discussed above. Faced with
falling risk premia and improving credit ratings, it is tempting for the emerging market
politician to assign the credit to his own policies (and if they have not actually changed, to
the fact that foreign investors have finally recognized how wonderful the policies have been).
Why not use the easy money to enhance growth rates? Thus it is possible politicians might
mistake a cyclical phenomenon for a secular trend and initiate a plethora of long term
projects on that basis, only to be forced to liquidate them when the cycle turns.
However, all politicians have to do is to look around and see that everyone seems to be lifted
by the rising tide of easy credit to realize their country is not special. This should inspire
caution. But politicians themselves have short horizons defined by elections, and asymmetric
compensation functions. Perhaps oversimplifying, if they can produce high growth before the
elections, they will be re-elected, while low growth (or high growth) post-elections is
discounted, a phenomenon that leads to the “political business cycle” (see, for example,
Alesina and Sachs (1986)). They, therefore, have every incentive to accept hot money even if
they fully recognize its true character.
In fact, a number of models of early warning systems for crises show that the probability of
an emerging market crisis increases when U.S. interest rates rise (see Kamin, Schindler, and
Samuel (2001) or Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999)). The point, therefore, is that common
factors like low interest rates – potentially caused by accommodative monetary policy -- can
engender excessive tolerance for risk on both sides of financial transactions.21 When markets
21

The reader will note that I have been vague about whether I am talking about nominal or
real rates, or policy, short term, or long term rates. It is possible to spin a story about each
rate – for example, insurance companies with fixed nominal commitments would be
(continued)
23

- 24 -

are integrated, these phenomena can spill across borders. An industrial country’s monetary
policy, while appropriate for its domestic circumstances, may be inappropriate taking into
account spillover effects on other economies.
Financial Risk and Real Risk
Thus far, we have discussed excessive financial risk taking. When is it most likely to
translate into real risk? Clearly, excessive risk tolerance leads to an excessive willingness to
finance real investment, with the potential for overcapacity and a waste of real resources to
society.
Are there other consequences? Can the build up of financial claims independently affect real
activity? In the perfect world, the answer should be no. If there is an adverse shock to the real
value of an asset or position, it should be immediately reflected in the financial claims that
are written on that asset or position. Holders of financial claims will absorb the loss and since
the aggregate loss cannot be more than the real loss suffered, the consequences cannot be any
greater.
In practice, however, real losses need not be allocated so smoothly to financial claims. First,
with myriad complex claims written on the same underlying real asset, there may be legal
uncertainty on who bears what loss. Bankruptcy procedures, which are an attempt to allocate
losses, can be prolonged. During this time, gaming between firm managers and claimants,
between various classes of claimants, and between claimants and customers can affect real
activity, converting financial distress into economic distress.
Second, in anticipation of a complicated bankruptcy, or when there is no such procedure to
restrain claimants, some short-term claimants may prefer to press their financial claims,
forcing a liquidation of long term real assets. Emerging markets have experience with this. A
downturn in a country’s economic prospects can lead not just to a sudden stop of new capital
but also a forced liquidation of existing real assets as investors run (see Calvo, Izquierdo, and
Mejia (2004), Diamond and Rajan (2001b), Jeanne (2002)).
The adverse consequences I have just described are multiplied when there is too little
financial liquidity in the system. Liquidity allows holders of financial claims to be patient,
allows the netting of offsetting claims, and allows the value of the net financial claim to more
fully reflect fundamental real value. Not only does illiquidity perpetuate the overhang of
financial claims as well as uncertainty about their final resolution, a perception of too little
aggregate liquidity in the system can trigger off additional demands for liquidity (see
concerned about nominal rates, while those with real commitments would be concerned
about real rates. To the extent that policy rates can affect long term nominal rates (by
signaling the stance of future monetary policy) as well as real rates (by inducing greater risk
tolerance), policy rates may indeed be relevant.

24

- 25 -

Diamond and Dybvig (1983)), and create contagion (Diamond and Rajan (2005)). Since
systemic instability, rather than the demise of a few players is the real concern, let us now
turn to whether the traditional providers of liquidity will step up to play their role.
Can the traditional providers of liquidity be relied upon?
The additional need for liquidity as financial systems have become more arm’s length stems
from a variety of reasons. First, as new and inexperienced players are drawn in, there is a
greater need for resilience in the system. Second, because more complicated instruments are
used and larger positions can be built up, a lot more uncertainty needs to be tided over.
Finally, large movements of asset prices away from fundamentals, as well as a concentration
on tail risks, implies that in certain eventualities, significant losses will have to be allocated.
Can banks step up to provide the needed liquidity?
Fundamentals and Asset Prices
Start first by asking whether banks and investment banks will take contrarian positions and
reduce the risk associated with misaligned asset values and excessive concentrations of risk.
The answer is likely to be no. For one, banks typically do not have the mandate to take the
large trading positions necessary to arbitrage away misalignments. Moreover, while bankers
may not have the same skewed incentives as investment managers, they also are responsible
for quarterly profits. They therefore face the same limits to arbitrage as do investment
managers – they cannot carry a losing position for too long.
More problematic, however, is that because they can typically sell much of the risk off their
balance sheets, they have an incentive to originate the assets that are in high demand and thus
feed the frenzy. If it is housing, banks have an incentive to provide whatever mortgages are
demanded, even if they are risky “interest-only” mortgages. In the midst of a frenzy, banks
are unlikely to maintain much spare risk bearing capacity. If the returns to originating risk are
high, and banks have to keep a piece of every risk originated, they have every incentive to
utilize their balance sheets fully when the frenzy is on, rather than buck the trend (and their
profitable peers) and keep spare capacity for a potential, low probability, crisis.
This also means that to the extent that the frenzy has contributed to a misalignment of asset
prices, bank balance sheets are unlikely to be fully insulated from a realignment of those
prices with fundamentals. In addition to explicit bank liabilities, significant downturns can
bring along a number of contingent and implicit commitments. Given that banks are
increasingly in the guarantee business and are concerned about their future reputations, they
will attempt to fulfill these commitments, especially while the extent of the downturn is still
unclear. This will further weaken the quality of their balance sheets. Finally, in an arm’s
length market, participants always have recourse to litigation, which can bring further
uncertainty and liabilities to the balance sheets of those who are perceived to have fed the
frenzy.

25

- 26 -

In summary then, while traditional providers of liquidity may have improved their abilities to
manage risk, they are forced by competitive forces to remain on the frontiers of risk creation
and absorption. They may not maintain much spare risk bearing capacity or liquidity creating
capacity. Can they, however, at least reallocate liquidity as they have done in the past?
Reallocating Liquidity
One of the advantages of banks is that they can be well diversified across liquidity needs in
the system and can thus provide liquidity most efficiently to those who need it (see Kashyap
et al. 2002). Gatev and Strahan (2004) show that when the commercial paper market dried up
for many issuers following the Russian crisis in 1998, banks with higher levels of transaction
deposits were perceived (by the stock market) to be lower risk. They experienced larger
inflows of funds – possibly from investors fleeing the commercial paper market – just when
firms denied access to commercial paper started taking down back-up lines of credit from
these banks. Thus banks helped intermediate liquidity back into the system in a time of crisis.
As the crisis passed, back-up lines were repaid, and deposits flowed back into commercial
paper. In a sense, banks provide guarantees of liquidity to borrowers and depositors, but
because these came at different times in 1998, they were naturally hedged. Central banks can
also help by increasing overall liquidity, as did the Federal Reserve in 1998.
One reason banks functioned effectively in 1998 as liquidity providers of next-to-last resort
was because they were not perceived as credit risks, so they attracted spare liquidity. This
need not be the case in future crises. As originators of credit risk, banks hold first loss
positions. A downturn in the economy, perhaps caused by, and causing asset price
realignment, would result in actual losses being borne by bank balance sheets. Of course,
banks hedge some positions through dynamic options-like strategies. As liquidity falls and
prices move more, they will have to make larger and larger trades to offset those initial
losses, thus demanding liquidity from the market precisely when it has little to offer. Bank
losses could widen.22
In sum, while the experience in the 1998 crisis in the United States should offer a certain
measure of confidence that liquidity will continue to be provided in a crisis, one should not
become overly sanguine. If banks also face credit losses and there is uncertainty about where
those losses are located, only the very few unimpeachable banks will receive the supply of
liquidity fleeing other markets. If these banks also lose confidence in their liquidity-short
brethren, the inter-bank market could freeze up, and one could well have a full blown
financial crisis.

22

This is not a novel observation – the failure of “portfolio insurance” strategies during the
Crash of 1987 was a wake-up call about the risks inherent in dynamic hedging strategies.

26

- 27 -

Summary
So, on net, what can we say about how the stability of the financial system has evolved as the
nature of the system has changed? While the system now exploits the risk bearing capacity of
the economy better by allocating risks more widely, it also takes on more risks than before.
Moreover, the linkages between markets, and between markets and institutions, are now
more pronounced. While this helps the system diversify across small shocks, it also exposes
the system to large systemic shocks – large shifts in asset prices or changes in aggregate
liquidity. The incentive structure of investment managers, as well as intensified competition,
may contribute to “endogenizing” the large systemic shocks (see Knight (2004) for a nice
exposition of endogenous risk) – not only might investment managers have a greater
tendency to allow asset price misalignments, they may also have a tendency to leave
themselves exposed to events in “the tail” of probability distributions, without preparing
adequately for them. Tail events may prompt a flight to quality and liquidity. Unfortunately,
traditional providers of liquidity could find it harder to step up at such times.
While it is hard to be categorical about anything as complex as the modern financial system,
it is possible that these developments are creating more financial–sector induced
procyclicality than in the past. They may also create a greater (albeit still small) probability
of a catastrophic meltdown. Unfortunately, we won’t know whether these are, in fact, serious
worries until the system has been tested.
It is true the volatility of growth in industrial countries has been falling, partly as a result of
the increasing flexibility of real economies, partly as a result of better policies, partly as a
result of increased trade, and partly as a result of better financial markets. But the nature of
tail risks, especially those related to credit, is such that we should not be lulled into
complacency by a long period of calm. The absence of volatility does not imply the absence
of risk, especially when the risk is tail risk, which may take a long time to show up.
Moreover, it is not even clear that volatility in the financial sector has fallen – in the figure
below, we plot the volatility of GDP growth in the United States and stock market returns
(quarter on quarter returns on the S&P 500 index, estimated over a rolling twelve quarter
period). While there seems to be a clear trend down in the volatility of GDP, there does not
seem to be such a trend in the stock market.
It is also true the financial system has survived some large shocks in the past, under the able
stewardship of Chairman Greenspan. The crash of 1987, the world panic of 1998, the
bursting of the stock market bubble in 2000-2001 were all shocks that might have had far
worse consequences for industrial country financial sectors, and for the world economy, were
it not for appropriate intervention by monetary authorities.
Nevertheless, the experience thus far should not make us overly sanguine. First, can we be
confident that the shocks were large enough and in the right places to fully test the system?
After all, a shock to equity markets, though large, may have less effect than a shock to credit
markets. In other words, can we be confident that all losses are equal, or will some losses be
more systemic than others? Perhaps Chairman Greenspan should be faulted for allowing only
27

- 28 -

two mild recessions during his tenure. And perhaps we can sleep better at night if we
pray,”Lord, if there be shocks, let them be varied and preferably moderate ones, so we can
stress test our systems.”
UNITED STATES 1973-2004
1.50

16.00

GDP (left)
STOCK MARKET (right)

14.00

1.25
12.00
1.00
10.00

0.75

8.00

6.00
0.50
4.00
0.25
2.00

0.00
1973Q1

0.00
1976Q1

1979Q1

1982Q1

1985Q1

1988Q1

1991Q1

1994Q1

1997Q1

2000Q1

2003Q1

Second, some argue it is better to pick up the pieces after the fact through a liquidity infusion
by monetary authorities, than attempt to second-guess the market and prevent risk build up.
There seems to a presumption in this argument that liquidity infusion is costless. It is not. It
does impose lower policy rates, sometimes for a considerable duration, and entails a tax on
savers and a transfer to those who need the liquidity. The low rates implicit in liquidity
intervention could also create their own incentive distortions. Market friendly policies to
prevent or discourage excessive risk taking should be considered in the light that most of the
remedies we currently contemplate are costly.
Before I come to policy, let me turn to an important question. If indeed risk taking is
excessive, why don’t investors offer their managers compensation contracts that restrain the
short-term emphasis on returns and associated risk taking, as well as encourage them to
maintain adequate liquidity? There is a prima facie case for policy intervention only if private
incentives for risk taking or liquidity provision depart from what is socially desirable. Even if
this case can be established, however, intervention will be warranted only if its benefits
exceed its costs. But let us start by asking whether there is a prima facie case.

28

- 29 -

Do Investors have the Incentive or Ability to restrain Managers?
Restraining risk taking
Investors may indeed have too little private incentive to restrain the focus of investment
managers on generating returns in the short run. For one, there is very little systematic
evidence that past performance in financial investment is an indicator of future performance,
Warren Buffet or Peter Lynch notwithstanding. This implies that the constant movement by
investors between funds has little social value (and potentially negative value – see Frazzini
and Lamont (2005)). But current investors in an individual fund benefit when new investors
pour in because the fund’s average costs go down. As a result, the private gains from
attracting new investors through a fund’s superior short term performance exceed the social
value, and current investors have too little incentive to restrain managers from focusing on
the short term.
Similarly, because issuers -- such as emerging market politicians -- may also be myopic and
may not fully internalize the cost of accepting hot money, investors may not bear the full cost
of the real damage inflicted as their investment managers herd in and out of investments.
Even if they wanted to provide their managers appropriate incentives, however, investors
may not have the ability to do so. For one, they may not be able to penalize a manager who
follows the herd into disaster. After all, it is easy for the manager to walk away and get a job
in another fund, blaming the collective crash for his poor performance.
Equally important, however, they may not have complete control over managers – because of
weaknesses in corporate governance, for example. If so, and because managers have private
incentives to generate returns in the short term (to preserve their jobs or for the public
adulation that success brings), the private equilibrium may again generate excessive risk
taking.
Restraining Illiquidity
Liquidity is clearly a public good, so it is likely the private incentives to provide for it, or not
overuse it, are inadequate. It is hard for a private actor to fully capture the benefits of
providing liquidity – if prices are higher and more closely reflect fundamentals, all who
trade benefit, not just the actor who injected liquidity into the market (Bhattacharya and Gale
(1987), Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2005)). Therefore, the private sector has too little
incentive to provision for it.
In fact, it makes sense for an investment manager to free ride on the liquidity provided by
others. Hot money departing an emerging market does not pay for the liquidity it relies upon

29

- 30 -

as it leaves.23 Thus both risk taking and liquidity provision by investment managers may not
be adequately policed by private markets (see Chakravorti and Lall (2004) for a related but
different rationale for why markets may not write the right incentive contracts with
investment managers).
Given that there is a prima facie case, can we say anything more. Any intervention has costs.
Chairman Greenspan, in a speech some years ago suggested some very useful guidelines for
interventions "Proceed cautiously, facilitate and participate in prudent innovation, allow
markets to signal the winners and losers among competing technologies and market
structures, and overall—as the medical profession is advised—do no harm." This would
suggest market friendly, low cost intervention, but only if we can show the benefits outweigh
the costs.
Unfortunately, since we do not know the probability of a potentially catastrophic meltdown
of the financial sector (though it is likely to be small), it is hard to do a precise cost-benefit
analysis. Greenspan (2004) suggests that a risk management approach to policy making
should take into account small probability events, especially if the potential costs of those
events is likely to be large. Ultimately, though, even a risk management approach boils down
to judgments about costs and probabilities and, at present, these will be subjective. More data
certainly needs to be collected on the magnitude of these risks.
Nevertheless, I would argue that given the potential costs of the concerns I raise, if we can
find low cost ways of nudging excessive risk taking down, and making it less procyclical, we
should use them. Let us examine the tools we might have.
IV. Monetary and Regulatory Responses
The two main tools that suggest themselves are monetary policy and prudential regulation
and supervision. I start with why monetary policy might have a role.
Changes in the Process of Credit Expansion and Contraction
One of the main changes under way is that banks increasingly account for a smaller and
smaller fraction of expansion in financing. Much more is now fueled by organizations like
hedge funds and pension funds. As we have argued, changes in the rate environment can
significantly affect the assets under management in risk-tolerant institutions, as well as the
allocation of investments by those institutions. This might induce substantial additional
procyclicality into monetary policy, as well as increasing the small probability of a serious
crisis.

23

Of course, “hot” money may well have paid up on average, by accepting lower interest
rates from the emerging market when it knows it has assured and easy exit.

30

- 31 -

Details matter. For example, we have seen that changes from a high interest rate environment
to a low interest rate environment could leave a number of institutions with long term fixed
interest liabilities searching for yield and hence risk, and willing to expand lending. Also, the
change can set off a self-reinforcing upward revaluation of asset prices, collateral values, and
credit (see, for example, Bernanke and Gertler (1990), Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), and Shin
(2005)). Conversely, a change from a low interest rate environment to a high interest rate
environment can induce a flight to quality with attendant effects on high-risk illiquid credits,
and a collapse in asset price growth.
The level of interest rates will also matter. In a persistently low interest rate environment,
more institutions (such as hedge funds) that are compensated on the basis of nominal return
will stretch for yield by taking on risk, including maturity risk. Note that via these actions of
financial institutions, changes in policy rates will affect long rates, contributing to any
existing channels of monetary transmission from policy rates to long rates.24
Implications for monetary policy
The above discussion, however, has the following implications for a risk management
approach. First, rapid, large, changes in monetary policy have significant costs, not just in the
domestic economy but in all interconnected markets (monetary authorities clearly recognize
this -- see, for example, Ferguson (2003)). Adjustment costs need to be factored into policy.
This will typically imply a more measured optimal policy than one that does not factor
adjustment costs. Of course, “measured” does not necessarily imply perfectly predictable –
some two-way uncertainty is always useful to prevent excessive gaming or complacency by
market participants.
Second, while deflation can be immensely harmful for the real economy, an unanticipated
but persistent low interest rate can be a source of significant distortions for the financial
sector, and thence for asset prices. Not only does this mean staying further away from
24

I have argued that the changed incentive structures as markets become more arm’s length
contribute to increased risk taking, and heighten the possibility of booms and busts. Much of
the debate in macro-policy circles has, however, centered on the decline in inflation as the
primary explanation. More precisely, the argument is that quiescent goods price inflation
may have created a fertile new environment for asset price booms and consequent busts.
Perhaps oversimplifying the well-argued ideas of Borio (2003), Borio and Lowe (2002), and
Crockett (2001, 2002, 2003), in this new environment, credit expansions are less likely to be
accompanied by goods price inflation. Monetary policy that is focused on controlling shortrun goods price inflation is likely to exert fewer checks on credit expansion and asset price
inflation. The increase in the number of booms and busts in recent years is thus attributed, in
part, to the presumed death of inflation. The two sets of explanations (incentives or the
absence of goods price inflation) are not mutually exclusive, and more research is required to
ascertain their relative merits.

31

- 32 -

deflation so that extremely low policy rates do not have to be used as a tool, it also implies
exercising greater supervisory vigilance when those rates are in effect to contain asset price
bubbles.
Third, and somewhat obviously, one can no longer just examine the state of the banking
system and its exposure to credit to reach conclusions about aggregate credit creation, let
alone the stability of the financial system. While the banking system may still be the lever by
which the entire financial system is controlled, other parts could have substantial influence.
Finally, given that the financial sector may experience greater liquidity and solvency
problems in really bad states of the world, central banks have to be vigilant for any possible
shortfalls in aggregate liquidity. A risk management approach will imply the central bank
will do everything to avert those states by pumping in liquidity. The danger, of course, is that
this could induce moral hazard in market participants. Clearly, any specific assistance will
have to include penalties for those managers who have left their institutions overexposed.
Central bank credibility in enforcing these penalties will go a long way in limiting moral
hazard.
Prudential Supervision
Some economists argue that monetary policy alone is insufficient to address concerns about
both inflation and financial stability, so a second instrument with countercyclical
characteristics is needed (see, for example, Goodhart (2005)). A natural candidate seems to
be some aspect of prudential supervision.
Two questions arise immediately. Who should come under the prudential supervision net and
what instruments should be used?
Who should be supervised?
Large institutions at the core of the financial sector will have to be supervised. However,
some might argue that there is no need to bring institutions like hedge funds under the
regulatory umbrella. After all, if rich sophisticated investors want to lose their money by
placing it with some mathematical whiz kids who think markets mimic their models, why
should regulators intervene?
Clearly, there is no public policy rationale for protecting sophisticated investors. And despite
their aura, few hedge funds are large enough to pose systemic risks, LTCM notwithstanding.
In the jargon, there is no micro-prudential reason to regulate hedge funds. However, there
may be a macro-prudential rationale, because funds may herd on some trades, causing both
large asset price movements as well as demands on liquidity when these trades are reversed,
with potential systemic consequences. For this reason, and because accurate asset prices as
well as liquidity are public goods, there is some rationale for bringing such institutions under
the supervisory net.

32

- 33 -

Even if there is such a rationale, do supervisors have the ability to limit excessive risk taking
and herding while at the same time not chilling the legitimate and valuable functions such
institutions provide? That depends on what instruments are likely to be used and what the
effectiveness to intrusiveness ratio is likely to be. Let us turn to that now.
Instruments: Supervision and disclosure
For institutions such as small banks that directly hold assets on their balance sheets to
maturity, supervisors can monitor positions and slow the creation of assets in hot sectors
through market friendly means. For example, they can require lower loan to value ratios after
a sustained bout of house price inflation, or caution banks on making “interest only” loans at
such times.
Direct supervisory oversight of each position or public disclosure is likely to be ineffective
for institutions with less homogenous positions and with active trading strategies. Unlike
with bank loans, a sample of current positions is likely to say little about an institution’s
aggregate risk exposure. Supervisors really need to know all positions as well as the
institution’s dynamic trading strategy in order to judge risk exposure effectively, and this will
be prohibitively costly (as well as useless soon after, as the institution trades away from the
position).
More useful would be for supervisors to gauge the risk management structure of the
institution, the risk models the institution uses, as well as to require stress tests/reports of
sensitivities of portfolios to changes in macro variables or correlations with other asset
prices. Some of this information, stripped of details that would reveal specific positions,
could be shared so as to make participants aware of risk concentrations.
While transparency and disclosure are often useful, they are, however, no panaceas. We need
to understand better how we can communicate the extent of risk that is being undertaken by
an institution in a way that is easy to grasp for both supervisors and investors. We also need
to factor in the public or regulatory response to such disclosures, as well as the institution’s
counter-response (for an excellent treatment of the perverse response induced by marked-tomarket accounting, see Plantin, Sapra, and Shin (2004)). All said and done, we have some
way to go before transparency and disclosure offer effective tools for the supervisor and the
public to exercise discrimination.
Instruments: Capital
Goodhart (2005) suggests that capital requirements should be procyclical – for instance, the
capital adequacy requirement on mortgage lending could be related to the rise in house prices
(relative to core inflation), while the requirement for lending to construction and property

33

- 34 -

would be related to the rise in property prices.25 This is an ingenious suggestion, which
attempts to “lean” against the asset price inflation without stopping it dead in its tracks. It
may, however, have wider consequences than only restraining aggregate lending. Institutions
can always issue additional capital and the ones that will find additional capital “cheapest”
are those whose asset portfolios are most concentrated in the boom sectors and have therefore
seen their own stock price run up. Thus the pace of overall lending could slow, but the
lending could become more concentrated in a few institutions that specialize in property. Of
course, if loans can be sold to unsupervised institutions, even the pace of overall lending
might only be marginally impacted.
The broader point is that capital acts as a budget constraint for the risk a particular institution
can take, but is less effective in setting aggregate macro-prudential limits, especially if new
capital can be raised or if a number of financial institutions are outside the supervisory
umbrella. The way capital requirements are implemented also make them relatively
ineffective against risks that occur in the tails, which may give institutions an added incentive
to load up on these risks. Finally, while capital requirements provide some buffer against
insolvency, they provide none against illiquidity.26
Instruments: Incentives
If external restraints like disclosure or capital requirements are likely to be ineffective,
perhaps the focus should shift to ensuring investment managers have the right incentives.
How does the “market” ensure that investment managers have the right incentives – that they
are not too myopic in their investment strategies and they internalize the risks they take?
One way the market induces the right incentives is by requiring managers to have some of
their own wealth invested in the funds they manage. For instance, as of Dec 2004, 811 of the
2364 managers in the TASS database of hedge fund managers said they had personal
investments in their own funds. Only 179, however, reported the quantity of personal
holdings. On average, managers had personal investments amounting to 16 percent of fund
assets. The median amount was 7 percent, the minimum 0.02 percent.27 Similarly, the usual
25

A related notion is statistical provisioning implemented by the Spanish authorities. Under
this, bank provisioning (a set aside from capital) is anchored to an average estimated over the
business cycle, creating a buffer that is run down when credit conditions worsen. This
reduces the degree of procyclicality associated with capital requirements but may have
milder effects on booms fed by asset price inflation.

26

Market discipline might be very useful in preventing excessive risk taking or incompetent
management by specific institutions, but is less useful against booms, where market
participants are themselves caught up in the frenzy.
27

I thank David Hsieh for providing these data.

34

- 35 -

percentage that partners in venture capital funds are expected to contribute is 1% of the
committed capital. This number can be lower for very large funds, and for buyout funds
(which often are very large). Usually it is the senior partners who have to contribute more of
this money, while the younger partners invest less.28
A market-friendly way to create better incentives for investment managers is to encourage
the spread of this practice. Industry groups could urge all managers vest some fixed portion
of their pay (which could be a norm varying across different segments of the investment
management industry) in the funds they manage. A fraction of pay might be better than a
fraction of total capital -- a norm that managers start by owning a minimum share of total
capitalization might serve as an entry barrier, restricting entry into investment management
only to the wealthy. Furthermore, the fixed fraction of pay has countercyclical properties in
that managers who generate high returns (and thus get high pay) will invest more in their
funds, which will counteract incentives to take overly risky bets.
In order that incentives be to invest for the long term, the norm could be that the manager’s
holdings in the fund would be retained for several years (say a significant part of the duration
of a typical asset price cycle). Of course, such holdings will not eliminate the factors that lead
a manager to focus on the short term, only offer an offsetting incentive.
This is clearly, again, no panaceas – the managers of LTCM did have substantial stakes in
their enterprise. Some other immediate concerns include:
Will the manager become overly conservative? Additional conservatism is an objective,
which, if carefully moderated, is in the public (though perhaps not the private) interest.
However, one should recognize that some institutions provide a public service by taking risks
and the share of compensation, as well as the duration for which assets are held in the fund,
will have to be modulated based on the industry segment the investment manager is in.
Will the manager take excessive risks to increase asset values? If the manager holds shares in
a highly levered institution, he may have an incentive to increase the level of risk, especially
if the institution is likely to default. This is why the norm that the manager hold the entire
range of securities of the institution (or be paid in phantom securities that mimic the asset
holdings of the institution) becomes important.
Will the manager manipulate accounting or reduce reserves to boost securities values? This is
always a possibility, but the long term escrowing will serve as a disincentive for managers to
engage in short term securities price manipulation – it is far more difficult to manipulate
accounts over the long term.

28

Private correspondence with Antoinette Schoar.

35

- 36 -

What happens if the manager quits or is fired? It would be sufficient to hold his securities in
escrow for say a year after he leaves so that he does not game his departure strategically, and
then give them to him to dispose as he chooses.
Will the manager trade out of his position? It is possible that the manager could undertake
offsetting trades that essentially hedge him against the risk of the positions held in the fund.
Clearly, such violations can be detected (with some difficulty) in the same way as insider
trading is detected, provided the agencies of the government support the self-regulatory
groups set up by industry. It does lead to questions of whether self-regulation by industry
groups should be accompanied by stronger government-supported sanctions than simply
expulsion, against those who violate industry norms.
More generally, while I have offered one suggestion on how incentives resulting in an
excessive focus on generating returns in the short run might be ameliorated, there are
obviously others. My intent here is not to propose yet another layer of regulation, but to start
a debate on whether a focus on incentives might be more effective than ever more onerous
disclosure and capital requirements. “Personal” capital requirements might be more effective
than traditional firm level external capital requirements in motivating an investment manager,
and deserve consideration as a complement, or even a substitute to existing requirements.
Modalities
Industry groups should see self-regulation of incentives to be in their own interest – after all,
everyone is likely to invest in the same assets whose prices may be driven away from
fundamentals, everyone relies on the same pool of liquidity, and the collective benefit from
the constant churning by investors between funds is small. Self-regulation might be better
than public regulation and supervision, because norms can be set by those with experience of
the business, and can be monitored by those who know how the norms can be evaded.
Industry groups also have the incentive to keep the cost of bureaucracy down.
However, one should not underestimate the costs of setting up an apparatus for monitoring
and enforcing norms or overestimate the political will to do so. Countries with developed
markets and powerful investment industries may not have the political consensus to
encourage desirable steps. Could emerging markets, who suffer from the volatility imposed
by hot money and who are faced with the stark choice of taking the risk associated with hot
money or imposing (often ineffective) one-size-fits-all capital controls, press for better
incentives? Or will it take the rise of unregulated investment managers in emerging markets
for a global consensus to emerge? One can do no more than speculate on the answer.
In Sum
I have not discussed concerns about too big to fail, about too complex to fail, etc. These are
important issues, but I have little to add to excellent treatments elsewhere (see, for example,
Stern and Feldman (2004)).

36

- 37 -

What is clear is that we are a long way from knowing all the answers on how to reduce the
risk of financial instability. It seems obvious that we should use all the innovations that
finance has created in order to prevent market forces from creating excessive risk. We have
to steer between the Scylla of excessive intervention and the Charybdis of a belief that the
markets will always get it right.
Conclusion
Technological change, market liberalization, and institutional change have combined to
expand access to credit and risk sharing opportunities. While many of these changes are most
pronounced in the United States, they are making their way to other countries. Furthermore,
to the extent that both goods and financial markets are increasingly interlinked across the
world, no country will be immune from the consequences of these changes.
I believe the changes have, in general, expanded opportunities significantly and have, even
on net, made the world tremendously better off. But opportunities can be used for good and
for bad. This is why it is so critically important to get incentives right. Given the possibility
of perverse incentives coming together in some states, a risk management approach to
financial regulation will be important to attempt to stave off such states through the judicious
operation of monetary policy and through macro-prudential measures. I argue some thought
should also be given to attempting to influence incentives of financial institution managers
lightly, but directly.
Risk can never be reduced to zero, nor should it be. We should be prepared for the low
probability but highly costly downturn. In such an eventuality, it is possible the losses that
emanate from a financial catastrophe cannot be entirely borne by current generations and are
best shared with future generations. Some of the mechanisms for sharing such systematic
risks with future generations such as (defined benefit) social security are being changed.
While there are gains from doing so, and from ensuring their sustainability, we need to
ensure that the inter-generational risk sharing mechanism they offer is not overly weakened.
We also need to continue improving the intrinsic flexibility of our economies, so as to better
ride out the downturns that, almost inevitably, will occur.

37

- 38 -

References
Agarwal, Vikas, Naveen D. Daniel, and Narayan Y. Naik, 2004, “Flows, Performance, and
Managerial Incentives in Hedge Funds,” EFA 2003 Annual Conference Paper No. 501.
http://ssrn.com/abstract=424369.
Allen, Franklin, Stephen Morris, and Hyun Song Shin, 2004, “Beauty Contests and Iterated
Expectations in Asset Markets”, working paper, London School of Economics.
Alesina, Alberto and Jeffrey Sachs, 1986, “Political Parties and the Business Cycle in the
United States 1948-1984,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 1940.
Bernanke, Ben and Mark Gertler, 1990, “Financial Fragility and Economic Performance,”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 105, No. 1: 87-114.
Bhattacharya, Sudipto and Douglas Gale, 1987, “Preference Shocks, Liquidity and Central
Bank Policy,” in New Approaches to Monetary Economics, edited by W. Barnett and K.
Singleton, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
BIS, 2005, Basel Committee on Banking Supervision/The Joint Forum “Credit Risk
Transfer,” (Basel: Bank of International Settlements), http://www.bis.org/publ/joint13.pdf.
Black, Sandra E. and Philip E. Strahan, 2001, “The Division of Spoils: Rent-Sharing and
Discrimination in a Regulated Industry,” American Economic Review, Vol. 91, No. 4: 814831.
Boot, Arnoud W. A., Stuart. I. Greenbaum, and Anjan.V. Thakor, 1993, Reputation and
Discretion in Financial Contracting, The American Economic Review, Vol. 83, No. 5: 11651183.
Borio, Claudio, 2003, “Towards a Macroprudential Framework for Financial Supervision and
Regulation”, BIS Working Paper No. 128, (Basel: Bank of International Settlements).
Borio, Claudio and Philip Lowe, 2002, “Asset Prices, Financial and Monetary Stability:
Exploring The Nexus,” BIS Working Paper No. 114, (Basel: Bank of International
Settlements).
Brown, Stephen J., William N. Goetzmann, and James Park, 2001, “Careers and Survival:
Competition and Risks in the Hedge Fund and CTA Industry”, Journal of Finance, Vol. 56,
No. 5: 1869-1886.
Bryan, Lowell, 1988, Breaking Up The Bank : Rethinking an Industry Under Siege,
(Homewood, IL: Dow Jones-Irwin).

38

- 39 -

Caballero, Ricardo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2005, “Exchange Rate Volatility and the
Credit Channel in Emerging Markets: A Vertical Perspective,” International Journal of
Central Banking, Vol. 1, No. 1: 207-245.
Calvo, Guillermo, Alejandro Izquierdo, and Luis-Fernando Mejia, 2004, “On the Empirics of
Sudden Stops: The Relevance of Balance-Sheet Effects”, National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper 10520.
Chakravorti, S. and S. Lall, 2004, “Managerial Incentives and Financial Contagion”, IMF
working paper, WP/04/199.
Chan Nicholas, Mila Getmansky, Shane M. Haas, and Andrew Lo, 2005, “Systemic Risk and
Hedge Funds,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 11200.
Chevalier, Judy and Glenn Ellison, 1997, “Risk Taking by Mutual Funds as a Response to
Incentives,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 105, No. 6: 1167-1200.
Crockett, Andrew, 2001, “Monetary Policy and Financial Stability”, Speech, February 13
2001, (Basel: Bank of International Settlements).
Crockett, Andrew, 2002, “Institutions for Stability – Current and Past Experience”, Speech,
December 6, 2002, (Basel: Bank of International Settlements).
Crockett, Andrew, 2003, in “Monetary Stability, Financial Stability and the Business Cycle:
Five Views,” BIS Papers No. 18, (Basel: Bank of International Settlements).
Diamond, Douglas W., and Phillip H. Dybvig, 1983, Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and
Liquidity, Journal of Political Economy Vol. 91, No. 3: 401-419.
Diamond, Douglas W., and Raghuram Rajan, 2001a, “Liquidity Risk, Liquidity Creation and
Financial Fragility: A Theory of Banking,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 109, No. 2:
287-327.
Diamond, Douglas, and Raghuram Rajan, 2001b, “Banks, Short-term Debt, and Financial
Crises: Theory, Policy Implications, and Applications,” Proceedings of Carnegie Rochester
Series on Public Policy 54: 37-71.
Ferguson, Roger, 2003, in “Monetary Stability, Financial Stability and the Business Cycle:
Five Views”, BIS Papers No. 18, (Basel: Bank of International Settlements).
Franke, Günter and Jan Pieter Krahnen, 2005, “Default Risk Sharing between Banks and
Markets: the Contribution of Collateralized Debt Obligations,” Center for Financial Studies
Working Paper No. 2005/06.

39

- 40 -

Frazzini, Andrea and Owen A. Lamont, 2005, “Dumb Money: Mutual Fund Flows and the
Cross-Section of Stock Returns”, NBER working paper 11526.
Gatev, Evan, and Philip E. Strahan, 2004, “Banks Advantage in Hedging Liquidity Risk:
Theory and Evidence from the Commercial Paper Market,” National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper 9956, forthcoming, Journal of Finance.
Goodhart, Charles, 2005, “Financial Regulation, Credit Risk, and Financial Stability,”
National Institute Economic Review,192: 118-127.
Greenspan, Alan, 2004, “Risk and Uncertainty in Monetary Policy”, remarks at the meetings
of the American Economic Association, San Diego, California.
Hoshi, Takeo, Anil Kashyap, and David Scharfstein, 1993, “The Choice Between Public and
Private Debt: An Analysis of Post-Deregulation Corporate Financing in Japan,” National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 4421.
International Monetary Fund, 2003, 2004, 2005, various chapters, Global Financial Stability
Reports, (Washington: International Monetary Fund).
International Monetary Fund, 2004, “Are Credit Booms in Emerging Markets A Concern,”
Chapter IV, World Economic Outlook (Washington: International Monetary Fund).
International Monetary Fund, 2005a, “Output Volatility in Emerging Market and
Developing Countries,” Chapter II, World Economic Outlook (Washington: International
Monetary Fund).
International Monetary Fund, 2005b, “Global Savings and Investment,” Chapter II, World
Economic Outlook (Washington: International Monetary Fund) forthcoming.
Jayaratne, Jith and Philip E. Strahan, 1996, “The Finance-Growth Nexus: Evidence from
Bank Branch Deregulation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 111, No. 3: 639-670.
Jayaratne, Jith and Philip E. Strahan, 1998, “Entry Restrictions, Industry Evolution and
Dynamic Efficiency: Evidence from Commercial Banking,” Journal of Law and Economics,
Vol. 41, No. 1: 239-273.
Jeanne, Olivier, 2002, “Why Emerging Market Countries Borrow in Foreign Currency,” IMF
WP/03/177, forthcoming in B. Eichengreen and R. Hausmann, editors, 2005, Other People’s
Money, (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Jensen, Michael C., and William H. Meckling, 1976, “Theory of the Firm: Managerial
Behavior, Agency Costs, and Ownership Structure,” Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 3,
No. 4: 305-360.

40

- 41 -

Kaminsky, Gabriella L. and Carmen M. Reinhart, 1999, “The Twin Crises: The Causes of
Banking and Balance-of-Payment Problems,” American Economic Review, Vol. 89, No. 3:
473-500.
Kamin, Steven B., John W. Schindler, and Shawna L. Samuel, 2001, “The Contribution of
Domestic and External Factors to Emerging Market Devaluation Crises: An Early Warning
Systems Approach,” International Finance Discussion Paper, No. 711, (Washington: Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System).
Kashiwase, Kenichiro and Laura E. Kodres (2005), Emerging Market Spread Compression:
Is It Real or Is It Liquidity?” IMF Working Paper, xx/05, (Washington: International
Monetary Fund), forthcoming, summary in Global Financial Stability Report, September
2004, Box 2.4 (Washington, International Monetary Fund).
Kashyap, Anil, Raghuram Rajan, and Jeremy Stein, 2002, “Banks as Providers of Liquidity:
An Explanation for the Co-Existence of Lending and Deposit-Taking,” Journal of Finance.
Vol. 57, No. 1: 33-73.
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro and John Moore, 1997, “Credit Cycles” The Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 105, No. 2: 211-248.
Knight, Malcolm, 2004, “Markets and Institutions: Managing the Evolving Financial Risk,”
Speech to 25th SUERF Colloquium in Madrid on October 14th.
Kohn, Donald, 2004, “How Should Policymakers Deal with Low-Probability, High-Impact
Events?” speech at European Central Bank Conference on Monetary Policy and Imperfect
Knowledge, October 15, 2004.
Kroszner, Randall S. and Philip E. Strahan, 1999, “What Drives Deregulation? Economics
and Politics of the Relaxation of Bank Branching Restrictions,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, Vol. 114, No. 4: 1437-1467
Lamont, Owen A. and Richard H. Thaler, 2001, “Can the Market Add and Subtract?
Mispricing in Tech Stock Carve-outs,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 111, No. 2: 227268.
Large, Andrew, 2003, “Basel II and Systemic Stability”, speech given at the Barbican Center,
13th March 2003.
Mian, Atif, 2004, “Distance Constraints: The Limits of Foreign Lending in Poor Economies,”
mimeo, Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago, forthcoming Journal of
Finance.
Morgan, Donald P., 2002, “Rating Banks: Risk and Uncertainty in an Opaque Industry,”
American Economic Review, Vol. 92, No. 4: 874-888.
41

- 42 -

Myers, Stewart C. and Raghuram G. Rajan, 1998, “The Paradox of Liquidity,” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, Vol. 113, No. 3: 733-771.
Petersen, Mitchell and Raghuram Rajan, 2002, “Does Distance Still Matter? The Information
Revolution in Small Business Lending,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 57, No. 6: 2533-2570.
Plantin, Guillaume, Haresh Sapra, and Hyun Song Shin, 2004, “Marking to Market: Panacea
or Pandora’s Box?” Working Paper, London School of Economics.
Qian, Jun and Philip E. Strahan, 2005, “How Law and Institutions Shape Financial Contracts:
The Case of Bank Loans,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 11052.
Rajan, Raghuram, 1998, “The Past and Future of Commercial Banking Viewed Through an
Incomplete Contract Lens,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, Vol. 30, No. 3: 524-550.
Rajan, Raghuram and Luigi Zingales, 2003, Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists, (New
York: Crown Business Division of Random House).
Shiller, Robert, 2002, The New Financial Order: Risk in the 21st Century, Princeton
University Press, Princeton, N.J.
Shin, Hyun Song, 2005, “Financial System Liquidity, Asset Prices, and Monetary Policy,”
mimeo, (Washington: International Monetary Fund), presented at the Reserve Bank of
Australia: http://www.rba.gov.au/PublicationsAndResearch/Conferences/.
Shleifer, Andrei and Robert W. Vishny, 1997, “The Limits to Arbitrage” Journal of Finance,
Vol. 52, No. 1: 35-55.
Simons, Henry, 1948, Economic Policy for a Free Society, (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press).
Stern, Gary, and Ron Feldman, 2004, Too Big To Fail: The Hazards of Bank Bailouts,
(Washington: Brookings Institute).

42

