NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

U.S. v. MICROSOFT:
DID CONSUMERS WIN?
David S. Evans
Albert L. Nichols
Richard Schmalensee
Working Paper 11727
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11727
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2005

Vice Chairman, LECG Europe and Visiting Professor, Faculty of Laws, University College London;
Director, LECG LLC; and John C Head III Dean, Sloan School of Management, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology. The authors were consultants to Microsoft on the litigation discussed in this paper and
Schmalensee testified at trial in the liability phase of the case. We are grateful to Microsoft for supporting
the research for this paper. All views expressed are own and not necessarily shared by Microsoft or any
organization with which we are affiliated.The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by David S. Evans, Albert L. Nichols, and Richard Schmalensee. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

U.S. v. Microsoft: Did Consumers Win?
David S. Evans, Albert L. Nichols, and Richard Schmalensee
NBER Working Paper No. 11727
October 2005
JEL No. K21, L1, L4, L6
ABSTRACT
U.S. v. Microsoft and the related state suit filed in 1998 appear finally to have concluded. In a
unanimous en banc decision issued in late June 2004, the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals rejected
challenges to the remedies approved by the District Court in November 2002. The wave of follow-on
private antitrust suits filed against Microsoft also appears to be subsiding. In this paper we review
the remedies imposed in the United States, in terms of both their relationship to the violations found
and their impact on consumer welfare. We conclude that the remedies addressed the violations
ultimately found by the Court of Appeals (which were a subset of those found by the original district
court and an even smaller subset of the violations alleged, both in court and in public discourse) and
went beyond them in important ways. Thus, for those who believe that the courts were right in
finding that some of Microsoft's actions harmed competition, the constraints placed on its behavior
and the active, ongoing oversight by the Court and the plaintiffs provide useful protection against
a recurrence of such harm. For those who believe that Microsoft should not have been found liable
because of insufficient evidence of harm to consumers, the remedies may be unnecessary, but they
avoided the serious potential damage to consumer welfare that was likely to accompany the main
alternative proposals. The remedies actually imposed appear to have struck a reasonable balance
between protecting consumers against the types of actions found illegal and harming consumers by
unnecessarily restricting Microsoft's ability to compete.
David S. Evans
LECG, LLC
350 Mass Avenue
Suite 300
Cambridge, MA 02139
david_evans@lecg.com
Albert L. Nichols
LECG, LLC
350 Mass Avenue
Suite 300
Cambridge, MA 02139
nnichols@lecg.com

Richard Schmalensee
MIT Sloan School of Management
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
rschmal@mit.edu

I.

Introduction
The D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals issued a unanimous en banc decision in June 2004

upholding the remedy ordered in U.S. v. Microsoft.1 A District Court has been actively
overseeing compliance with that order since May 2003.2 Several of the major derivative private
actions have either been dismissed or settled.3 It thus appears that this long conflict is nearing
an end.4 It is concluding in a way that prevents hard-core warriors on either side from claiming
victory, though some who opposed Microsoft have claimed, in effect, that victory was stolen
from them in the remedy phase of the struggle.5
What about consumers, however, whose interests both sides claimed to be serving? As
the rhetorical dust kicked up by the Microsoft battles settles, we believe it is becoming clearer
that the end result—the violations ultimately found by the appeals court and the remedy
imposed under its guidance by the district court—is broadly consistent with basic, proconsumer antitrust principles. To the extent it departs from those principles, it reflects some
1

Massachusetts v. Microsoft Corp., 373 F. 3d 1199 (D.C. Cir., 2004).

2

Microsoft began complying with the terms of the settlement before it was entered by the courts. That process
started in December 2001. J Colleen Kollar-Kotelly did not issue a decision on the settlement until November
2002. In May 2003, J. Kollar-Kotelly ordered that Microsoft begin filing compliance status reports with the
court. The first such report was due in July 2003. (Stipulation and Revised Proposed Final Judgment, U.S. v.
Microsoft, Civil Action No. 98–1232 (CKK), November 6, 2001, available at
http://www.usdoj.gov/atr/cases/f9400/9495.pdf; Memorandum Opinion, New York v. Microsoft Corp., 224 F.
Supp. 2d 76 (D.D.C., 2002) (No. 98–1233); J. Colleen Kollar-Kotelly, Order, State of New York v. Microsoft
Corp., Civil Action No. 98–1233 (CKK), May 14, 2003. Since that Order, the parties have filed Status Reports
with the court at three-month intervals starting in July 2003.

3

Suits by Sun and AOL (which bought Netscape in 1999) have both been settled. Several other suits were brought
by other competitors of Microsoft, including Be, Inc., which offered the Be operating system in the mid 1990s
(case settled), and two suits by companies involved in digital media, Burst and RealNetworks (both cases still
pending as of February 2005). In addition, dozens of class-action suits were filed alleging overcharges on
Windows and, in some cases, Microsoft Word and Excel. Most of those suits have been dismissed or settled, but
a handful remain pending as of February 2005.

4

As we discuss further below, however, Microsoft still faces a major antitrust challenge in Europe. See the
European Commission’s decision: Case COMP/C-3/37.792 Microsoft, Mar. 24, 2004. The Court of First
Instance (CFI) denied Microsoft’s request to stay the remedy until the case was reviewed on the merits. (Order
of the President of the Court of First Instance, Case T-201/04 R, December 22, 2004.) The CFI is not likely to
reach a decision on whether to uphold or void the Commission’s decision until 2006.

1

serious bumps along the procedural road and, in part as a consequence, embodies an element of
punishment for Microsoft’s perceived aggressiveness and arrogance.6 As we discuss in this
essay, the courts did find that Microsoft engaged in anticompetitive actions, but, in the absence
of any evidence that those actions actually reduced competition, the remedy imposed is well
designed to prevent similar violations without imposing potentially expensive structural
changes or substantially restricting Microsoft’s ability to compete on the merits.
Accordingly, we argue below, if one accepts the courts’ ultimate findings of fact one
must conclude that the Microsoft remedy is likely to contribute future benefits for consumers.7
Even if one goes beyond those findings and harbors a deep and broad distrust of Microsoft, as
some observers plainly do,8 it is hard to escape the conclusion that the constraints placed on
Microsoft’s behavior and its active oversight by the parties and the District Court will benefit
consumers by reducing the likelihood of future anticompetitive behavior—even if one believes
that more severe constraints should have been imposed.
At the other end of the spectrum, even if one believes, as we do, that Microsoft’s
conduct did not justify a finding that it had violated the Sherman Act, because there was no
credible evidence of likely consumer harm flowing from the challenged actions, 9 it is hard to
find much fault with a remedy that does not impose costly structural change or significantly
reduce Microsoft’s ability to compete on the merits—in particular, its ability to design,

5

Timothy F. Bresnahan, A Remedy that Falls Short of Restoring Competition, 16 ANTITRUST 67 (2001).

6

Eleanor M. Fox, What Is Harm to Competition? Exclusionary Practices and Anticompetitive Effect, 70
ANTITRUST L.J. 371 (2002).

7

Whether a rigorous cost-benefit analysis, taking into account litigation and compliance costs, would conclude
that this litigation enhanced discounted expected social welfare is a harder question. We do not attempt to
answer it here.

8

See, e.g., Reforming Microsoft, N.Y. TIMES, Sept. 7, 2001.

9

Howard H. Chang et al., Has the Consumer Harm Standard Lost its Teeth? AEI-Brookings Joint Center Working
Paper; MIT Sloan Working Paper No. 4263–02, 2002, available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=332021.

2

develop, and market products that respond to the demands of end users and software
developers.
Moreover, regardless of one’s views of the particular facts of this case, there can be
little doubt that this near-death experience has caused Microsoft, which unquestionably has
significant short-run market power in personal computer operating systems, to be more careful
to avoid even the appearance of anticompetitive behavior.10 As long as this increased care does
not result in competitive timidity or reduced innovation, it may make all parties better off.11
Those observers who have complained about the remedy in this case are typically not
considering, as we are here, a but-for world in which this case was never brought. Moreover,
their primary concern seems to have been with competition in particular markets, rather than
with fidelity to general antitrust principles. That is, they have sought to use antitrust as a tool to
reshape particular market structures rather than to deter anticompetitive behavior across the
economy.12 Observing that competition in operating systems for personal computers was not as
vigorous as they would like and that some of the actions Microsoft took in the course of
maintaining its leading market position were judged to have been anticompetitive, they asked
the courts to impose drastic structural and injunctive relief designed to induce more
competition, largely by hobbling Microsoft and making some of its intellectual property
available to its rivals.13
While it is hard to argue with the proposition that more vigorous competition in the
software business would raise welfare, all else equal, increasing competition by weakening a
10

For a discussion of the fragility of market power in network industries, see Richard Schmalensee, Antitrust
Issues in Schumpeterian Industries, 90 AM. ECON. REV. 192 (2000).

11

This is not to assert that on balance this litigation was welfare-enhancing; see note 7 supra.

12

Robert E. Litan & Carl Shapiro , Antitrust Policy during the Clinton Administration, UC Berkeley, Center for
Competition Policy Working Paper No. CPC01–22, 2001, available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=502782.

3

competitor does not leave all else equal and is not likely to make consumers better off—in
general or, as we argue below, in this case. In Microsoft, in the absence of evidence that the
violations in question had actually reduced competition, the courts properly declined to take not
particularly egregious antitrust violations as a license to punish the firm in ways that would
make it a less effective competitor.
Those who are frustrated with the result in Microsoft are thus not frustrated because the
courts stepped away from traditional antitrust standards, which are based on concern for
consumer welfare. Rather, they are frustrated because the courts refused, despite enormous
pressure, to leap forward into uncharted territory. Microsoft escaped execution, but it hardly
escaped unscathed. Accepting the original trial court’s findings of fact, this outcome—and the
appellate decisions on which it rests—is consistent with sound antitrust doctrine.
Not only did the Microsoft litigation follow a somewhat winding path, which we
summarize below, but the conduct ultimately found illegal was not at the core of the case
originally brought or the trial actually held. Section I of this paper summarizes the evolution of
the liability side of the case from the original complaint in May 1998 to the D.C. Circuit’s
decision on liability in June 2001. Similarly, as Section II summarizes, the discussion of
remedy changed considerably along the way from the original complaint to the D.C. Circuit’s
final decision on remedy in June 2004.
At the core of this case as originally brought was the allegation that Microsoft’s
provision of Internet browsing functionality—labeled Internet Explorer or IE—as a component
of the Windows operating system rather than as a stand-alone application constituted a tie that
was per se illegal under Section 1 of the Sherman Act. This tying claim was never proven

13

These proposals, as well as the remedy actually ordered, are summarized below.

4

although many commentators appear not to have noticed.14 Microsoft ultimately was found
liable for an apparently related violation: making it difficult for computer manufacturers who
used Windows (OEMs in the language of the case) to remove ready means of access to IE,
including its icon on the Windows desktop and its place on the Start menu. Accordingly, as
Section III describes, much of the discussion of remedies focused on whether and how
Microsoft should be ordered to modify the design of Windows. We argue that the design
change actually ordered would in fact have been appropriate even if an illegal tie had been
found. In fact, the design change ordered is what the government sought as its remedy for the
claimed illegal tying.15 More drastic design changes proposed in this case—and adopted by the
European Commission in its case against Microsoft now under appeal16—would have imposed
significant costs on consumers without any incremental competitive benefit.
Section IV discusses the other remedy provisions and the enforcement of the entire
relief order. Section V summarizes our evaluation of the Microsoft outcome and draws a
number of related conclusions.

14

There has been much confusion about this point in the non-specialist media. For instance, Déjà vu all over
again, ECONOMIST, Jan. 29, 2004, asserted that “Although Microsoft was found guilty of illegally ‘tying’ its
web-browser to Windows, and was initially ordered to be broken in two, the far more lenient settlement that was
eventually agreed made no attempt to prevent similar tying in future.” As we discuss below, the final remedy is
more easily understood if one is told (as readers of the ECONOMIST were not) that the trial court’s finding of
illegal tying was vacated and remanded by the court of appeals and never retried, and the trial court’s divestiture
order was vacated, in part, because the trial court did not hold a hearing to address remedies-specific factual
disputes.

15

The DOJ’s initial complaint to the District Court asked that Microsoft be enjoined from “distributing a single
version of its operating system which includes Microsoft's browser software, unless… each OEM is permitted
at its option to delete the software that provides the Internet Explorer icon and the other means by which
users may readily use IE to browse the web.” (emphasis added) Department of Justice Complaint, U.S. v.
Microsoft Corp., Civil Action No. 98–1232, May 18, 1998, § VIII, Part 2.e.

16

Commission Decision, Case COMP/C-3/37.792 Microsoft, Mar. 24, 2004.

5

II.

Violations Alleged and Found
A. Basic Facts17
The central product in Microsoft was Microsoft’s Windows operating system for

personal computers.18 An operating system permits applications software, like word processors,
to control the underlying hardware through what are called APIs (Applications Program
Interfaces). APIs are interfaces that are documented so that applications can use them to request
specific services from the operating system.19 When a user instructs a word processing program
to print a document, for instance, the word processing program uses APIs to in effect pass this
instruction (including detailed formatting information) along to the operating system, which in
turn sends the printer detailed instructions specific to that printer. Operating systems for
personal computers also provide services that can be invoked directly by end-users, such as the
ability to name, copy, move, or delete files. In modern operating systems, APIs exposed by one
part of the system may be used by other parts. Thus, for instance, when a user directly instructs
Windows to rename a file, the same APIs are invoked as when the user tells an application such
as WordPerfect to rename a file.
Interest among the public in use of the Worldwide Web increased sharply in 1993 after
a team at the University of Illinois developed the first graphical Web browser, called Mosaic,
which it licensed to several commercial software vendors. Netscape Communications, formed
17

We only cover the more prominent accusations.

18

An operating system is a piece of software that provides memory management services and interfaces for
communication between applications and a computer’s hardware. Microsoft Windows, which originally shipped
as an add-on to Microsoft’s earlier operating system, MS-DOS, has an integrated graphical user interface, so
that users execute commands and perform functions primarily using a mouse. Since its inception, Windows has
greatly increased in functionality; over the years Microsoft has, for instance, added support for networking
protocols, included myriad drivers for peripheral hardware such as printers and speakers, and integrated new
features, such as the Internet Explorer Web browser.

6

in 1994, hired away most of the Mosaic developers from the University of Illinois.20 Its
Navigator browser was an instant hit as soon as it was released in late 1994. By some estimates,
it accounted for 80 percent of browser usage in 1995 and early 1996,21 and versions of
Navigator ran on several operating systems in addition to Windows. As Netscape noted in a
prospectus in the summer of 1995, however, it faced competition from several sources,
including operating system vendors, many of which were developing their own Web browsers
and planning to include them with their operating systems.22 IBM’s OS/2 Warp operating
system (then the primary competitor to Microsoft’s Windows) was among the first, with its
Web Explorer browser in the fall of 1994.23 Microsoft followed in August 1995 with Internet
Explorer included in its new Windows 95 operating system. Apple was also developing its own
Web browsing software for the Macintosh.24
At around the same time, Sun began promoting its Java software platform. It promised
to permit programmers to write applications that would run on any computer with a “Java
Runtime Environment” or JRE,25 regardless of the computer’s operating system or
microprocessor. Java is often described as “middleware” because it works between applications
software and the operating system; applications use some of the APIs provided by the
middleware in addition to or in place of APIs provided by the operating system. Starting in
19

We use “API” to mean only documented, “public” interfaces that are intended for use by application software
developers. Some authors use “API” to reference any interface, including those that are private or internal and
are not documented for use by third-party developers.

20

MICHAEL A. CUSUMANO & DAVID B. YOFFIE, COMPETING ON INTERNET TIME: LESSONS FROM NETSCAPE AND
ITS BATTLE WITH MICROSOFT 7, 44, 99, 329 (1998).

21

ID.,, at 11 (1998).

22

Netscape Prospectus, Aug. 8, 2005, available at http://wp.netscape.com/comprod/investor/prospectus.html (last
visited Feb. 15, 2005).

23

Randall Kennedy, OS/2 Warp Goes Light Years Ahead of 2.1, INFOWORLD, Nov. 14, 1994.

24

Tom Quinlan, Apple to Tack Internet on to Tardy Copland, INFOWORLD, Feb. 26, 1996.

7

1996, Netscape distributed a JRE with Navigator.26 Microsoft also added a JRE to Windows in
1996.27
Microsoft had worked hard to persuade applications software vendors (independent
software vendors, or ISVs in the language of the case) to write their programs to run on
Windows. Its success in this effort contributed substantially to the value of its operating system
products: consumers found them attractive in large part because they could run a large number
of useful applications. Java posed a potential threat to Microsoft because it held out the
possibility that if JREs became ubiquitous and their capabilities and performance improved
sufficiently, standard PC-style applications could be written to run on any operating system for
which a compatible JRE existed. Thus, an entrant in operating systems would not have to
attract developers to write applications for its new operating system before it had customers; it
would only have to create a JRE. Moreover, because the operating system would not have to
support applications directly, it could be much simpler than Windows (or Apple’s Mac OS) and
less costly to OEMs.
Netscape seemed to pose a similar potential threat. During the period relevant to the
case, it was not a middleware product: it neither exposed many APIs to other applications nor
supported a robust programming language. But Navigator was widely used on Windows and
other operating systems (notably Apple’s Macintosh), and if it had both remained ubiquitous
and come to expose a sufficiently rich set of APIs, applications program writers might have

25

A JRE consisted of a Java Virtual Machine (JVM), which interpreted Java applications to run on a particular
operating system/processor platform, and a set of “class libraries” that provided the Java equivalent of APIs.

26

Netscape Press Release, Netscape Builds Momentum with Shipment of Netscape Navigator 2.0, Feb. 5, 1996, at
https://wp.netscape.com/newsref/pr/newsrelease82.html (last visited June 14, 2002).

27

MS, Sun Battle for Java, CNET News.com, Dec. 26, 1996, available at
http://news.com.com/MS%2C+Sun+battle+for+Java/2100-1001_3-257680.html?tag=st.rn (last visited Jan. 28,
2005).

8

written programs to run on Navigator rather than on Windows. Moreover, Navigator provided
wide distribution of Netscape’s JREs.28 In various interviews, Netscape’s Chief Technical
Officer boasted that Navigator and Java would relegate the role of Windows to a set of “slightly
buggy device drivers.”29
Microsoft saw the opportunity presented by the Internet and the challenges posed by
Netscape and Java, and it responded in several ways.30 First and most important, it included a
browser that it had licensed and modified and an application exposing no significant APIs in
Windows 95 when it was released. A year later, in August 1996, Microsoft introduced IE 3, a
fully redesigned version that broke the browsing functions down into a series of software
“components.” IE 4, released in October 1997, provided additional “componentization” and,
like IE 3, offered new features and improved performance to browser users. By the time the suit
was filed, Internet Explorer generally received better reviews in the trade press than Netscape’s
Navigator did.31
Breaking IE into components provided little direct benefit to users, but it exposed much
of the functionality in IE as APIs that other parts of the operating system and applications could
28

At trial, Netscape’s JREs were portrayed by plaintiffs as faithful implementations of Sun’s specifications.
However, as noted infra note 33, Netscape’s JREs ran fewer “pure” Java applications than did Microsoft’s JRE
in tests by PC Magazine. Moreover, like Microsoft, Netscape offered its own method for calling “native” code
and did not adopt Sun’s specification until more than a year after it was released. Even then, Netscape adopted
Sun’s specification only for its JRE that ran on Windows, not for those that ran on other platforms.

29

CUSUMANO & YOFFIE, supra note 20, at 40.

30

Netscape’s success posed a significant challenge even if Navigator did not become middleware. Netscape’s
original business plan envisioned its browser primarily as a way of promoting sales of its Web servers. The idea
was that by having the most popular browser, Netscape could set de facto Internet standards for new
functionality, which its Web servers could provide, keeping Microsoft and other software vendors permanently
in catch-up mode. Alessandra Bianchi, Should Netscape Control the Web, INC., Dec. 1996,
http://pf.inc.com/magazine/19961215/2028.html (last visited Feb. 11, 2005); Christopher Jones, When It Comes
to Standards, Everyone’s a Suit, WIRED NEWS, Aug. 20, 1997,
http://www.wired.com/news/print/0,1294,6155,00.html (last visited Feb. 11, 2005); CUSUMANO & YOFFIE,
supra note 20, at 96, 99, 120.

31

David S. Evans & Richard L. Schmalensee, The Economics of the Microsoft Antitrust Case in the United States:
A Post-Trial Primer, in TRIAL AND ERROR 65, 73 (2nd ed., 2002).

9

use to add new features. An example is the “HTML rendering engine,” the software that
interprets files in HTML format for display on monitors or in printed documents. This software
is used to display Web pages when the user is browsing the Web; it is used to display
information in the Windows Help system; and it can be used by any application to display an
HTML file, whether it is on the Web or the user’s hard disk.
Second, Microsoft actively promoted Internet Explorer. It included IE in Windows,
including updated versions (IE 2, 3, and 4), which were incorporated into “service releases” of
Windows 95 that were distributed to OEMs. IE 4 was an integral part of Windows 98. Thus,
Microsoft licensed this product in its entirety and did not allow OEMs to disassemble or
modify its software by removing IE or hiding IE from users. Microsoft also prevented OEMs
from displaying other browsers and folders in a manner different and more prominent than IE
was displayed. (Some computer makers did distribute Netscape Navigator as well as IE.)
Microsoft also provided IE and related software for free to Internet access providers
(IAPs), offered some of them a bounty for each customer signed up that used IE, and provided
some IAPs (most importantly, AOL) with free distribution of Windows in exchange for the
IAPs’ agreement to not promote competing browsers to subscribers and to limit shipments of
non-Microsoft browsers to subscribers who requested them.32 Microsoft similarly offered free
software that let IAPs and corporations manage and customize IE. It also provided inducements
to some Web site developers (Internet content providers or ICPs in the language of the case) to
distribute and promote IE rather than competing browsers.
Finally, Microsoft added some Windows-specific extensions to its implementation of
Java that, if used by a developer, meant that the written Java application could not run on JREs

10

that fully complied with Sun’s specifications. Nonetheless, tests in 1997 and 1998 showed that
Microsoft’s JRE was able to run a larger proportion of “pure” Java applications (designed to
meet Sun’s specifications and thus using no Windows-specific extensions) than were those
from Sun and Netscape.33

B. Complaints and Trial
The U.S. Department of Justice, twenty state co-plaintiffs, and the District of Columbia
(collectively, “the government”) filed an antitrust lawsuit in May 1998. The complaints alleged
that the inclusion of IE with Windows was an illegal tie.34 They also charged that Microsoft’s
contracting practices had effectively cut off Netscape’s distribution,35 that Microsoft attempted
to monopolize “the market for Internet browsers,” and that it had illegally maintained a
monopoly in “the market for PC operating systems” through these and other anticompetitive
practices.36
The District Court put the case on a “fast track”: the trial began in mid-October 1998
and concluded in mid-June 1999, following 76 trial days. Each side was limited to 12 trial
32

AOL did not use IE per se. Instead, with Microsoft’s help, it used IE components and their APIs to provide Web
browsing from within the software it provided to subscribers to find and use content on AOL’s proprietary
network.

33

See Larry Seltzer, Java Environments, PC MAG., May 27, 1997; Larry Seltzer, Java Environments, PC MAG.,
Apr. 7, 1998.

34

Tying is a violation under Section 1 and is often analyzed under a fairly strict standard enunciated by the
Supreme Court in Jefferson Parish Hospital v. Hyde, 466 U.S. 2 (1984). Tying can also be a violation under
Section 2 under standard that is harder for plaintiffs to prevail on. 10 PHILLIP E. AREEDA ET AL., ANTITRUST
LAW ¶ 1752 (1996).

35

Shortly before the complaint was filed, Microsoft unilaterally removed the restrictions the Department found
objectionable from many—but not all—of the relevant contracts.

36

The States brought a separate claim of monopoly under Section 2 of the Sherman Act, alleging that Microsoft
“used its monopoly power in the market for operating system software to foreclose competition in the separate
market for Internet browsers and create a monopoly in the market for Internet browsers” (Plaintiff States’ First
Amended Complaint, U.S. v. Microsoft and New York, et al. v. Microsoft, Civil Action Nos. 98–1232 and 98–
1233 (TPJ), July 17, 1998, ¶¶ 91–92). The district court dismissed this claim on summary judgment “[b]ecause
the theory of “monopoly leveraging” is inconsistent with both the Sherman Act’s plain text and with Supreme
Court pronouncements on the general limitations of its reach” (Memorandum and Order, U.S. v. Microsoft and
New York, et al. v. Microsoft, Civil Action Nos. 98–1232 and 98–1233 (TPJ), Sept. 14, 1998, p. 3).

11

witnesses who provided written testimony and were then cross-examined on that testimony at
trial and three rebuttal witnesses who presented oral testimony. The court issued findings of
fact on November 5, 1999 and conclusions of law on April 3, 2000. A hearing on remedies, in
which the trial court allowed the parties to makes statements but present no testimony, took
place on May 24, 2000. A final decision was issued on June 7, 2000.
The testimony at trial covered six broad topics: (1) market definition and market power;
(2) tying of IE and Windows; (3) contracts that limited the distribution of Netscape; (4)
predatory conduct against Netscape; (5) Microsoft discounts and other efforts to dissuade
OEMs from installing Netscape and other middleware products; and (6) various Microsoft
actions regarding IBM, Intel, Netscape, Sun, RealNetworks, and Apple that were alleged to be
part of a pattern of using monopoly power in the operating system to illegally maintain power
there. Considerable economic testimony was presented on all of these topics. Table 1
summarizes the main antitrust charges initially levied against Microsoft, as well as their
disposition by the District Court and, as we will discuss in the next section, the Court of
Appeals.37
The trial court agreed with the government on most of the charges against Microsoft,
rejecting only the Section 1 claim of exclusive dealing. It found that Microsoft had a monopoly
in personal computer operating systems, had illegally tied a browser to this operating system,
had engaged in tying and exclusionary contracts for the purpose of excluding Netscape from
37

The states in their complaint made additional antitrust claims under the Sherman Act regarding Microsoft’s
Office suite of business applications: 1) Office as well as Windows was indispensable to OEMs, contributing to
Microsoft’s leverage negotiating with OEMs about IE; 2) Microsoft’s licensing terms for Office were
anticompetitive, leading to higher barriers to entry in a putative market for PC office productivity suites and
monopoly power in said market for Microsoft; and 3) Microsoft planned to illegally bundle its consumer email
application, Outlook Express, with Windows 98 to eliminate potential threats to Office. Plaintiff States’
Complaint, New York, et al. v. Microsoft, Civil Action No. 98–1233 (TPJ), May 18, 1998, §§ VII, XI–XII. The
states further brought claims under their individual state laws. Plaintiff States’ Complaint, New York, et al. v.
Microsoft, Civil Action No. 98–1233 (TPJ), May 18, 1998, §§ VII, X–XXXIX.

12

the browser market, and had engaged in a variety of other actions to maintain its operating
system monopoly and in an attempt to monopolize the browser market. Although these broad
conclusions are clear from the court’s findings, it is harder than one might imagine to determine
from the court’s findings (of fact and of law) whether particular actions engaged in by
Microsoft were found to be illegal or were merely frowned upon by the court. For example, the
trial court seemed to condemn Microsoft for engaging in predatory conduct (including giving
IE away for free) in its Findings of Fact, but there is no specific Conclusion of Law that states
that this was a violation.38
After finding liability, the trial court asked the parties to submit their recommendations
on remedies. The government sought structural relief—proposing to break Microsoft into two
companies—as well as behavioral restraints, including restrictions on the integration of features
into the operating system. The court decided not to take additional testimony on this topic and,
after a one-day hearing, granted the government’s proposal over Microsoft’s objections.

C. The First Appeal
Shortly after the conclusion of the trial, interviews with the trial judge appeared in the
press based on conversations that had taken place before he issued his Findings of Fact and
Conclusions of Law. The Court of Appeals, in a unanimous en banc decision, found that the
trial judge’s violations of several ethical precepts in these secret conversations were
“deliberate, repeated, egregious, and flagrant.”39 And it noted that some of his comments
“would lead a reasonable, informed observer to question the District Judge’s impartiality.”40

38

As we will see below, the Justice Department did not raise the predation issue on appeal, and the appeals court
dismissed this as a possible antitrust violation, while noting that it was not clear that it was being claimed as an
antitrust violation by the government. U.S. v. Microsoft, 253 F.3d 34 (D.C. Cir. 2001), at 41–42, 88–89.

39

U.S. v. Microsoft, 253 F.3d 34 (D.C. Cir. 2001), at 107.

40

Id.,, at 115.

13

The Court of Appeals concluded, however, that the appropriate remedy for the District Judge’s
misconduct was to vacate the order breaking up Microsoft (which, as we discuss in Section II,
it vacated for other reasons as well) and to disqualify him from participating in the case
thereafter. In particular, it held that his findings of fact “both warrant deference under the clear
error standard and, though exceedingly sparing in citations to the record, permit meaningful
appellate review.”41
As it turned out, the District Court’s detailed findings of fact failed to save two of the
trial court’s three findings of liability. The D.C. Circuit reversed the finding that Microsoft had
attempted to monopolize the browser market because the trial court had not found that browsers
comprised a relevant market. It also found that the plaintiffs had not presented adequate
evidence on market definition or barriers to entry—either at trial or in oral argument on
appeal—and it precluded the government from addressing this problem on remand. The appeals
court also vacated the finding of per se illegal tying, in part because it concluded that “the
nature of the platform software market affirmatively suggests that per se rules might stunt
valuable innovation.”42 It remanded the issue, giving plaintiffs the option to retry a tying claim
under the rule of reason, and it also provided guidance on the specific standards it would apply
if upon remand the district court found under the rule of reason that Microsoft had illegally tied
its browser to Windows, its software platform.43 The government decided against pursuing the

41

Id.,, at 118. The clear error standard requires a finding of fact to be sustained unless it can be shown that it is
clearly erroneous in light of the record. This is little help when the record is thin: if only one witness testified on
an issue, and that testimony was not clearly demolished on cross-examination, it stands as definitive even if
inconsistent with incontrovertible facts not in the record.

42

Id.,, at 92.

43

In particular, the Court of Appeals’ standards were: “First, to be condemned as exclusionary, a monopolist’s act
must have an ‘anticompetitive effect.’ That is, it must harm the competitive process and thereby harm
consumers. In contrast, harm to one or more competitors will not suffice…Second, the plaintiff, on whom the
burden of proof of course rests, must demonstrate that the monopolist’s conduct indeed has the requisite
anticompetitive effect…Third, if a plaintiff successfully establishes a prima facie case under § 2 by

14

tying case on remand. Although some have argued that the change in administrations made the
U.S. Department of Justice less aggressive, we think the higher standards for establishing a
tying violations set by the appeals court together with that court’s prohibition against the
government’s re-arguing that there is a browser market (a potentially important element of a
tying claim) would have made such an attempt futile. In any event, it is not clear that the
remedy would have been any different if the tying claim had been retried and Microsoft found
liable.
The trial court’s detailed findings of fact were critical to the Court of Appeals’ review
of the District Court’s finding of illegal monopoly maintenance. The findings relevant to the
actions listed in the second and third sections of Table 2 were based on a thin trial record.44
In considering these findings by the lower court, the appeals court described the test for
causation that it thought was appropriate for considering liability questions. It first noted with
approval that “with respect to actions seeking injunctive relief, [Areeda and Hovenkamp]
recognize the need for courts to infer ‘causation’ from the fact that a defendant has engaged in
anticompetitive conduct that ‘reasonably appear[s] capable of making a significant contribution

demonstrating anticompetitive effect, then the monopolist may proffer a ‘procompetitive justification’ for its
conduct. If the monopolist asserts a procompetitive justification—a nonpretextual claim that its conduct is
indeed a form of competition on the merits because it involves, for example, greater efficiency or enhanced
consumer appeal—then the burden shifts back to the plaintiff to rebut that claim…Fourth, if the monopolist’s
procompetitive justification stands unrebutted, then the plaintiff must demonstrate that the anticompetitive harm
of the conduct outweighs the procompetitive benefit.” U.S. v. Microsoft Corp., 253 F.3d 34, 58-59, 95-97 (D.C.
Cir. 2001),. The court noted that although its discussion on the rule of reason arose in the context of the Section
2 monopolization claims, the analysis was analogous to that for Section 1 claims.
44

For two of the twelve acts found illegal by the Court of Appeals, there was no direct testimony; the findings
were based on documents introduced during cross-examination during the rebuttal phase (These findings
concerned the “First-Wave” program, which the court found was used to reduce the likelihood that ISVs would
distribute Navigator and non-Microsoft JREs. Id.,, at 48–49, 54–55.)) For another of the acts—the finding that
Microsoft had deceived Java developers into using Windows-specific features in its Java developer kit—there
was no testimony (at trial or in deposition) from any independent developer. The only testimony was from a Sun
witness who testified that he had heard from some developers that they were confused, but could not recall any
names(Trial Transcript, December 10, 1998, a.m. session (Gosling Direct), U.S. v. Microsoft, 253 F.3d 34 (D.C.
Cir. 2001), at. 58–64.) There is a deeper but nonetheless sparse trial record for the other nine acts.

15

to … maintaining monopoly power”(emphasis added).45 It then asserted that “[w]e may infer
causation when exclusionary conduct is aimed at producers of nascent competitive technologies
as well as when it is aimed at producers of established substitutes.”46 It described this as a
“rather edentulous [i.e., toothless] test for causation[.]”47
Under this standard, the Court of Appeals reversed the trial court on the allegations
summarized in the second part of Table 2. But it found that because each of the actions listed in
the third part of Table 2 seemed capable in principle of maintaining Microsoft’s monopoly
power and lacked an adequate efficiency justification, each constituted a violation of the
Sherman Act.
The Court of Appeals held in this case that actions by a monopoly were illegal if they
were facially suspect, aimed at nascent competitors, and lacked a persuasive efficiency
rationale, even in the absence of proof of any actual effect on competition or harm to
consumers. The main explicit argument it gave for this “toothless” standard was the difficulty
of proving what would have happened absent the illegal acts. Suppose monopoly A burns the
factory of B, an emerging but struggling competitor, and B’s business fails. Even if it cannot be
shown that the fire caused or even hastened the failure, most people would want to find A
guilty of more than arson. The charge on the table in Microsoft was monopoly maintenance,
and, in retrospect, once the appeals court had decided it would accept all of the trial court’s
findings of fact, with their adverse description of conduct that struck most observers as at least

45

Microsoft, 253 F.3d 34 at 79 (citing 3 PHILLIP E. AREEDA & HERBERT HOVENKAMP, ANTITRUST LAW ¶ 651c, 78
(1996)).

46

Microsoft, 253 F.3d 34 at 79.

47

Id.,, at 79.

16

exceptionally aggressive competition,48 it would have been difficult for it to find that Microsoft
had done absolutely nothing wrong. At the same time, for some of the acts ultimately found
illegal by the Court of Appeals, Microsoft had not presented testimony explaining why its
actions had pro-consumer benefits.49
We and others have argued that more evidence of harm to consumers should be required
to establish liability.50 But the direct impact of any antitrust case on consumers depends on
what relief, if any, is ordered,51 and in that context the D.C. Circuit pointedly noted that
“Microsoft’s concerns over causation have more purchase in connection with the appropriate
remedy issue.”52 As we show in the next section, its elaboration of that point played a central
role in determining the remedy ultimately adopted.

III.

Remedies Proposed and Ordered
A. Complaints and Trial
In its original complaint, the Department of Justice asked the court to order Microsoft

not to tie “Microsoft’s Internet browser software or other software product” to Windows, to
48

NEWSWEEK wrote that Judge Jackson’s Findings of Fact was a “compelling litany of misdeeds” documenting “at
length how Microsoft is a monopolistic violator that not only bullies its competitors but also rips off the public
by stifling innovation and overcharging for its software” Bill Takes It On The Chin, NEWSWEEK, Nov. 15, 1999.
Time Magazine described Jackson’s Findings of Fact as the “judge’s greatest hits collection of Microsoft
skullduggery,” detailing “the ways in which Microsoft used its monopoly power to bludgeon the competition”
Adam Cohen, et al., Bill Gates’ Monopoly/The Findings Of Fact, TIME, Nov. 15, 1999.

49

In many cases that is not surprising since there were many allegations made during the trial and it was not
apparent that many of the ones ultimately found illegal by the appeals court were ones that the government was
pursuing seriously. In addition, limiting each side to only 15 witnesses (12 during the main case and three in
rebuttal) also made it impractical to call witnesses to testify on all of the factual issues raised. To a great degree,
many factual issues were not addressed in testimony, or were addressed only through hearsay (which the trial
judge freely allowed because there was no jury and he could decide for himself how much weight to give to the
evidence).

50

Chang et al., supra note 9 ; Timothy J. Muris, The FTC and the Law of Monopolization, 67 ANTITRUST L.J. 693
(2000).

51

The ultimate impact of any case depends both on the direct impact and on the indirect precedential effects. We
argue below that the likely precedential effects of both the D.C. Circuit Court’s Microsoft decisions, taken
together, will be to reinforce traditional, pro-consumer antitrust principles.

52

Microsoft, 253 F.3d 34 at 80.

17

forbid Microsoft from requiring or inducing anyone—whether OEM, IAP, or ICP—not to
distribute “any non-Microsoft Internet browser software or other software product,” and not to
take action or threaten to take action for non-distribution of Microsoft products or distribution
of non-Microsoft products. (The key term “software product” was not defined.) The court was
also asked to order Microsoft to eliminate restrictive terms from its OEM contracts
corresponding to the OEM allegations in Table 2. In addition, the states’ complaint asked that
Microsoft be ordered to license its intellectual property in “interfaces” that were necessary to
permit alternative browsers to work effectively with Windows and that it be required broadly to
provide necessary information and technical support to ISVs.
The Department of Justice asked that for a period of three years, Microsoft be allowed
to distribute a single version of Windows with IE only if it also included Navigator and
permitted each OEM “to delete the software that provides the Internet Explorer icon and the
other means by which users may readily use IE to browse the web, the software that provides
the icon and the other means by which users may readily use the Netscape Internet browser, or
both.” In addition, the Department of Justice asked that Microsoft be permanently barred from
distributing IE with Windows unless it made available to OEMs, “a practical and commercially
reasonable option of deleting … or not installing … the software that provides the Internet
Explorer icon and the other means by which users may readily use IE to browse the web” and
gave a price break to OEMs that deleted or did not install IE.
It is important to recognize that, even after Web browsing became more tightly
integrated into Windows starting with the release of IE 3 in 1996, removing user access to IE,
as the Department of Justice’s complaint requested, does not require removal of the modules of
code that support APIs related to Internet browsing. Thus, application programs (and other

18

parts of Windows) can call on Windows to perform functions, such as display of files in HTML
format, that are also used in Web browsing. If some OEMs removed the files supporting these
APIs, however, developers of applications software would have to recognize that programs
relying on those APIs would not work on some computers running Windows. If these
computers were numerous, application developers would need either to avoid using the
functions involved or to bundle the necessary Windows code with their applications software to
perform those functions so that consumers did not face inconsistent application performance.
In November 1999, the trial judge issued findings of fact that made it clear that he
would conclude that Microsoft had violated the Sherman Act. He encouraged Microsoft and the
government to agree on a consent decree, and he appointed a mediator, Judge Richard Posner.
On April 3, after mediation had failed, the District Court issued its Conclusions of Law, which
are summarized in Table 1 and Table 2.
On April 28, 2000, plaintiffs submitted their proposed relief. In addition to interim
restrictions on Microsoft’s conduct that were similar to those that had been proposed in the
complaint, they proposed that Microsoft be split into two independent companies, with one
producing operating systems (“OpsCo”) and one producing applications and everything else
(“AppsCo”), including IE. While there had been much press speculation about breaking up
Microsoft,53 this proposal was nonetheless surprising because it would neither directly increase
competition in operating systems nor reduce the incentives of OpsCo, which would inherit
Windows and its market power, to continue to add new features and functions to its products.54

53

Microsoft may face breakup, CNN MONEY, Apr. 24, 2000, at
http://money.cnn.com/2000/04/24/companies/microsoft/ (last visited Jan. 11, 2005); Joe Wilcox, Rumors of
Microsoft breakup proposal not surprising, NEWS.COM, Jan. 13, 2000, available at http://news.com.com/21001001-235617.html?legacy=cnet (last visited Jan. 11, 2005).

54

Indeed, several noted economists filed an amicus brief with the trial court arguing that this relief was insufficient
for exactly this reason and that the only way to increase competition in operating systems was to create multiple

19

The government filed affidavits with its proposal that advanced the argument, which had not
been made at trial, that competition would be enhanced because AppsCo would transform
Microsoft Office, a very popular product containing a word processor, a spreadsheet, and other
applications, into middleware that would compete with Windows for the loyalty of applications
developers. No evidence related to such a transformation had been introduced at trial, nor had
the concept been discussed in the Findings of Fact or Conclusions of Law.55
On May 10, Microsoft responded that the proposed remedy was too severe and that it
would be impossible to resolve remedy-specific factual disputes without substantial discovery
and a full hearing. At a one-day hearing on May 24, the judge indicated that he was prepared to
enter a relief order without any further process. Microsoft then offered to produce testimony
from various experts showing, among other things,56 that the proposed divestiture would not
induce entry into operating systems; that it would be expensive and difficult, that it would
disrupt product development, and that it would result in substantial price increases for both
Windows and Office.57 The District Court nonetheless held no further proceedings and issued a
relief order on June 7 that was essentially identical to the government’s proposal.

operating system companies, each able to distribute and improve upon the latest version of Windows: see Robert
E. Litan,., Roger D. Noll, William D. Nordhaus, and Frederic Scherer, Remedies Brief of Amici Curiae at 8,
U.S. v. Microsoft 253 F.3d 34 (Civil Action No. 98–1233 (TPJ)).
55

The states’ initial May 1998 complaint had included a claim concerning Microsoft’s alleged monopolization of
business productivity applications (Office) by denying competitors access to undocumented Windows interfaces
that Office applications used. The states dropped that claim, however, in their first amended complaint. The only
way in which Office appeared during the trial concerned Microsoft’s threat to stop offering Office for the
Macintosh if Apple did not promote the Macintosh version of IE more prominently on new Macintosh
computers.

56

Microsoft’s offer of proof listed testimony from sixteen experts. For the full list see, Defendant Microsoft
Corporation's Offer of Proof in Opposition to Entry of the Government’s Proposed Final Judgment, U.S. v.
Microsoft, Civil Action No. 98–1233 (TPJ), May 24, 2000.

57

Microsoft, 253 F.3d 34, at 98–99. The argument for a price increase is classic, see AUGUSTIN COURNOT,
RECHERCHES SUR LES PRINCIPES MATHEMATIQUES DE LA THEORIE DES RICHESSES (1838). Because Windows
and Office are complements, a firm producing both will take into account reductions in the sales of Windows
when considering increasing the price of Office, and vice versa. Given the same initial prices, two singleproduct firms, which necessarily ignore these cross effects, will find raising prices more attractive than will a

20

B. The First Appeal
As noted above, the D.C. Circuit’s decision of June 2001 vacated the District Court’s
relief order in part because of judicial misconduct on the part of the District Judge and
remanded the case to a new judge for the purpose of fashioning appropriate relief. It also
vacated the order because the District Court failed to hold an evidentiary hearing on remediesspecific factual disputes and because it failed to offer an adequate explanation for the relief it
ordered.58 Had that been all the court of appeals had to say on the subject of relief, the new
judge conceivably might simply have received additional written testimony, held a brief
evidentiary hearing, and entered the same order as the trial court—this time with a summary of
the government’s explanation of the order’s virtues attached.
However, the D.C. Circuit gave a third reason for vacating the District Court’s remedies
decree that made such a course impossible: “[w]e have drastically altered the scope of
Microsoft’s liability, and it is for the District Court in the first instance to determine the
propriety of a specific remedy for the limited ground of liability which we have upheld”
(emphasis added).59 The discussion in Section I, summarized in Tables 1 and Table 2, makes
clear just how drastically the D.C. Circuit had reduced the scope of Microsoft’s liability: of the
three violations found by the trial court, one had been reversed, one had been vacated, and,
while the monopoly maintenance violation was upheld, the list of condemned actions had been
shortened substantially.
single firm producing both. See also Defendant Microsoft Corporation's Offer of Proof in Opposition to Entry of
the Government’s Proposed Final Judgment, May 24, 2000, U.S. v. Microsoft Corp., (No. 98–1233). In a
declaration filed by the government, a former chief economist of the Antitrust Division acknowledged this effect
but contended that it would be small; see Declaration of Carl Shapiro, Apr. 28, 2000, at 10 U.S. v. Microsoft
Corp, 253 F.3d 34, (No. 98–1233).
58

Microsoft, 253 F.3d 34 at 46, 117, 119.

21

In providing guidance to the District Court on remand, the appeals court noted that
unitary companies, not formed by mergers and acquisitions, are rarely split in antitrust
proceedings because of the cost and difficulty involved, and it noted that Microsoft claimed to
be a unitary corporation. It then turned to the critical issue of causation, asserting that “the
District Court also should consider whether plaintiffs have established a sufficient causal
connection between Microsoft’s anticompetitive conduct and its dominant position in the OS
market.”60 As we noted above, the court had defended its “edentulous” standard for liability
with a citation from Areeda and Hovenkamp that applied “to actions seeking injunctive
relief.”61 It reinforced this linkage in its discussion of remedy by citing Areeda and Hovenkamp
with approval to the effect that “structural relief … ‘require[s] a clearer indication of a
significant causal connection between the conduct and creation or maintenance of market
power’” (emphasis added by the court) and that “[a]bsent such causation, the antitrust
defendant’s unlawful behavior should be remedied by ‘an injunction against continuation of
that conduct.’”62
The court then referred to the weak standard for causation that it had adopted for
liability: “we have found a causal connection between Microsoft’s exclusionary conduct and its
continuing position in the operating systems market only through inference.”63 The D.C.
Circuit noted that the District Court, although it had found much more of Microsoft’s conduct
illegal, had expressly found that, “There is insufficient evidence to find that, absent Microsoft’s
59

Id., In the summary, the court made the same point with slightly different language: “[T]he District Court’s
Final Judgment rests on a number of liability determinations that do not survive appellate review; therefore the
remedial order as currently fashioned cannot stand.” Microsoft, 253 F.3d 34, at 46.

60

Id, at 106.

61

See supra note 45.

62

Microsoft, 253 F.3d 34 at 106, (citing 3 PHILLIP E. AREEDA & HERBERT HOVENKAMP, ANTITRUST LAW ¶ 653b,
at 91–92 and ¶ 650a, at 67 (1996)).

22

actions, Navigator and Java already would have ignited genuine competition in the market for
Intel-compatible PC operating systems.”64 The appeals court concluded that, “While we do not
undertake to dictate to the District Court the precise form that relief should take on remand, we
note again that it should be tailored to fit the wrong creating the occasion for the remedy.”65
This guidance left open the possibility that on remand the government would provide
evidence of “a significant causal connection” that would convince the new district judge that
more than injunctive relief was in order. Absent such evidence, however, structural relief was
clearly ruled out, and one could doubt whether the appeals court would sustain relief much
beyond “an injunction against continuation” of the conduct it had found illegal. In this first
appellate decision, the D.C. Circuit thus enunciated both a weak standard for liability and a
strong standard for relief: liability did not require much evidence of causation, particularly
when nascent competition was involved, but serious proof of causation was required to go
beyond straightforward injunctive relief. The rationale seems clear: if there is no evidence that
the illegal conduct actually did harm consumers by reducing competition, there is no
justification for relief intended to increase competition beyond what market forces would
produce, since relief of this sort almost inevitably involves costs of various sorts.66

C. Settlement and Hearings
Shortly after September 11, 2001, making reference to the events of that day, the new
District Judge ordered the remaining parties to enter into settlement negotiations.67 The U.S.
Department of Justice and nine of the state plaintiffs (the “settling plaintiffs”) reached
63

Microsoft, 253 F.3d 34 at 106–107.

64

Id.,, at 107(citing Findings of Fact ¶ 411).

65

Id.,, at 107.

66

Chang et al., supra note 9.

67

One state withdrew before the first District Court decision, and another settled during the summer of 2001.

23

resolution in the form of a proposed settlement in early November, but nine states and the
District of Columbia (the “litigating states”) proposed a different, more severe remedy.
Beginning in March 2002, the district court held a 32-day evidentiary hearing on the issue of
remedies proposed by the litigating states. In addition, as part of its review under the Tunney
Act the court held separate, shorter hearings of whether the proposed settlement was in the
public interest. In November 2002, the District Court approved the settlement and entered a
relief order that differed only slightly from the proposed consent decree. Table 3 summarizes
the substantive provisions of that order and relates them to the actions listed in Table 2.
We defer a detailed discussion of those substantive provisions and their enforcement to
Sections IV and V, below. We note here, however, that the consent decree order goes far
beyond the relief sought by plaintiffs in their 1998 complaints: a wider range of actions is
prohibited or required (including some that were neither complained of nor related to actions
found illegal), a greater variety of software products is affected (including any new middleware
technologies that might emerge, as well as more of Microsoft’s existing offerings), and, as a
consequence, the required changes to Windows are more extensive. The only provision in the
complaint’s relief not present in the final relief order is the requirement that for a three-year
period Microsoft either bundle Netscape Navigator along with Windows or offer a version of
Windows without IE. Since Navigator no longer had a large share of browser usage by late
2002, and the District Court found that Navigator’s distribution had not been foreclosed by
Microsoft’s actions,68 this omission is not particularly surprising.
Thus, if Microsoft had simply surrendered when it received the government’s complaint
in 1998, it almost certainly would have received a less onerous order. One might argue that it

68

See Table 1 for disposition of the charges.

24

also would have been spared considerable cost as well as a great deal of hostile media coverage
and a wave of derivative litigation.69 But, of course, surrendering would have entailed
admitting to having broken the law, and Microsoft did not believe it had done so. That nine
states felt the final relief order was too weak, even though it was much stronger than the order
plaintiffs initially sought, testifies both to the difficulty of managing a large coalition of
litigants and to the tendency of bitter, protracted litigation to drive parties to extreme positions.
Our own view, to add to the Monday morning quarterbacking, is that Microsoft inevitably
would have been subject to significant protracted litigation even if it had settled the IE issue in
1998. Many in government and elsewhere felt that it was necessary for antitrust to rein in
Microsoft’s perceived market power and arrogance, and some other grounds for suit almost
certainly would have been found.
The remedy proposed by the litigating states differed in a number of important respects
from that proposed by the Justice Department and Microsoft and finally adopted. It had a much
broader definition of middleware. It required disclosure of considerable additional Microsoft
intellectual property—including making the source code of Internet Explorer available on an
open source basis and licensing three companies to use the source code of Microsoft Office to
port it to operating systems other than Windows and Macintosh. And it required that Microsoft
offer “unbound” versions of Windows that would allow licensees to remove any combination

69

For a list of class action suits and other litigation that followed the trial court’s liability finding, see Microsoft
Press Release, Antitrust Settlement Fact Sheet, Oct. 28, 2003, at http://www.microsoft.com/presspass/legal/1028SettlementFS.asp (last visited Jan. 10, 2005). Microsoft estimates that it has already spent roughly $3 billion
and has reserved an additional $950 million to settle class action suits and private antitrust suits related to the
findings in the DOJ case. See “Transcript of News Conference Regarding Microsoft Legal Settlements with the
Computer & Communications Industry Association (CCIA) and Novell,” Nov. 8, 2004, at
http://www.microsoft.com/presspass/exec/bradsmith/11-08-04CCIATranscript.asp (last visited Feb. 11, 2004)).
In the press, Microsoft has often been equated with evil. See, e.g. Rob O'Regan, In its current state, Microsoft
has no appeal, PC WEEK, Feb. 28, 2000; Mary Jo Foley, Microsoft is still ‘The Evil Empire,’ ZDNET NEWS,
Mar. 9, 2000; Stewart Alsop, Alas, poor Microsoft, FORTUNE, July 7, 2003; Robert L. Mitchell, Just Pin It on
Microsoft, COMPUTERWORLD, Feb. 3, 2003.

25

of “middleware” that they wished. The litigating states defined “middleware” as any software
that provides one or more interfaces and that “could, if ported to or made Interoperable with
multiple Operating Systems, enable software products written for that Middleware to be run on
multiple Operating System Products.”70 The states’ computer science expert witness equated
“middleware” with all code in operating system products that is not part of the “kernel,” a very
tiny part of most operating systems (about 1.5 percent of Windows XP and as little as 0.2
percent of one major Linux distribution in 200271).
Thus, instead of requiring that Microsoft enable the blocking of end user access to
specific pieces of Microsoft middleware (e.g., in the language of the Department of Justice
complaint, enabling OEMs to delete or not install “the software that provides the Internet
Explorer icon and the other means by which users may readily use IE to browse the web”), the
litigating states would have required Microsoft to make available versions of Windows in
which the corresponding computer code for various combinations of middleware had been
removed. One of the goals of the states’ proposal was to remove code that supported APIs, so
that ISVs would no longer be able to count on every copy of Windows of a particular vintage
supporting the same set of APIs.72 We return to these issues in Section III.
In discussing the general standards and guidance from the D.C. Circuit that it followed
in shaping the final relief order, the District Judge noted that “the Court’s determination of the

70

Plaintiff Litigating States’ First Amended Proposed Final Judgment March 4, 2002, § 22.w, New York v.
Microsoft Corp., (No. 98–1233).

71

Direct Testimony of Stuart M. Madnick, Apr. 26, 2002, ¶ 142, n. 126 and 127 New York. v. Microsoft Corp.
231 F. Supp. 2d 203 (D.D.C., 2002) (No. 98–1233).

72

Memorandum Opinion at 300–301, New York. v. Microsoft Corp., 231 F. Supp. 2d 203 (D.D.C., 2002) (No.
98–1233) (citing Direct Testimony of James L. Barksdale ¶ 60). The European Commission’s order concerning
Windows Media Player similarly would require removal of code, with the concurrent disabling of APIs seen as
a positive feature. Commission Decision of 24.03.2004 relating to a proceeding under Article 82 of the EC
Treaty (Case COMP/C-3/37.792 Microsoft), ¶ 1019, available at
http://europa.eu.int/comm/competition/antitrust/cases/decisions/37792/en.pdf.

26

appropriate remedy in this case reflects, among other considerations, the strength of the
evidence linking Defendant’s anticompetitive behavior to its present position in the market.”73
Two economists testified on the issue of causality.74 The judge found the litigating states’
economist’s “‘assessment’ to have been based entirely upon his examination of the district and
appellate courts’ opinions in this case,” and that he “did not make any attempt to separate the
effect of the illegal conduct from the effect of the conduct found not to be illegal.”75 The judge
therefore gave little weight to Carl Shapiro’s testimony.
Microsoft’s economic expert, Professor Kevin Murphy, testified, based on analyses and
evidence that were not part of the trial record, that the conduct that had been found illegal had
had essentially no effect on Microsoft’s market position. Recall that the trial court found that
neither Netscape nor Java had ever actually developed a product that posed a threat to
Windows: “no middleware product [including Navigator and Java] exposes enough APIs to
allow independent software vendors (‘ISVs’) profitably to write full-featured personal
productivity applications that rely solely on those APIs.”76
Professor Murphy noted that even by the time of the remedies hearing in 2002,
Navigator had exposed only a handful of APIs that, in aggregate, did not provide significant
middleware functionality, and Java had not become a significant platform for desktop
applications. He argued that these outcomes reflected the technical limitations of Web browsers
and Java as application platforms and business decisions by Netscape, not anticompetitive

73

Memorandum Opinion at 30–31, New York v. Microsoft Corp., 231 F. Supp. 2d 203 (D.D.C., 2002) (No. 98–
1233).

74

Direct Testimony of Kevin M. Murphy, Id; Direct Testimony of Carl Shapiro, Apr. 5, 2002, Id.,

75

Microsoft Corp., 231 F. Supp. 2d at 114–115.

76

Findings of Fact¶ 28, U.S. v. Microsoft Corp.,84 F. Supp. 2d 9 (D.D.C. 1999) (No. 98–1232) and New York v.
Microsoft Corp. 231 F. Supp. 2d 203 (D.D.C., 2002) (No. 98–1233).

27

actions by Microsoft.77 When Netscape was an independent company, it never intended to turn
Navigator into a middleware platform of the sort envisioned by the government’s theory.78
After AOL agreed to acquire Netscape in late 1998, funds for developing Navigator into
middleware could hardly have been an issue, and AOL’s huge membership provided an
obvious basis for developing a middleware platform. Yet the development of Navigator slowed
dramatically after this time, and AOL continued to use IE components rather than Navigator in
its client software. Java continues to be widely used as a development platform, but mainly for
small “Web applets” and for applications that run on servers and on cell phones and other small
devices, where the nature of the applications makes Java’s technical limitations less troubling
than with PC applications. Serious attempts by several major ISVs in the late 1990s to write PC
applications in Java failed, and Microsoft’s large share of the desktop operating system
business has made the cross-platform ability of Java not very valuable.
The court concluded, however, that Professor Murphy’s testimony could not be given
much weight because his “conclusion that the anticompetitive conduct identified in this case
had no effect upon Microsoft’s monopoly can be seen to undercut, if not directly contradict, the
inference of causation necessary to the appellate court’s imposition of liability.”79

77

Direct Testimony of Kevin M. Murphy, Apr. 12, 2002 at ¶¶ 107, 113, 128, New York v. Microsoft Corp., 231 F.
Supp. 2d 203 (D.D.C., 2002) (No. 98–1233).

78

Trial Transcript at 73, U.S. v. Microsoft Corp., 84 F. Supp. 2d 9 (D.D.C. 1999) (No. 98–1232); New York v.
Microsoft Corp., 231 F. Supp. 2d 203 (D.D.C., 2002) (No. 98–1233)(Barksdale Cross on Oct. 20, 1998).

79

Memorandum Opinion at 118, New York v. Microsoft Corp., 231 F. Supp. 2d 203 (D.D.C., 2002) (No. 98–
1233). We would argue that this testimony shows that the court of appeals was too pessimistic about the
possibility of applying a test for causation with some evidentiary teeth in this case. Had it asked a District Court
to consider the issue of consumer harm seriously on remand before finding liability, expert economists would
have been able to present new, relevant data and analysis to supplement what was a very thin record on the acts
found to be violations by the court of appeals. It might not have been possible to settle the issue definitively, but,
as in other complex matters, Professor Murphy’s testimony demonstrates by example that there would have
been substantive evidence that a trial judge could weigh.

28

The combined effect of rejecting Shapiro’s testimony for the litigating states and
Murphy’s testimony for Microsoft, however, was to lead the new trial judge to rely on the
record from the original trial that the appeals court had relied upon in its liability findings. But,
as noted above, the appeals court had gone out of its way to emphasize that it was using a
“toothless” standard for liability—something it would not have had to do if the government
could have met a stronger standard—and that a higher standard was needed for the sort of
structural relief sought by the litigating states. Not surprisingly, then, the new trial judge found,
“Neither the evidentiary record from the liability phase, nor the record in this portion of the
proceeding, establishes that the present success of IE is attributable entirely, or even in
predominant part, to Microsoft’s illegal conduct.”80 And the court of appeals had instructed the
new district court that in the absence of “a sufficient causal connection between Microsoft’s
anticompetitive conduct and its dominant position in the OS market … the antitrust defendant’s
unlawful behavior should be remedied by ‘an injunction against the continuation of that
conduct.’”81
Under these conditions, one could argue that the District Court was obliged only to
enjoin repetition of the conduct described in the third part of Table 2.82 The Court rejected this
approach and, along with a 324-page opinion discussing factual and legal issues in depth,
issued the order sketched in Table 3, which it said “exceeds a mere proscription of the precise

80

Id.,, at n81.

81

Microsoft, 253 F.3d 34, at 106 (citing 3 PHILLIP E. AREEDA & HERBERT HOVENKAMP, ANTITRUST LAW
¶ 653b,¶ 650a, at 67 (1996)).

82

Memorandum Opinion at 110–113, New York v. Microsoft Corp., 231 F. Supp. 2d 203 (D.D.C., 2002) (No. 98–
1233). Some observers who argue that the Court’s relief order was inadequate go to the other extreme and overstate the courts’ findings on causation. See, e.g., Bresnahan, supra note 5, at 67 (discussing the negotiated
settlement that differed only slightly from the final remedies order): “The government plaintiffs successfully
proved to the district court and a unanimous appeals court sitting en banc that Microsoft illegally prevented the
widespread distribution of new technologies that would have substantially lowered the entry barriers into its
Windows monopoly.” This, of course, goes far beyond what even the trial court found.

29

conduct found to be anticompetitive and is forward-looking…” as well as being “crafted to
foster competition in the monopolized market in a manner consistent with the theory of liability
in this case.”83 But of course at this point Microsoft had already entered into a consent decree
with the U.S. Department of Justice and other states that was much stronger than mere
injunctive proscription.
In contrast, the trial judge described the litigating states as having “shown little respect
for the parameters of liability that were so precisely delineated by the appellate court” and
described many of their remedial proposals as “unjustifiably in conflict with the imposition as
well as the rejection of liability in this case.”84 In addition, “the Court observes that a number
of the remedial provisions proposed by [the litigating states] would require drastic alterations to
Microsoft’s products, as well as to aspects of its business model which do not involve illegal
conduct.”85 Further, “[c]ertain of Microsoft’s competitors appear to be those who most desire
these provisions and, concomitantly, are the likely beneficiaries, while other competitors in the
relevant market would not necessarily benefit.”86

D. The Second Appeal
At the end of the day only a single non-settling state, our own Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, decided the expected benefits of an appeal from this decision outweighed the
expected costs, and it asked the D.C. Circuit to set aside the District Court’s remedial decree.
Massachusetts was joined in a related appeal by two trade associations, which raised
83

Memorandum Opinion at 194, New York. v. Microsoft Corp., 231 F. Supp. 2d 203 (D.D.C., 2002) (No. 98–
1233).

84

Id.,, at 193. Similarly, the apparent regret expressed by The Economist in its discussion of remedy in this case
seems to reflect a confusion about whether a break-up remedy could be appropriate given the appeals court’s
liability findings (supra, note 14).

85

Memorandum Opinion at 193, New York v. Microsoft Corp., 231 F. Supp. 2d 203 (D.D.C., 2002) (No. 98–
1233).

30

overlapping substantive issues as well as procedural issues that do not concern us here. In June
2004, in another unanimous en banc decision, the court of appeals strongly affirmed the district
court’s decree in its entirety.87
The D.C. Circuit found none of the new trial court’s challenged findings of fact failed
the appropriate “clearly erroneous” test, nor did its relief decree fall afoul of the “abuse of
discretion” standard. As we discuss in more detail in Section III, the appeals court was
particularly strong and clear on the issue of code removal versus removal of end-user access. It
supported the District Court’s decision not to adopt any provision, and in particular not to adopt
a broad provision proposed by the litigating states, aimed at Action C.11 in Table 2—deception
of Java developers.88 And it reaffirmed the importance of its earlier decision reducing the scope
of Microsoft’s liability: “The parties’ relative positions were considerably changed by our
decision in [the first appeal].”89 Following the court’s decision, Massachusetts announced that
it would not pursue an appeal to the Supreme Court.90

IV.

Tying, Commingling, and Product Design
This section is concerned with relief proposals that would alter the design of Windows.

As noted above, the core of the case as originally brought was the allegation that there was a tie
between Windows and Internet Explorer that was alleged to be per se illegal under the Supreme

86
87

Id.,, at 193.
Massachusetts v. Microsoft Corp., 373 F. 3d 1199 (D.C. Cir., 2004).

88

The court of appeals noted that the District Court found that “[t]he Java deception ‘concern[ed] a single, very
specific incident of anticompetitive conduct by Microsoft,’ which conduct Microsoft had ceased in accordance
with a consent decree into which it had entered in another case in another court.” Id.,, at 20–21.

89

Id.,, at 83.

90

Transcript of News Conference Regarding Microsoft Legal Settlements with the Computer & Communications
Industry Association (CCIA) and Novell, Nov. 8, 2004, at
http://www.microsoft.com/presspass/exec/bradsmith/11-08-04CCIATranscript.asp (last visited Feb. 11, 2005).
Neither of the two private trade associations whose appeal had been rejected by the Court of Appeals filed
notice of appeal to the Supreme Court.

31

Court’s Jefferson Parish test. The trial court agreed with the government, but, while this
conclusion of law was set aside by the D.C. Circuit on the first appeal, the illegality of actions
C.1-C.3 in Table 2 was upheld. In effect, the appeals court held that for technical reasons a
further rule of reason analysis was necessary to decide whether Microsoft could tie by refusing
to license Windows to OEMs without IE, while relatively little evidence was required to
condemn Microsoft actions that seemed to prevent OEMs from, in effect, discarding IE rather
than including it as part of the Windows-based systems they distributed to consumers.91 The
rule of reason argument as to why this actually harmed Netscape and thus constituted a Section
2 violation was that consumers would be confused by having icons on their desktops for
multiple pieces of software that performed the same basic functions. If such confusion actually
harms competition, the natural remedy would seem to be to prohibit Microsoft from creating
it—in this case by making it possible for OEMs to discard IE. But, as we discuss below, it has
not been simple for the courts to decide exactly what that requires.

A. Windows Architecture and the Commingling Confusion
Versions 1 and 2 of Internet Explorer were conventional applications, making the
meaning of “removal” straightforward.92 That is, the corresponding binary code was relatively
isolated and could be deleted easily; it exposed few if any APIs; and its removal from Windows

91

In outlining the steps that plaintiffs would need to take in pursuing a tying claim under rule of reason, the D.C.
circuit wrote that “the fact that we have already considered some of the behavior plaintiffs allege to constitute
tying violations in the monopoly maintenance section does not resolve the § 1 inquiry. The two practices that
plaintiffs have most ardently claimed as tying violations are, indeed, a basis for liability under plaintiffs’ § 2
monopoly maintenance claim. These are Microsoft’s refusal to allow OEMs to uninstall IE or remove it from
the Windows desktop and its removal of the IE entry from the Add/Remove Programs utility in Windows 98. In
order for the District Court to conclude these practices also constitute § 1 tying violations, plaintiffs must
demonstrate that their benefits—if any—are outweighed by the harms in the tied product market.” Microsoft,
253 F.3d 34, at 95–96(internal cites removed).

Findings of Fact ¶ 175 , U.S. v. Microsoft Corp., 215 F. Supp. 2d (D.D.C., 2002) (No. 98–1232); New York v.
Microsoft Corp., 231 F. Supp. 2d 203 (D.D.C., 2002) (No. 98–1233) .

32

would not cause other application programs or other Windows processes to crash. There was
thus no meaningful “commingling” issue.
If the architecture of Version 3 and later versions of IE had been the same as Versions 1
and 2, to permit OEMs to discard IE Microsoft would have involved only the provision of a
suitable add-remove utility (Action C.2 in Table 2) and removal of the contractual prohibitions
of icon, folder, or “Start” menu entry removal (Action C.3). But starting with version 3, IE was
designed to be an integral part of the Windows platform, not just an application. Much of the
code that was used in Internet browsing was also used to perform other operating system
functions in support of both Windows itself and applications. Deleting that code, through some
sort of Add/Remove utility or in any other way, would disable those operating system
functions.
Consider, for instance, the HTML rendering engine mentioned above.93 In the first two
versions of IE, this code could only be invoked when an end user, browsing the Internet, used
Internet Explorer to display a Web page. Starting with IE 3, however, the code for HTML
rendering was a separate component that exposed APIs that Microsoft documented for use by
applications programs to display HTML files on screen, whether or not those files had been
obtained from the Internet.94 The end user could employ it to display an HTML file stored on
the hard disk, for instance. Moreover, starting with IE 4, Microsoft used HTML to display

93

In its remedy decision, the district court includes a discussion of the HTML rendering engine in Windows to
illustrate the difficulty of defining middleware separate from an operating system and of removing middleware
without degrading an operating system’s functions. (In the case of Windows, the HTML engine, which Plaintiffs
argued OEMs must have the right to remove, is required for Windows Help and Windows Explorer to work
properly, so Microsoft could not effect the removal without subjecting itself to claims of providing a degraded
operating system product.) Memorandum Opinion at 289–290, New York. v. Microsoft Corp., 231 F. Supp. 2d
203 (D.D.C., 2002), (No. 98–1233). See also Direct Testimony of Stuart M. Madnick, Apr. 26, 2002, ¶ 183, Id.,

94

In the District Court hearing on remedy, two computer scientists testified for Microsoft on the problems
associated with code removal. For a discussion of how IE relied on a series of modules—including the HTML
rendering engine, see Direct Testimony of Stuart M. Madnick, at ¶¶ 181–186, Id.,

33

directories of folders and files on users’ hard disks or corporate networks, and the same code
used to provide the “shell” for IE was also used for file management and other purposes,
including Windows Media Player.
On its face, this approach would seem to be efficient, since the same code is used for
multiple purposes. That also means that when the code is revised, updating that file updates all
of the functions and applications that rely on it. But it makes it essentially impossible to define
“removing IE” via an Add-Remove utility or other means. If the binary code that renders
HTML files is removed, for example, important parts of Windows will not work.
In the binary, working version of an operating system or other complex program, code
performing different functions is grouped together in files. It is our understanding that the best
way to structure these files in any particular case depends on, among other things, how
frequently different functions are called close together in time. There are tradeoffs between
using fewer, larger files or more numerous smaller files, and part of the final development
process is to experiment with alternatives to see how they perform under various likely
scenarios.
The original trial judge heard, correctly, that in Windows some code used for Internet
browsing was in the same files as code used for other purposes, and that deleting those files
would disable other parts of Windows and third-party applications. He did not seem to
understand that some code was used for both sorts of purposes, or that there were software
engineering reasons for grouping different code modules in larger files for distribution and
execution. Accordingly, the Findings of Fact stated that Microsoft had bound IE to Windows
98 “by placing code specific to Web browsing in the same files as code that provided operating
system functions” and that this “ensure[s] that the deletion of any file containing browsing-

34

specific routines would also delete vital operating system routines and thus cripple
Windows…”95 In his Conclusions of Law, this “commingling” became a violation of Section II
of the Sherman Act:
[C]onsumers today perceive operating systems and browsers as separate
“products,”… This is true notwithstanding the fact that the software code
supplying their discrete functionalities can be commingled in virtually infinite
combinations, rendering each indistinguishable from the whole in terms of files
of code or any other taxonomy… Microsoft’s decision to offer only the
bundled—“integrated”—version of Windows and Internet Explorer derived not
from technical necessity or business efficiencies; rather, it was the result of a
deliberate and purposeful choice to quell incipient competition before it reached
truly minatory proportions.96
On appeal, Microsoft challenged these particular findings as clearly erroneous,
characterizing as uncontradicted expert testimony that “‘[t]he very same code in Windows 98
that provides Web browsing functionality’ also performs essential operating system
functions—not code in the same files, but the very same software code.”97 Thus the grouping of
code into files or the inclusion of IE in an Add/Remove utility had nothing to do with the
inability of OEMs to delete IE without adverse consequences; that was determined by the basic
architecture of the operating system. Apparently not grasping that some code was used for both
purposes, the court of appeals found that this testimony was contradicted by testimony that
some code used for Web browsing was in files with code not used for web browsing.98 Finding

95

Microsoft, 253 F.3d 34 at 65, citing Findings of Fact ¶ 164.

96

Conclusions of Law at 29, 33, U.S. v. Microsoft Corp.; New York v. Microsoft Corp., Civil Action Nos. 98–
1232 and 98–1233 (TPJ)

97

Microsoft, 253 F.3d 34 at 66.

98

It is interesting to note that elsewhere in its decision, in a discussion of possible benefits from tying, the court of
appeals seemed to understand quite clearly both that multi-use code was present in Windows and that it could
reflect efficient design: it pointed to “…the ‘shared’ library files that perform OS and browser functions with the
very same lines of code and thus may save drive space from the clutter of redundant routines and memory when
consumers use both the OS and the browser simultaneously.” Microsoft, 253 F.3d 34 at 87.

35

contradictory testimony, the appeals court ruled that the judge’s findings were not clearly
erroneous and thus upheld his conclusion that “commingling” violated the Sherman Act.99
The settlement negotiated subsequently between Microsoft and the U.S. Department of
Justice, and agreed to by nine states, dealt with both the commingling and Add-Remove
violations by enabling OEMs to block end-user access to IE, as well as a range of other
Microsoft “middleware,” such as Windows Media Player and Windows Messenger.100 The
litigating states argued that this provision was inadequate. Since the commingling offense had
the effect of making it difficult for OEMs to remove code, they argued, the remedy must be to
require Microsoft to produce versions of Windows with the code for Internet Explorer and,
upon request, for a wide range of other middleware removed entirely. The litigating states’
economic expert refused to endorse this provision of their proposed remedy.101

B. Multi-Use Code and Multi-Sided Platform Markets
An important source of the commingling confusion was the trial and appeals courts’
apparent failure to recognize the implications that software, like the HTML rendering engine,
could perform both browsing and non-browsing functions. In the presence of such software, it
is unclear as an operational matter what it means to “delete” Internet Explorer and it is clear
that what code is in what files is irrelevant to any substantive issue. The courts presumably
could eliminate this ambiguity by requiring Microsoft not to have any code perform more than
one function or to block access by application developers to some APIs, but the first remedy
99

Id.,, at 38–39.

100

Final Judgment at §III.H, U.S. v. Microsoft Corp., 2002 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 22864 2002-2 Trade Cas. (CCH)
P73, 860 (D.D.C., 2002) (No. 98–1232). Note that during the trial, the “removal” program developed by the
government’s computer science expert witness actually removed very little code because he recognized that
removing more code would disable other parts of Windows and various applications. See Trial Transcript, New
York v. Microsoft Corp., (No. 98–1233), Dec. 14, 1999, A.M. Session (Felten Cross), pp. 42, 63–64.)

101

Trial Transcript at 3271–3272, 3277, 3284, 3289, 11 Apr. 2002, A.M. Session (Shapiro Cross), New York v.
Microsoft Corp., 224 F. Supp. 2d 76 (D.D.C., 2002)(No. 98–1233); Memorandum Opinion at 304, Id.

36

would make Windows more complex and less efficient, and the second remedy would force
applications developers to write code to perform functions that could be performed for them by
Windows. Neither remedy would benefit consumers.102
A second source of the commingling confusion, we believe, was the failure of any party
to understand clearly the antitrust policy implications of the fact that Windows is a multi-sided
market platform.103 This is hardly a surprise, since the economic literature on multi-sided
platform markets post-dates most of this proceeding, and most of it has been concerned with
payment cards rather than software platforms.104 In essence, a firm providing a multi-sided
market platform needs to attract two or more groups because the value of the platform to one
group depends on the participation of the other group and vice versa. Singles bars need to
attract both men and women; shopping malls need stores and shoppers; payment card ventures
like American Express need to attract both merchants and consumers; video game console
makers need game software developers and game users; and operating system vendors need to
attract both applications software developers and end users.105 As Microsoft management
102

The district court addressed the two solutions discussed here, as well as two others put forward by the
government’s computer science expert, Dr. Appel. The court found that none of the proposed solutions would
benefit consumers. Memorandum Opinion at 297–299, Microsoft Corp., 224 F. Supp. 2d. see also, Direct
Testimony of Stuart M. Madnick, ¶¶ 180–185, Id.,

103

The government and Microsoft both recognized that software platforms had indirect network effects, which
created a positive feedback loop between users and applications developers. There is extensive economic
literature on industries with indirect network effects that was developed in the 1980s and early 1990s. For a
summary, see Michael L. Katz and Carl Shapiro, Systems Competition and Network Effects, 8 J. OF ECON.
PERSP. 93 (1994); see also, David S. Evans & Richard Schmalensee, A Guide to the Antitrust Economics of
Networks, 16 ANTITRUST (1996). And Microsoft executives clearly understood the business implications of
these externalities.

104

See, e.g., Richard L. Schmalensee, Payment Systems and Interchange Fees, 50(2) J. IND. ECON. 103–122
(2002); Jean-Charles Rochet & Jean Tirole, Platform Competition in Two–Sided Markets, 1 J. EUR. ECON.
ASS’N 990–1029 (2003); David S. Evans, The Antitrust Economics of Multi-Sided Platform Markets, 20 YALE J.
REG. 325–381 (2003).

105

Microsoft receives most of its Windows revenue from OEMs rather than directly from end-users, but to analyze
the issues here, it is most useful to think of OEMs as distributors of Windows. When it designs new versions of
Windows, however, Microsoft works closely with OEMs to ensure that hardware and operating systems
capabilities evolve in compatible ways. In that context it makes sense to think of OEMs as a “side” of the
market whose loyalty is important to secure. One can also think of Microsoft’s task as three-sided, as it must

37

clearly understood, an operating system is more valuable to applications developers the more
end-users are potential buyers of programs written for it, and an operating system is more
valuable to end-users the more attractive applications have been developed to work with it.
One of the insights from the economic literature on multi-sided markets is that both
profit-maximizing and socially efficient pricing structures are not driven only by side-specific
costs but also by details of demand conditions and indirect network externalities. Even if it is
more expensive to serve side A than side B, for instance, it may make business sense and
enhance economic efficiency to sell below cost to A because more sales to A have a powerful
stimulating effect on sales to B. In the case of computer operating systems, for instance, no
vendor charges applications developers for the right to use the system’s APIs, even though
Microsoft, Apple, and other firms devote substantial resources to wooing and informing ISVs.
Operating system vendors receive almost all their income from end-users, in Microsoft’s case
through OEMs. On the other hand, makers of video game systems receive almost all their net
income from license fees charged to game developers; game consoles with operating systems
installed break even at best.106 The economic literature on two-sided markets makes it clear that
there is nothing inherently inefficient or anticompetitive in this sort of pricing, even if pricing
on one side of the market is below the marginal cost incurred there.107
Another insight that emerges when one views markets through the multi-sided lens is
that the analysis of product design decisions, like the analysis of pricing decisions, must take
into account effects on all sides of the market. An important way in which all operating system

work with hardware vendors (most prominently Intel) to ensure that Windows takes advantage of new devices
and that those devices are designed to work well with Windows.
106

David S. Evans et al., A Survey of the Economic Role of Software Platforms in Computer–Based Industries, 51
CESifo Economic Studies, No. 2-3 (forthcoming Summer 2005); Rochet & Tirole, supra note 104.

107

Rochet & Tirole, supra note 104; Evans, supra note 104.

38

vendors compete for the allegiance of applications developers is by expanding the set of APIs
that can be employed to develop attractive applications.108 Since the marginal cost of
distributing additional APIs, once developed, as part of the operating system is zero, while
separate distribution would entail additional costs, this sort of bundling makes economic
sense.109 No court in this litigation—or any other of which we are aware—has condemned this
form of competition, even though in the case of Microsoft adding features and functionality to
Windows may help to preserve its market position. Indeed, the decision in the first appeal
explicitly said that “a monopolist does not violate the Sherman Act simply by developing an
attractive product.”110
Operating systems also provide services directly to end-users. In the earliest versions of
MS-DOS, for instance, tiny programs were provided that enabled end users to rename, copy,
move, or delete files by calling the same code that applications programs could call. Similarly,
using IE 3 and later versions most commonly involved running a tiny application (itself called
by double-clicking the IE icon) to call published APIs (including those for the HTML rendering
engine) also available to application developers.111
Generally, offering a better product to end-users would also be considered socially
valuable competition. Here, however, the courts found that because OEMs licensed Windows
108

Direct Testimony of Stuart E. Madnick Apr. 26, 2002, §II.B, New York v. Microsoft Corp., 224 F. Supp. 2d 76
(D.D.C., 2002) (No. 98–1233); Direct Testimony of Bill Gates Apr. 18, 2002, §II.A, Id.,; Evans et al., supra
note 106; MARCO IANSITI & ROY LEVIEN, THE KEYSTONE ADVANTAGE 55–56,83–91 (2004).

109

Bakos, Yannos & Eric Brynjolfsson, Bundling Information Goods: Pricing, Profits, and Efficiency, 45 MGMT
SCI. 1613–1630 (1999); David S. Evans & Michael Salinger The Role of Cost in Determining When Firms Offer
Bundles and Ties, Working Paper Series, 2004, available at
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=555818; David S. Evans & Michael A. Salinger Why Do
Firms Bundle and Tie? Evidence from Competitive Markets and Implications for Tying Law, 22 Yale J. on Reg.
(2005), also available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=550884.

110

Microsoft, 253 F.3d 34 at 68.

39

in its entirety and were required to distribute and display this product with all of its features to
their customers, e.g., by retaining the IE icon on the Windows desktop, OEMs were reluctant to
distribute Navigator. The courts found that this at least could have prevented Navigator from
attaining the ubiquity it would have needed to become a platform competitor. Thus the offense
directly affected the end-user side of the market, not the ISV side, even though the alleged
competitive impact ultimately involved ISV behavior.

C. Remedies Hearings and the Second Appeal
The district court in the remedies hearing heard a good deal of expert testimony on
multi-use code, including the HTML rendering engine.112 The court did not explicitly
contradict the D.C. Circuit’s findings on commingling and add-remove, but it did note that
“Plaintiffs [i.e., the litigating states] have been unsuccessful at distinguishing the code which
comprises an ‘operating system’ from the code which comprises a non-operating system
‘Microsoft Middleware Product,’ such as a browser” and thus “Plaintiffs have not offered a
reasonable way for Microsoft to separate the code in order to comply with the code removal
requirements in Plaintiffs’ unbundling proposal.”113 If multi-use code is important, of course, it
is logically impossible to meet these burdens.
The court went on to show an understanding of the multi-sided issues discussed above.
It found that even if one could remove middleware code without breaking Windows, “the
record is overwhelmed with significant unrebutted evidence that Plaintiffs proposal of code

111

IE or its components also can be invoked in various other ways, such as through the Windows Update feature.
The appeals court found such invocations legal so long as specific features of IE were needed that other Web
browsers did not have necessarily have. Microsoft, 253 F.3d 34, at 67.

112

Memorandum Opinion at 289–291, New York v. Microsoft Corp., 224 F. Supp. 2d 76 (D.D.C., 2002) (No. 98–
1233).

113

Id.,, at 129.

40

removal would harm ISVs and consumers.” 114 The set of APIs available on all Windows
computers would be reduced, and thus the quality of the product provided to the ISV side of the
market would be degraded.115 ISVs testified that the quality of their products would be reduced
because they could not count on the availability of all Windows APIs, and this obviously would
be a direct source of consumer harm.116 Moreover, the reliability of Windows would suffer.
Microsoft would be required to offer many different versions of Windows117 and it clearly
could not test each one as extensively as it now tests the single version it provides to OEMs.118
Finally, the court pointed out that the violation had to do with discouraging OEMs from
distributing Netscape Navigator, because they were not free to choose to present Navigator or
another non-Microsoft browser by itself. IE always had to remain visible, and earlier decisions
found that OEMs were reluctant to present more than one browser because users would find it
confusing. Thus, the problem is on the end user side of the market, and “the evidence presented
to the Court indicates that the ability to remove end-user access to any commingled
functionality would sufficiently address the anticompetitive aspect of the conduct and would
prove far less disruptive to consumers and industry participants.”119

114

Id.,, at 130.

115

One could argue, based on the recent experience discussed in III.D, that no OEM would have licensed a version
of Windows with code removed, so that Windows would not in fact fragment. If this is true, of course, the
litigating states remedy would have failed to achieve its stated purpose of fragmenting Windows. Memorandum
Opinion at 300-301, New York v. Microsoft Corp., 224 F. Supp. 2d 76 (D.D.C., 2002) (No. 98–1233).
Moreover, the litigating states proposal would have required disabled versions of Windows to be offered at
(arbitrarily) lower prices than the full version, so one cannot rule out the possibility that some disabled versions
would have been attractive to some OEMs.

116

Direct Testimony of Scott Borduin, Apr. 17, 2002, § IV, Id.,; Direct Testimony of Brent Frei Apr. 18, 2002,
¶¶ 33–39, Id.,

117

Memorandum Opinion at 301, New York v. Microsoft Corp., 224 F. Supp. 2d 76 (D.D.C., 2002) (No. 98–1233)

118

Microsoft provides several different PC “editions” of its Windows XP operating system, including
“Professional”, “Home”, “Tablet”, and “Media Center.” However, all of them support a common set of APIs.

119

Id.,, at 131.

41

On (the second) appeal, the D.C. Circuit unanimously and enthusiastically endorsed the
District Court’s choice of access removal over code removal: “Far from abusing its discretion,
therefore, the district court, by remedying the anticompetitive effect of commingling, went to
the heart of the problem that Microsoft had created, and it did so without intruding itself into
the design and engineering of the Windows operating system. We say, Well done!”120

D. Recent Experience
Microsoft began complying with the terms of the settlement in December 2001. In
September 2002, it released an updated version of Windows that included a new feature (Set
Program Access and Defaults) that made it easy for end users to disable access to Microsoft
middleware; made it easy for end users to set non-Microsoft products as the defaults for related
functions; and that made it easy for OEMs and end users to change their default Web browsers
and various other pieces of “middleware.”121 Also in August 2002, Microsoft announced that
the client-server communications protocols covered by the decree (roughly 100) had been
documented and were available for license.122
After the consent decree, OEMs knew with certainty that shipping rival middleware
products would have no effect on their royalty payments or their terms and conditions for
Windows. Instead, OEMs make their own software choices and have, in fact, distributed third
party middleware in considerable numbers. Indeed, every major OEM has installed at least one
non-Microsoft media player on its consumer-oriented (as opposed to business-oriented) PCs,

120

Massachusetts v. Microsoft Corp., 373 F. 3d 1199, 15 (D.C. Cir., 2004).

121

The other features that can be disabled are: Windows Media Player, Windows Messenger, Outlook Express,
and Microsoft’s Java Virtual Machine.

122

Joint Status Report on Microsoft’s Compliance with the Final Judgments, U.S. v. Microsoft, Civil Action No.
98–1232, 22–23, July 3, 2003, available at http://www.usdoj.gov/atr/cases/f201100/201135.pdf (last visited
Nov. 2, 2004).

42

but none has blocked access to Windows Media Player.123 Similarly, all major OEMs display
an icon for America Online (AOL), but none has removed the icon for Microsoft’s competitive
service, MSN.124
At the very least, this experience casts doubt on the liability theory that OEMs were
reluctant to install Navigator because they could not remove end-user access to Internet
Explorer. After all, end users always have been free to ignore and/or remove the icon and menu
entry for any piece of software that they do not want to use. On the other hand, little harm has
been done by giving OEMs this option. Consumers have not been deprived of choice;
Microsoft had been required to produce only a single version of Windows (albeit with a new
access-disabling feature); and ISVs know what APIs will be exposed by (and thus what
applications will run on) a Windows-based computer system.
If the litigating states’ code removal proposal had been adopted instead, this experience
suggests that it is at least plausible that all major OEMs would nonetheless have licensed the
version of Windows from which no code had been removed (the “intact” version). While the
litigating states proposal would have made versions from which code had been removed
(“disabled” versions) somewhat cheaper than the intact version, the disabled versions would

123

Albert Nichols et al., Survey and Analysis of Media Players Installed on New PCs Sold in Europe and the
United States, LECG study (2004) (on file with the authors).

124

In connection with Microsoft’s appeal of the European Commission’s decision in Case COMP/C-3/37.792
Microsoft, LECG staff undertook a study to determine the extent to which major OEMs in installed media
players on computers that are sold for home and small office use. In the United States, they identified six OEMs
that each accounted for at least 2 percent of units sold (Dell, eMachines, Gateway, HP/Compaq, Sony and
Toshiba). Each of the PCs examined came with at least one third-party media player installed and an icon for
America Online. Examination of the PCs also demonstrated that while some OEMs had made other media
players the default players for various types of media files (including those using Microsoft’s own formats),
none of the OEMs had blocked access to either Windows Media Player or MSN. A similar study done in 2002
for Kevin Murphy’s testimony in Sun’s suit against Microsoft found that home and small office PCs from the
leading OEMs included many third-party applications (many of which were classified as “middleware”),
including media players. (Declaration of Kevin M. Murphy in Support of Microsoft’s Opposition to Sun
Microsystems’ Motion for Preliminary Injunction, Sun Microsystems v. Microsoft, Case No. C02-01150 RMW
(PVT), Jul. 2002, Appendix A.)

43

not only have lacked one or more features aimed at end-users, just as if end-user access had
been removed, but they would also have lacked the corresponding APIs. Accordingly, at least
some applications that ran on the intact version of Windows would fail to run on one or more
disabled versions. If this suggestion is right, and no significant OEM would sell PCs without
the intact version of Windows, only Microsoft would bear additional costs—the substantial
costs of designing and testing many disabled versions of Windows with ambiguous design
requirements.125 On the other hand, if this suggestion is wrong and some major OEMs would
distribute disabled versions of Windows, additional costs would be borne by consumers and
applications vendors (including Microsoft in that capacity), because, absent extensive and
expensive redesign, some Windows applications simply would not run on some Windows
machines. Accordingly, we believe the courts’ clear rejection of code removal benefited
consumers.
Despite the rejection of code-removal by these two U.S. courts and the general accessremoval remedy provision in force worldwide since 2002, the European Commission has
ordered Microsoft to produce a version of Windows with the code for Windows Media Player
removed.126 The Commission’s order requires that the versions of Windows with code removed

125

Direct Testimony of Stuart M. Madnick, Apr. 26, 2002,¶¶ 189–190,New York v. Microsoft Corp., 224 F. Supp.
2d 76 (D.D.C., 2002) (No. 98–1233).

126

The Commission defined the files that constitute “Windows Media Player” as those identified as part of
“multimedia applications” in Windows XP Embedded, a product designed to help manufacturers create very
small versions of Windows for special purpose products (such as ATMs) that typically run only one or at most a
handful of custom designed applications. (Commission Decision of 24.03.2004 relating to a proceeding under
Article 82 of the EC Treaty (Case COMP/C-3/37.792 Microsoft), ¶¶ 1019, 1021, 1029, Article 1.6, available at
http://europa.eu.int/comm/competition/antitrust/cases/decisions/37792/en.pdf.). For the current version of
Windows, this definition results in the removal of 186 different files. The Korean FTC has been investigating
tying claims against Microsoft, first with respect to instant messenger software and more recently with respect to
media players, and it apparently is considering ordering code removal.

44

be priced “no higher” than the intact version.127 That presumably recognizes the fact that media
players are widely available for free so that there is no basis for having a price difference
between software that includes or excludes this “free” feature. Since it is hard to imagine that
there would be much demand for Windows without media player, especially given that OEMs
and consumers are free to disable access to this feature under the U.S. consent decree, it would
appear likely that this remedy will impose costs on Microsoft but have little or no effect on the
market.128

V.

Other Substantive Provisions and Enforcement
A. Other Substantive Remedy Provisions
As Table 3 indicates, the remedy finally ordered went beyond the liability findings in

several ways. It defined “middleware” to include numerous features—such as instant
messaging and media players—that, unlike Java and Web browsers, had never been held out as
likely to become general-purpose platforms that could challenge Windows.129 In addition, the
remedy addressed Microsoft practices that had not been found illegal by the court of appeals.
Notable among these is action A.1 in Table 2: individually negotiated royalty rates and
discounts for large OEMs that met the terms of “market development agreements.” Under the
remedy, Microsoft has to offer uniform terms to the top 10 OEMs, with prices varying only by
volume and with any discounts based on criteria that are objectively verifiable.
127

Commission Decision of 24.03.2004 relating to a proceeding under Article 82 of the EC Treaty (Case
COMP/C-3/37.792 Microsoft), ¶ 1013, available at
http://europa.eu.int/comm/competition/antitrust/cases/decisions/37792/en.pdf.

128

John G. Spooner, Business as Usual for PC Makers, CNET NEWS, Mar. 24, 2004, available at
http://news.com.com/Business+as+usual+for+PC+makers/2100-7341_3-5178690.html (last visited Mar. 3,
2005).

129

Judge Kollar-Kotelly notes that “an effective remedy must be sufficiently forward-looking to extend beyond the
specific middleware threats addressed during the liability phase.” Judge Colleen Kollar-Kotelly, Memorandum
Opinion at 88–89,

45

Similarly, even though the case had focused on “client” PCs, and there had been no
allegations of anticompetitive conduct with respect to servers, provision III.E of the remedy
required that Microsoft license all communications protocols used to exchange information
between Windows clients and servers. Microsoft was allowed to charge reasonable and nondiscriminatory royalties, and the licenses were restricted to use in achieving interoperability
between Windows clients and non-Microsoft servers. The district court judge stated that this
provision, “[i]n all likelihood…is the most forward-looking provision in the Court’s
remedy.”130 This provision was a limited version of what Sun and other server vendors
(including Novell and IBM) had been seeking from the European Commission since 1998.131
As summarized in Table 3, the decree included numerous other provisions limiting
Microsoft’s conduct, including prohibitions on taking any retaliatory action against a wide
range of firms for their support of products that compete with Microsoft products (III.A, C, and
F), a requirement to document any interfaces used between Microsoft middleware and other
parts of Windows (III.D), and a prohibition on entering into agreements that require the other
party to use any Microsoft platform software exclusively or that place quantitative limits on the
use of competing non-Microsoft software by the other party (III.G).

B. Enforcement Mechanisms and Results
The settlement agreement required that Microsoft begin complying with its terms before
it was entered by the courts. As noted earlier, that process started in December 2001, a month
after the settlement was reached, with Microsoft offering uniform terms for Windows licenses

New York v. Microsoft Corp., 224 F. Supp. 2d 76 (D.D.C., 2002) (No. 98–1233) .
130

Id.,, at 157.

131

The 2004 European Commission decision discussed above requires Microsoft to license a subset of these
protocols, but does not restrict their use to client-server communication. More importantly, it also requires that
Microsoft license additional protocols used in server-to-server communication.

46

to the top 20 OEMs.132 By September 2002, Microsoft had met all of the deadlines in the
settlement/decree that called for specific actions.
To aid the government in monitoring Microsoft’s compliance and resolving technical
issues, the remedy set up a “Technical Advisory Committee” with three members (plus staff),
to be funded by Microsoft. The committee members were selected in early 2003. Starting in
April 2003, the government and Microsoft have submitted status reports to the district court at
roughly three-month intervals, with shorter interim reports on specific issues submitted from
time to time.133
The status reports indicate that implementation of the remedy has gone smoothly for
almost all provisions. To the extent that issues have arisen, for the most part they have been
resolved quickly. For example, in response to the government’s request, Microsoft moved the
icon for the Set Program Access and Defaults feature to a more prominent position134 and
changed a new feature (Shop for Music Online) so that it used the default browser rather than
Internet Explorer.135 Government representatives meet with those from Microsoft on a regular
basis. Recent status reports indicate that the government is taking a proactive approach to the
next major version of Windows—code named Longhorn—which is not scheduled for release
until some time in 2006. The government has given Microsoft a list of topics related to the final

132

Stipulation and Revised Proposed Final Judgment, U.S. v. Microsoft Corp., Civil Action No. 98–1232, Nov. 6,
2001, available at http://www.usdoj.gov/atr/cases/f9400/9495.pdf.

133

See Joint Status Reports on Microsoft’s Compliance with the Final Judgments issued in Apr. 2003, July 2003,
Oct. 2003, Jan. 2004, Apr. 2004, July 2004, and Oct. 2004, available at
http://www.usdoj.gov/atr/cases/ms_index.htm#settlement.

134

Joint Status Report on Microsoft’s Compliance with the Final Judgments, U.S. v. Microsoft Corp., Civil Action
No. 98–1232, 5–6, July 3, 2003, available at http://www.usdoj.gov/atr/cases/f201100/201135.pdf (last visited
Nov. 2, 2004).

135

Joint Status Report on Microsoft’s Compliance with the Final Judgments, U.S. v. Microsoft, Civil Action No.
98–1232, 10–11, Jan. 16, 2004, available at http://www.usdoj.gov/atr/cases/f202100/202129.pdf (last visited
Oct. 19, 2004).

47

judgment that it wants to be tracked and has asked for “regular briefings…to enable early
detection and resolution of any potential areas of concern.”136
The licensing program for client-server protocols has been the exception to this pattern
of smooth implementation, with the government raising a series of issues starting with the first
status report and continuing to the present. That this provision, which does not correspond to
any of the acts found illegal, should be the biggest source of friction in enforcement is perhaps
ironic, but not surprising.137 The licensing program is complicated and open to conflicting
interpretations. Microsoft is required to license use of the protocols on reasonable and
nondiscriminatory terms. Most of the initial concerns focused on those terms, leading to
significant changes in the licenses (e.g., simplifying the terms), the conditions under which
potential licensees can review the licenses and protocol specifications, and royalty rates. Those
issues appear largely to have been resolved by Microsoft’s changes.138
More recently, the government has focused on the completeness of the specifications.
Microsoft created about 5,000 pages of technical documentation for the roughly 100 protocols
covered by the program. Determining how much documentation is required to implement

136

Joint Status Report on Microsoft’s Compliance with the Final Judgments, U.S. v. Microsoft, Civil Action No.
98–1232, 7, Oct. 8, 2004, available at http://www.usdoj.gov/atr/cases/f205700/205751.pdf (last visited Oct. 19,
2004).

137

It is also interesting to note that implementation of a 1994/95 settlement between Microsoft and the Department
of Justice also proceeded smoothly with respect to the provisions related directly to the alleged anticompetitive
behavior: certain types of contracts with OEMs. The provision that led to the greatest controversy and conflict,
including a 1997 contempt hearing and the 1998 lawsuit that is the focus of this paper, was one that prohibited
“tying” except in the case of “integrated products.” Tying had not been an issue during the several years of
investigation by the DOJ and the FTC that preceded the settlement, and we understand from participants in the
settlement negotiations that it was added at the end, as an afterthought.

138

Joint Status Report on Microsoft’s Compliance with the Final Judgments, U.S. v. Microsoft, Civil Action No.
98–1232, 6–9, July 3, 2003, available at http://www.usdoj.gov/atr/cases/f201100/201135.pdf (last visited Nov.
2, 2004); Joint Status Report on Microsoft’s Compliance with the Final Judgments, U.S. v. Microsoft, Civil
Action No. 98–1232, 8–9, Jan. 16, 2004, available at http://www.usdoj.gov/atr/cases/f202100/202129.pdf (last
visited Oct. 19, 2004); Joint Status Report on Microsoft’s Compliance with the Final Judgments, U.S. v.
Microsoft, Civil Action No. 98–1232, 4–5, July 9 2004, available at
http://www.usdoj.gov/atr/cases/f204500/204560.pdf (last visited Nov. 5, 2004).

48

complex software protocols in operational code is inherently complex, with differences in
interpretation and understanding almost inevitable. Microsoft has supplemented its
specifications, and the Technical Advisory Committee (with the aid of consultants and staff)
has developed 50 pages of clarifying detail for the specifications (which were already over
2,000 pages).139 Microsoft submitted revisions in December 2004, which the plaintiffs
characterized in the January 2005 report as an improvement. The report stated that Microsoft
had agreed with plaintiffs on a “comprehensive plan to ensure the completeness and accuracy
of the technical documentation and to accomplish further work on the documentation.”140
Earlier, as of the July 2004 report, Microsoft had unilaterally extended the licensing program
for an additional two years—from 2007 to 2009—to address concerns about the time it had
taken to resolve various related issues.141
On the whole, the remedy appears to be working as intended, but it is much less clear
that it has had a material impact on market outcomes. As we noted earlier, for example,
apparently no OEM has exercised its right under the decree to disable ready access to IE or any
other covered middleware. Nonetheless, OEMs appear to feel free to install non-Microsoft
middleware (sometimes several different brands), such as media players and Internet access

139

Joint Status Report on Microsoft’s Compliance with the Final Judgments, U.S. v. Microsoft, Civil Action No.
98–1232, 22, July 3, 2003, available at http://www.usdoj.gov/atr/cases/f201100/201135.pdf (last visited Nov. 2,
2004); Joint Status Report on Microsoft’s Compliance with the Final Judgments, U.S. v. Microsoft, Civil Action
No. 98–1232, 4–5, Apr. 14, 2004, available at http://www.usdoj.gov/atr/cases/f203200/203264.pdf (last visited
Nov. 5, 2004); Joint Status Report on Microsoft’s Compliance with the Final Judgments, U.S. v. Microsoft, Civil
Action No. 98–1232, 4–6, July 9 2004, available at http://www.usdoj.gov/atr/cases/f204500/204560.pdf (last
visited Nov. 5, 2004); Joint Status Report on Microsoft’s Compliance with the Final Judgments, U.S. v.
Microsoft, Civil Action No. 98–1232, 10–11,Oct. 8, 2004, available at
http://www.usdoj.gov/atr/cases/f205700/205751.pdf (last visited Oct. 19, 2004).

140

Joint Status Report on Microsoft’s Compliance with the Final Judgments, U.S. v. Microsoft, Civil Action No.
98–1232, 2–6, Jan. 25, 2005, available at http://www.usdoj.gov/atr/cases/f207200/207283.pdf (last visited Feb.
15, 2005).

141

Joint Status Report on Microsoft’s Compliance with the Final Judgments, U.S. v. Microsoft Corp, Civil Action
No. 98–1232, 4–5, July 9 2004, available at http://www.usdoj.gov/atr/cases/f204500/204560.pdf (last visited
Nov. 5, 2004).

49

services, in addition to the features in Windows—as they have always been permitted to do
under the terms of Windows license agreements, even before this litigation began.
With respect to the protocol licensing program, the government’s status reports have
expressed concern that there have not been many licensees (21 as of January 2005) and that
virtually all have been for specialized uses, rather than server operating systems or other
software seen as posing a significant potential threat to Microsoft’s position in PC operating
systems.142 Some argue that this reveals that the remedy was inadequate, but it seems at least as
plausible that the theory behind the licensing provision—that potential competitors in server
operating systems or server-based middleware needed access to those protocols in order to
compete effectively—was incorrect. The government reports that prospective licensees cite
three types of reasons for not obtaining a license: (1) they found certain provisions (such as
royalties or the lack of actual source code in addition to specifications) unattractive; (2) they
did not need the protocols; or (3) they had not invested the resources to evaluate the terms of
the licenses or the value of the technology.143 The second and third reasons cast no doubt on the
remedy’s adequacy, and complaints about licensing terms may mean that the effective cost is
“too high” (by some unspecified standard) or simply that the value to the potential licensees is
too low to justify paying even “reasonable” costs.

142

Joint Status Report on Microsoft’s Compliance with the Final Judgments, U.S. v. Microsoft Corp, Civil Action
No. 98–1232, 4–7, Jan. 16, 2004, available at http://www.usdoj.gov/atr/cases/f202100/202129.pdf (last visited
Oct. 19, 2004); Joint Status Report on Microsoft’s Compliance with the Final Judgments, U.S. v. Microsoft
Corp, Civil Action No. 98–1232, 9, Oct. 8, 2004, available at
http://www.usdoj.gov/atr/cases/f205700/205751.pdf (last visited Oct. 19, 2004); Joint Status Report on
Microsoft’s Compliance with the Final Judgments, , U.S. v. Microsoft Corp, Civil Action No. 98–1232, 13, Jan.
25, 2005, available at http://www.usdoj.gov/atr/cases/f207200/207283.pdf (last visited Feb. 15, 2005).

143

Joint Status Report on Microsoft’s Compliance with the Final Judgments, New York v. Microsoft Corp., Civil
Action No. 98–1232, Jan. 16, 2004, 7, available at http://www.usdoj.gov/atr/cases/f202100/202129.pdf (last
visited Oct. 19, 2004).

50

VI.

Evaluation and Conclusions
Who won the Microsoft case? One could argue that the government won. Microsoft was

found to have monopoly power in PC operating systems and to have violated the Sherman Act
in trying to keep that monopoly. That finding has enabled various parties—from class actions
representing consumers to companies such as AOL and Sun—to obtain billions of dollars in
settlements as well as other concessions from Microsoft.144 Moreover, ultimate relief was much
more than the government sought in its initial complaints and more than might have been
entered by the trial court, on remand, if it had construed the D.C. Circuit’s instructions
narrowly.
Of course, one seldom hears the case’s strongest early proponents declaring victory.
More often, there are complaints that Microsoft got off too lightly. Many of the case’s
proponents and press accounts suggest that Microsoft benefited from a Republican
administration taking over from a Democratic one.145 We do not believe a careful reading of the
two unanimous en banc decisions of the D.C. Circuit supports that view.
One can also argue that Microsoft won a victory of sorts—or lost much less than it
might have. Most of its challenged behavior—particularly its heavy investment in developing,
144

Microsoft paid Sun $700 million to settle antitrust claims and also entered into information-sharing agreements
with Sun for supporting and improving Java and collaborating in developing server software. Microsoft Press
Release, Microsoft and Sun Microsystems Enter Broad Cooperation Agreement; Settle Outstanding Litigation,
Apr. 2, 2004, at http://www.microsoft.com/presspass/press/2004/apr04/04-02SunAgreementPR.asp (last visited
Jan. 10, 2005). In addition to the Sun settlement, Microsoft also entered into settlement agreements in a number
of state class action suits, in a federal class action suit, and in suits with Be and Netscape-AOL/Time Warner.
Microsoft Press Release, Antitrust Settlement Fact Sheet, Oct. 28, 2003, at
http://www.microsoft.com/presspass/legal/10-28SettlementFS.asp (last visited Jan. 10, 2005).

145

Mike Pettit, President of ProComp, issued this statement in November 2002 after the release of J. Colleen
Kollar-Kotelly’s decision: “Microsoft has terrorized the industry for more than a decade. Victims of Microsoft's
predatory conduct are legion. This was the moment in time when competition could have been restored; that
task will be much more difficult in the future. The right case was brought and won resoundingly. Eight federal
judges ruled unanimously against Microsoft. And then what happened can only be explained this way: the Bush
Justice Department surrendered to Microsoft.” (See, ProComp, Microsoft Settlement Sets Dangerous Precedent
in Antitrust Law, Nov. 1, 2002, available at http://www.procompetition.org/headlines/110102.html (last visited
Nov. 8, 2004).)

51

improving, promoting, and distributing Internet Explorer—was found lawful. The company
managed to defeat some remedy proposals that would have been highly damaging. Most
importantly, the U.S. courts did not condemn Microsoft’s inclusion of new features in the
operating system as a general matter, and the D.C. Circuit at least has specifically ruled that
tying issues related to software platforms must be considered under the rule of reason rather
than the Jefferson Parish per se test.
But Microsoft has not declared victory—in fact it has been conciliatory146 and vows to
do better. While we suspect that many of its executives long for the days of go-for-the-throat
competition, willingly or unwillingly, and for better or worse, the company is a more careful
competitor than it was seven years ago.
We have argued here that consumers in the aggregate could justifiably declare at least a
modest victory. While we, as noted above, believe the appeals court should have required
evidence of actual or likely future consumer harm before finding Microsoft to have violated the
Sherman Act, it is hard to argue that the remedy ultimately imposed will harm consumers by
appreciably restricting Microsoft’s ability to innovate or compete on the merits—though it will
certainly make life more complex for Microsoft executives. If one believes that Microsoft is
prone to anticompetitive behavior of the sort at issue in the case, then one must believe that the
remedy is likely to prevent future at least some violations that might harm consumers. Finally,
if one believes that during the relevant period Microsoft was simply an immature company,
prone to behavior that the second District Judge described as “unsavory” and

146

Microsoft Press Release, Microsoft Responds to U.S. District Court Ruling, Nov. 1, 2002,
http://www.microsoft.com/presspass/press/2002/Nov02/11-01TunneyStatementPR.asp (downloaded Feb. 8,
2005).

52

“reprehensible,”147 having such an influential firm go through a maturing, near-death
experience may not be a bad thing for society.

147

Memorandum Opinion at 94, 105 New York v. Microsoft Corp., 224 F. Supp. 2d 76 (D.D.C., 2002) (No. 98–
1233)

53

TABLES

Table 1. Disposition of Major Antitrust Allegations
Allegation
Sherman Act Section 1 Claims:
Microsoft exclusive dealing
contracts barred Netscape from
the market
Microsoft’s inclusion of Internet
Explorer in Windows was a per
se illegal tie
Sherman Act Section II Claims:
(States Only) Microsoft leveraged
its operating system monopoly to
monopolize the browser market
Microsoft attempted to
monopolize the browser market
Microsoft illegally maintained a
monopoly in operating systems

District Court

Court of Appeals

No Violation

Not Appealed

Violation

Vacated (dropped on remand)

No Violation (summary
judgment)

Not Appealed

Violation

Reversed

No Violation for some allegations
Violations for some allegations

Not Appealed
Some not addressed
Some reversed
Some affirmed

54

Table 2. Disposition of Monopoly Maintenance Violations

A.

Not Adjudicated by the Court of Appeals
1.
2.
3.
4–7.

B.

Microsoft used discounts and other devices to reward or punish OEMs, depending on whether they
aided or resisted its anticompetitive agenda.
In June 1995, Microsoft proposed a division of the market to Netscape.
Microsoft withheld important technical information from Netscape.
To further anticompetitive objectives, Microsoft pressured Intel concerning its “Native Signal
Processing” (NSP) software, Apple and RealNetworks concerning their media players, and IBM
concerning promotion of its “Smart Suite” business productivity software.

Reversed by the Court of Appeals
Course of Conduct
1.
Microsoft’s general course of conduct was predatory, particularly its large investments in Internet
Explorer (IE), which it gave away.
Binding Internet Explorer
2.
Windows overrode the user’s choice of a default browser by launching IE in some circumstances.
Original Equipment (Computer) Manufacturers (OEMs)
3.
Microsoft barred OEMs from causing a user interface other than the Windows desktop to launch
automatically.
Internet Access Providers (IAPs)
4.
Microsoft provided IE for free to IAPs.
5.
Microsoft offered IAPs a bounty for each customer signed up using IE.
6.
Microsoft provided at no charge valuable software that IAPs could use to customize IE—the
Internet Explorer Access Kit.
Internet Content Providers (ICPs)
7.
Microsoft gave some ICPs prominent placement on the Windows “Active Desktop” in exchange for
agreeing to limit promotion and distribution of non-Microsoft Web browsers.
Java
8.
Microsoft developed a Java Virtual Machine that was incompatible with Sun’s.

C.

Affirmed by the Court of Appeals
Binding Internet Explorer
1.
Commingling code specific to Web browsing with code that performs core operating system
functions, so that deletion of browsing-specific code would cripple Windows.
2.
Microsoft’s Add/Remove utility for Windows 98, which could be used by consumers to remove
some features and functions, could not be used to remove Internet Explorer.
Original Equipment (Computer) Manufacturers (OEMs)
3.
Microsoft prohibited OEMs from removing any desktop icons, folders, or “Start” menu entries,
thereby preventing them from removing visible means of user access to IE.
4.
Microsoft prohibited OEMs from modifying the initial boot sequence, which occurs the first time
the computer is turned on, thus preventing them from using that process to promote the services of
IAPs distributing Navigator.
5.
Microsoft prohibited OEMs from adding icons or folders different in size or shape from those
supplied by Microsoft, thereby preventing OEMs from using such folders or icons to promote rival
browsers more prominently.
6.
Microsoft prohibited OEMs from using the ‘Active Desktop’ feature to promote third-party
browsers or IAPs.
continued below…

55

Table 2 (continued). Disposition of Monopoly Maintenance Violations
Internet Access Providers (IAPs)
7.
Microsoft agreed to provide promotion or distribution to IAPs in return for the IAPs’ agreement to
promote IE exclusively and to ensure that IE comprised at least a specified percentage of the IAPs’
distribution of Web browsing software.
Independent Software Vendors (ISVs) and Apple
8.*
In “First Wave” agreements, Microsoft promised to give preferential technical support to ISVs that
agree, among other things, to use IE as the default for any software they developed under the
program with a hypertext-based user interface.
9.
Microsoft agreed to continue developing Office for the Macintosh only when Apple agreed to make
IE the default browser on its operating system and not to put icons for non-Microsoft browsers on
the Macintosh desktop.
Java
10.
One of the conditions in Microsoft’s “First Wave” agreements was that ISVs that developed a Java
application under the program make Microsoft’s JRE the default and distribute that JRE with the
application.
11.
Microsoft’s Java application development tools deceived developers into writing Java applications
that were not portable but ran only on Windows.
12.
Microsoft threatened Intel and induced it to stop working with Sun on certain multimedia
technologies for Java.

56

Table 3. Major Definitions and Substantive Remedy Provisions

Definitions
Microsoft Platform Software: Windows and its successor operating systems, and Microsoft Middleware.
Microsoft Middleware: Includes Microsoft’s Internet browser, Java Virtual Machine, email client
software, media player, instant messaging software, and more.
Non-Microsoft Middleware: A product running on Windows “that exposes a range of functionality to
ISVs through published APIs” and that could make it easier for an ISV to port an application using that
functionality to a non-Microsoft operating system.

Key Provisions
III.A

Microsoft shall not threaten or act against an OEM for “developing, distributing, promoting,
using, selling or licensing” any product that competes with Microsoft Platform Software or that
distributes or promotes any “Non-Microsoft Middleware” or for shipping a PC including or
capable of booting with a non-Microsoft operating system.
Addresses: Action A.1.
III.B
Microsoft may not negotiate license terms with each of the top 20 OEMs individually but must
instead work from a published royalty schedule that meets certain conditions on allowable
discounts and allowances.
Addresses: Action A.1.
III.C. Microsoft may not restrict any OEM from installing and displaying icons, shortcuts of any size or
1–2
shape, or menu entries that for any “non-Microsoft Middleware” or any product or service
(including but not limited to IAPs) that “distributes, uses, promotes, or supports” any such
middleware.
Addresses: Actions C.5 and C.6, with more software covered.
III.C. Microsoft may not restrict any OEM from modifying the boot sequence, choosing non-Microsoft
3-5
middleware to launch if Microsoft middleware would otherwise launch “upon connections to or
disconnections from the Internet,” providing the option to launch other operating systems, or
presenting its own IAP offer in the initial boot sequence.
Addresses: Action C.4.
III.D
Microsoft must document all interfaces used by “Microsoft Middleware” to operate with other
parts of Microsoft operating systems.
Addresses: Issues not raised in the trial.
III.E
Microsoft must license to third parties on reasonable and nondiscriminatory terms all
communications protocols used by Microsoft operating systems to interoperate or communicate
directly with a Microsoft server operating system.
Addresses: Issues not raised in the trial.
III.F
Microsoft shall not threaten or act against any ISV or IHV (independent hardware vendor, e.g.
Apple) for developing, using, distributing or promoting any software that competes with (or runs
on software that competes with) “Microsoft Platform Software” nor may it enter into any
agreement with an ISV relating to a Microsoft operating system that provides that ISV with
consideration for refraining from such acts.
Addresses: Actions C.8, C.9, C.10, and C.12, with more software covered.
III.G
Microsoft shall not enter into any agreement that grants consideration on the condition that any
Microsoft Platform Software be distributed, promoted, used, or supported exclusively or in a
fixed percentage (unless competing software can obtain a higher percentage) or grant any IAP or
ICP placement on the Windows desktop on condition that it refrain from distributing, promoting,
or using software that competes with Microsoft Middleware.
Addresses: Actions C.7, C.8, C.9, and C.10, with more software covered.
continued below…
Note: Except where explicitly noted, these descriptions are paraphrases, not quotations. With the exception of
III.E, which Microsoft unilaterally extended to 2009, these provisions will expire in November 2007
unless the District Court orders an extension. Note that Actions A.1-A.7 were not considered by the Court
of Appeals; Actions B.1-B.8 were explicitly found not to be violations; while Actions C.1-C.12 were
explicitly found to be violations.

57

Table 3 (continued). Major Definitions and Substantive Remedy Provisions

Key Provisions (continued)
III.H.
1–2

Microsoft must make it easy for end users and OEMs to enable or remove access to each
Microsoft Middleware Product or non-Microsoft Middleware Product and to designate either a
non-Microsoft Middleware Product or a Microsoft Middleware Product as the default, to be
invoked whenever Windows would ordinarily launch the Microsoft Middleware Product.
Addresses: Actions C.1, C.2, C.3, with more software covered.
III.H. Windows may not alter an OEM’s configuration of icons, shortcuts, or menu entries without first
3
seeking confirmation from the end user, and any pre-defined alteration must be unbiased between
Microsoft and non-Microsoft Middleware.
Addresses: Action C.5, with more software covered.
III.I
Microsoft must license to third parties under reasonable and non-discriminatory terms any
intellectual property rights needed to exercise any of the options or alternatives provided to them
under this order.
Addresses: Workability of other provisions.
Note: Except where explicitly noted, these descriptions are paraphrases, not quotations. With the exception of
III.E, which Microsoft unilaterally extended to 2009, these provisions will expire in November 2007
unless the District Court orders an extension. Note that Actions A.1-A.7 were not considered by the Court
of Appeals; Actions B.1-B.8 were explicitly found not to be violations; while Actions C.1-C.12 were
explicitly found to be violations.

58

