 ASSESSING THE SAFETY AND EFFICACY OF THE FDA:
THE CASE OF THE PRESCRIPTION DRUG USER FEE ACTS

                Tomas J. Philipson
                  Ernst R. Berndt
              Adrian H. B. Gottschalk
               Matthew W. Strobeck

               Working Paper 11724
                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   ASSESSING THE SAFETY AND EFFICACY OF THE FDA:
                  THE CASE OF THE PRESCRIPTION DRUG USER FEE ACTS

                                            Tomas J. Philipson
                                              Ernst R. Berndt
                                          Adrian H. B. Gottschalk
                                           Matthew W. Strobeck

                                           Working Paper 11724
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w11724


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       October 2005




Corresponding author, email: t-philipson@uchicago.edu. For part of the time this research was undertaken,
Philipson was on leave from the University of Chicago to the FDA and CMS as the Senior Economic Advisor
to the Commissioner and Administrator, respectively. Research support to Philipson from The Milken
Institute and to Berndt, Gottschalk and Strobeck from general funds at the Harvard-MIT Division of Health
Sciences and Technology is gratefully acknowledged. We thank Ed Hass of the FDA and Roy Gross of MIT
for their very significant assistance throughout this project. The views and opinions expressed in this paper
are those of the authors, and do not necessarily reflect any official positions or policies of the institutions or
companies with which they are or have been affiliated. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Tomas J. Philipson, Ernst R. Berndt, Adrian H. B. Gottschalk, and Matthew W. Strobeck. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Assessing the Safety and Efficacy of the FDA: The Case of the Prescription Drug User Fee Acts
Tomas J. Philipson, Ernst R. Berndt, Adrian H. B. Gottschalk, and Matthew W. Strobeck
NBER Working Paper No. 11724
October 2005
JEL No. I1, H0

                                             ABSTRACT

The US Food and drug Administration (FDA) is estimated to regulate markets accounting for about
20% of consumer spending in the US. This paper proposes a general methodology to evaluate FDA
policies, in general, and the central speed-safety tradeoff it faces, in particular. We apply this
methodology to estimate the welfare effects of a major piece of legislation affecting this tradeoff,
the Prescription Drug User Fee Acts (PDUFA). We find that PDUFA raised the private surplus of
producers, and thus innovative returns, by about $11 to $13 billion. Dependent on the market power
assumed of producers while having patent protection, we find that PDUFA raised consumer welfare
between $5 to$19 billion; thus the combined social surplus was raised between $18 to $31 billions.
Converting these economic gains into equivalent health benefits, we find that the more rapid access
of drugs on the market enabled by PDUFA saved the equivalent of 180 to 310 thousand life-years.
Additionally, we estimate an upper bound on the adverse effects of PDUFA based on drugs
submitted during PDUFA I/II and subsequently withdrawn for safety reasons, and find that an
extreme upper bound of about 56 thousand life-years were lost. We discuss how our general
methodology could be used to perform a quantitative and evidence-based evaluation of the
desirability of other FDA policies in the future, particularly those affecting the speed-safety tradeoff.

Tomas J. Philipson                                      Adrian H. B. Gottschalk
The Milken Institute                                    Biogen Idec, Inc.
and The University of Chicago
1155 E 60th Street                                      Matthew W. Strobeck
Chicago, IL 60637                                       Westfield Capital
and NBER
t-philipson@uchicago.edu

Ernst R. Berndt
Sloan School of Management
MIT, E52-452
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
eberndt@mit.edu
                                                                                            3




I.     INTRODUCTION

       In virtually all developed countries, regulatory authorities provide public oversight of the

safety and efficacy of prescription drugs, prior to their being approved for marketing. In the

U.S., such oversight is conducted by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). A central

tradeoff facing the FDA, and argued by many to be the most central one, involves balancing two

goals – fulfilling its mission set by Congress to assure the safety and efficacy of drugs, while at

the same time advancing the public health by not slowing down or disabling the innovative

process by which new medical products reach the market.

       Critics of the FDA, domestic and foreign, appear on both sides of this tradeoff. Some

observers have argued that the FDA is not taking enough time evaluating new drugs, thereby

allowing unsafe drugs to be marketed, while others have argued that the agency is taking too

long in doing so and therefore inflicting harmful effects on innovative returns and patient

welfare.1 However, surprisingly, very little quantitative empirical evidence has been put forward

to evaluate the degree to which the speed and safety tradeoff facing the FDA is being resolved

efficiently. More generally, there seems to be no suggested quantitative methodology or

framework for assessing the economic efficiency of the central speed-safety tradeoff of the

agency.2 This is somewhat paradoxical, since despite the agency’s strict adherence to evidence-

based evaluation of products overseen, there is less evidence on its own safety and efficacy. Put

differently, no product application would pass the FDA approval process with the quality and

type of evidence that currently exists for evaluating the FDA policies themselves. The welfare

consequences of this lack of methodology and systematic evidence may be quite substantial, as
                                                                                              4


the FDA is estimated to regulate markets accounting for about 20% of consumer spending in the

US.

       Motivated by this lack of quantitative assessment of FDA policies, this paper proposes a

general methodology to evaluate the common speed-safety tradeoff of FDA regulations. The

methodology only relies on the most common form of data available surrounding the drug

approval process, namely, the distribution of approval and withdrawal times of drugs as well as

the distribution of sales of the approved drugs. We use these commonly available data to

estimate the social value of a drug. As indicated in Figure 1, in this paper we interpret the

overall social value of a drug as its yearly social welfare from the time of review and approval to

the time of withdrawal, if the drug is withdrawn.

       As shown in Figure 1, the annual social surplus occurs after the drug is reviewed and

approved, then split up into consumer and producer surplus components while on the market, and

vanishes completely once the drug is withdrawn (if ever). Therefore, if the drug is beneficial as it

is in the figure, its overall social value falls with the review time and rises with the time until

withdrawal. However, if the drug is harmful, as when the social surplus is negative and below

the x-axis in the figure, then its overall social value rises with the review time and falls with the

time until withdrawal. The agency in general, and separate regulations in particular, influence

aggregate social welfare by affecting the distribution of review and withdrawal times, as well as

the magnitude and signs of the post-approval annual flows of social surplus.

       We apply this framework to quantify the change in aggregate social welfare induced by

major legislative acts comprised of the Prescription Drug User Fee Act (PDUFA) of 1992, later

continued as PDUFA-II in 1997 and PUDFA-III in 2002. These legislative acts specified

performance goals for the FDA in terms of faster review times, while levying taxes in the form
                                                                                           5


of user fees on the sponsoring applicant for consideration of new and supplemental drug

applications, as well as for existing manufacturing establishments and products. The user fee

revenues obtained under PDUFA represent a substantial portion of the FDA’s total revenues

obligated to processing human drug applications, often estimated to be close to half of the

funding of the drug review process.3 The implementation of PDUFA and its impact on the

central speed-safety tradeoff of the agency can be envisaged in Figure 1; faster review of drugs

involves a shift to the left of the surplus curve in Figure 1, which is accomplished with the

additional resources generated from the user-fees, but with the potential consequence of less

attention being devoted to the safety of the drugs approved, entailing a downward shift in the

surplus curve of Figure1 together with a reduction in withdrawal times.

       To estimate the impact of PDUFA on aggregate social welfare, we first assess the impact

of these Acts on review times using 662 New Molecular Entity (NME) drug approvals in the

years 1979-2002 prior to and following enactment of the Acts in 1992. We find that even though

there was a decline in review times of 2 percent a year prior to PDUFA, passage and

implementation of PDUFA I and II accelerated the decline by 6-7% and 3-4% a year

respectively. Using the estimated effects of PDUFA on approval times for each of the drug

approvals, we are then able to estimate the counterfactual approval time that would have

occurred in the absence of PDUFA.

       The estimated effects in review times induced by PDUFA are first used to assess the

impact on producer surplus or variable profits. One of the main issues of the speed-safety

tradeoff facing the FDA is how PDUFA affects innovative returns. The revenues of a drug under

PDUFA are derived from actual sales data, and the counterfactual revenues come from delaying

the entry of the drug by the predicted drug-specific delay between the observed and
                                                                                           6


counterfactual review times in a world with and without PDUFA. To estimate the effect of

PDUFA on the innovative return of the drug, we then net out from the earlier arrival of its sales

the application, product, and establishment fees associated with the drug under PDUFA as well

as variable costs estimated by price levels before patents have run out and extensive entry of

generic drugs has occurred. Our main finding is that producer surplus rose with the introduction

of PDUFA by about $11 billion or 1.2 percent (at a real discount rate of 3% and measured in

1992 dollars at the inception of PDUFA). For the sample of 284 drugs for which we had sales

information during PDUFA I and PDUFA II, this represents a gain of about $39 million per drug

launched.

       We then consider estimation of the social surplus from the additional speed induced by

PDUFA through adding estimates of consumer surplus to the estimated producer surplus levels.

We focus our discussion on two ways of adding consumer surplus to compute the social benefits

of PDUFA. The first case occurs when full price discrimination is infeasible so that some

consumer surplus exists under the patent. We use as a benchmark the case when consumer

surplus is half of producer surplus, as turns out to be true when demand is linear and there are

constant returns to scale. Also, under no price discrimination, we derive the simple but plausible

conditions under which measures of sales, the most commonly available data on drug usage,

constitute a lower bound to the social surplus. The second case occurs when price discrimination

is complete so that there is no consumer surplus during the patent period but only after generics

have entered. In this case, sales during the patent period represent producer surplus, and sales

just prior to expiration represent the consumer surplus after the patent has expired. Our major

findings here are that under no price discrimination, the social surplus generated by the greater

speed of PDUFA is $31 billion or 1.2 percent under demand linearity and constant returns to
                                                                                               7


scale, but bounded below by $21 billion or 1.2 percent under less stringent demand and cost

assumptions. For the case of complete price discrimination, we find that the benefit of the

additional speed is $18 billion or 1.2 percent. For the 284 drugs with sales data, these estimates

amount to a gain of about $109 or $62 million per drug introduced since the inception of

PDUFA.

       These evaluations of the social benefits of speed are then compared to the social costs of

a possibly less safe approval process. To assess the impact on consumer safety, we first consider

the effect PDUFA had on the fraction of drugs withdrawn and how rapidly they were withdrawn.

However, these measures of the quantity and timing of withdrawal do not fully capture the

quality of the drugs withdrawn. We also compute how much harm to health PDUFA must have

imposed in order to offset the gains from speed due to more rapid review. Our major findings are

that the proportion and timing of withdrawal of drugs approved pre- and post-PDUFA do not

differ in a statistically significant way; about 2-3% of approved drugs are withdrawn at the same

speed before and after the Acts. In addition, we compute an extreme upper bound on the adverse

safety effects induced by PDUFA by assuming that all NME withdrawals after 1992 were due to

PDUFA and that the were no benefits associated with the drugs so that their social surplus is

measured by the harmful health effects the withdrawn drugs imposed. Using this extreme upper

bound on the adverse safety effects of PDUFA, we find that the drugs approved and withdrawn

during PDUFA cost about 56 thousand life years as compared to the gains in health implicit in

the greater speed generated by PDUFA, which are estimated at the equivalent of 180 to 310

thousand life years. This estimate comes from dividing the value induced by speed for the

different social surplus cases by a range of estimates for the value of a life year, between

$100,000 to $300,000.
                                                                                            8


       The paper proceeds as follows. In Section II we provide a general framework for

assessing quantitatively the value of changes to the speed-safety tradeoff facing the FDA. In

Section III we provide a brief overview of PDUFA-I and PDUFA-II. In Sections IV and V, we

discuss estimation of the beneficial speed effects of PDUFA on producer, consumer, and social

welfare, using methods of bounding social surplus from sales data. In Section VI we estimate

negative safety effects of PDUFA by considering their effects on drug withdrawals as well as

calculating the equivalent losses in social surplus or health that must be induced to offset the

observed benefits of speed. Finally, in Section VII we summarize our findings, note limitations

of our research, and suggest directions for further research.



II.    A FRAMEWORK FOR EVALUATING CHANGES IN THE SPEED-SAFETY
       TRADEOFF OF THE FDA

       This section discusses a parsimonious framework for evaluating changes in FDA policy

that affect the speed-safety tradeoff. Let p(y) denote the inverse demand curve for a drug in a

given year and let c(y) be the cost function where y represents output. The annual producer (y)

and consumer surplus s(y) are specified in a standard manner as

         (y) = p(y)y – c(y) and

                y
       s(y) =       [p(q) – p(y)]dq.
                0


This specification could be modified to other forms of non-canonical producer and consumer

surplus relationships, e.g., representing insurance coverage of consumers or asymmetric

information about risks between consumers and producers. Regardless of how surpluses are

specified, we denote by w a vector of annual surpluses where each element wt=st+ t is the annual

social surplus t years after the drug is first marketed. We assume throughout that either w 0 or

w 0, that is, the drug is either always valued or not for all periods. Given these annual social
                                                                                                 9


surplus levels, a drug that is approved at date a and is on the market for a duration of m periods,

has the realized social welfare

                             m                    m                 m
          W(a,m,s, )= βa          βt wt dt =βa        βtstdt + βa       βt tdt = S + .
                             0                    0                 0


        This realized surplus implies that if a drug has social value every period, w > 0, the

overall welfare falls in the approval time and rises in the time on market; i.e., dW/da < 0 and

dW/dm >0. In other words, speeding up the entry of a valuable drug or postponing its exit both

raise social surplus. On the other hand, if the drug is socially harmful every period, w < 0, the

welfare rises in the approval time and falls in the market time, i.e., dW/da > 0 and dW/dm <0. In

other words, delaying a harmful drug or shortening its time on the market both raise social

welfare. Note here that non-approval and non-withdrawal of a drug can be represented by

infinite values of a, for which W is zero as no surplus is realized, and m, in which case we

assume the annual surplus eventually decreases with time due to therapeutic and generic

competition, making the welfare well defined.

        Given that drugs are patent protected, the social surplus, and its share attributable to

consumers versus producers, may differ across years since the drug has been marketed. In

particular, the social surplus wt = st +   t   for the tth year the drug is on the market depends on the

length of the patent . Given a patent length, the producer surplus mainly obtains from the profits

while on patent, when t     . Indeed, we will assume that the present value of profits after patent

expiration at the time of launch is zero not only due to generic competition but also due to

discounting. As opposed to the case for producer surplus, the annual consumer surplus is lower

during the patent period and occurs mainly after the patent has expired, when t           , as producer

surplus is then substituted for consumer surplus.
                                                                                          10


        For a total of N applications with the distribution F(a,m,s, ) of approval times, market

times, and surplus levels, the aggregate social welfare, A, can be broken down into a consumer

and producer component as follows:

        A=N WdF =N SdF + N          dF.

        Now consider the impact of the FDA on the aggregate social welfare A. Assume that the

drugs considered under the FDA are represented by (N,F) and the drugs without the FDA are

represented by (No,Fo). It seems warranted to assume that a drug would be marketed faster

without the FDA, ao a, that it would remain on the market longer without the FDA as the

producer can voluntarily exit in the presence of the FDA, m mo, and that the drug pipeline

would be more numerous without the FDA as the agency raises R&D costs, N No. Therefore, if

the drug is valuable, then W(a,m)     W(ao ,mo), and the FDA generates a social cost due to the

less rapid and potentially barred marketing of the drug and the potential that it is withdrawn for

undue reasons:

        C= NE[W|w 0]-NoEo[W|w 0]           0.

This term is negative because when the drug is socially valuable, the welfare falls in the approval

time and rises in the market time m, so if the agency raises a and reduces m, then it lowers

welfare. On the other hand, if the drug is socially harmful, then W(a,m)    W(ao ,mo) and the FDA

confers a benefit by delaying or barring marketing of the drug or getting it off the market faster;

hence

        B=NE[W|w<0]-NoEo[W|w<0]           0.

This term represents the gain in welfare due to increased safety from keeping unsafe drugs off

the market and, when approved, speeding up their withdrawal. This term is positive because
                                                                                            11


when the drug is unsafe, welfare rises in the approval time a and falls in the market time m so

that if the agency raises the approval time and lowers the market time, social welfare rises.

        The overall welfare effect depends on the benefits of more quickly eliminating or

removing unsafe drugs versus the costs of reduced speed of market entry of safe and efficacious

drugs, i.e.,

        A-Ao= Pr{w<0}B + Pr{w 0}C.

The agency thus has two opposing effects; one harmful (speed effect for valuable products) and

one beneficial (more speedy elimination effects for unsafe products). These two components of

aggregate welfare comprise the essential speed vs safety tradeoff of the FDA analyzed in this

paper. The effects are exemplified by changes in behaviors surrounding PDUFA which may be

interpreted as moving away from A towards Ao through speeding up approval but potentially

increasing safety issues. Note that the speed element central to the FDA makes the two

components of welfare depend on elements of the distribution F in addition to the classic type I

and II errors represented by the share of bad drugs approved, Pr{a< |w <0}, and the share of

good drugs not approved, Pr{a= |w>0}. Rather, it is the timing of the decisions made that

matters and that needs to be explicitly incorporated into any methodology evaluating agency

approval behavior.

        Our empirical analysis will estimate the impact of PDUFA on the aggregate welfare A.

In particular, we will estimate the first term in the change from A towards Ao induced by

PDUFA, the value of the greater speed induced by the legislative acts. Thereafter we compute

the equivalent loss in health, in terms of life years lost, that any offsetting increase in the second

term, due to a lowered safety of the approval process, must have to offset the benefits of this

increased speed. In doing so, we will estimate the impact of PDUFA on the distribution of
                                                                                            12


approval times F(a), the distribution of market times F(m), and use these with estimates of the

producer and consumer surplus distribution F( ,s) to calculate the induced change in aggregate

social surplus A.



III.   ESTIMATING THE BENEFITS OF SPEED DUE TO PDUFA

A.     Background on PDUFA4

       The concept of payment of user fees by individuals or firms being provided services by a

government regulatory body has ample precedent, e.g., application submission fees to the U.S.

Patent and Trademark Office. The development of the Prescription Drug User Fee Act permitted

the FDA to collect fees from sponsors submitting a New Drug Application (NDA or Biologics

License Application (BLA) for review. The passage of PDUFA-I in 1992 was, however,

somewhat controversial in that the amount of fees collected for each sponsor application was

very substantial, unlike that for patent applications. In the initial fiscal year 1993 user fee

schedule, applications with clinical data were assessed a one-time fee of $100,000; each

supplemental application with clinical data, and applications with no clinical data, $50,000;

annual manufacturing establishment fees were $36,080, and annual product fees were $6,000.

With effective renewals of PDUFA-I in 1997 under the Food and Drug Modernization Act of

1997 (“PDUFA-II”) and the Bioterrorism Preparedness and Response Act of 2002 (“PDUFA-

III”), fees have escalated sharply. In fiscal year 2004, for example, applications with clinical

data were assessed a one-time fee of $573,500; each supplemental application with clinical data,

and applications with no clinical data, were assessed a user fee of $286,750; annual

manufacturing establishment fees were $226,800, and annual product fees were $6,000. Waivers
                                                                                          13


and exemptions were granted to small firms, and to sponsors submitting an application under the

Orphan Drug Act of 1983.5

       In exchange for the collected user fees, the FDA was legally obliged to “review and act

on” NDA/BLA submissions. However, similar to the journal referee process in the academic

environment, reviewing and acting on is not the same as reaching a final approval decision.

According to the PDUFA-III legislation, for example:

       “ ’review and act on’ is understood to mean the issuance of a complete action letter after

       the complete review of a filed complete application. The action letter, if it is not an

       approval, will set forth in detail the specific deficiencies and, where appropriate, the

       actions necessary to place the application in condition for approval.”6

In essence, therefore, PDUFA mandates responses and action letters from the FDA, but not

necessarily approvals or final denials.

       NDA/BLA submissions are assigned either a “standard” or “priority” status, depending in

part on the novelty of the therapeutic and the existence of unmet needs. In the case of PDUFA-I,

II and III, the FDA is required to deliver a “complete review” on 90% of priority applications

within six months. For standard applications, the FDA was obliged to review 90% of

applications in twelve months under PDUFA-I; currently, the FDA is mandated to review 90%

of standard applications within ten months.

       On the action date mandated by PDUFA, the FDA issues one of three possible actions.

The first is a non-approvable letter indicating that the NDA/BLA has not satisfied the FDA’s

standards for safety and/or efficacy. The second is an “approvable” letter that indicates the

NDA/BLA can be approved if certain deficiencies and questions are appropriately acted upon by

the sponsor. The third type of action is the ultimate approval letter that gives the sponsor
                                                                                         14


company the right to market the drug to the public. Although PDUFA action date mandates have

generally been met by the FDA, these action dates are not the same as approval dates.

       To assess the impact of PDUFA on approval times, we considered drug approval data

provided to us by the FDA. These data indicate that approval times have been falling for quite

some time, at least since 1979, and appear to suggest that approval time declines have

accelerated, particularly during PDUFA-I. For example, mean approval time during 1979-86

was 33.6 months, 28.2 months in 1987-92, 18.6 months during PDUFA-I, and 16.1 months

during PDUFA-II. Since the approval time data is skewed to the right, the corresponding median

approval times are all smaller, but they too fall over time: 27.1 (1979-86), 23.8 (1987-92), 16.2

(PDUFA-I), and 12.3 (PDUFA-II).

       One way of depicting drug approval time trends is to construct “survival” curves that plot

the proportion of approvals not yet completed within a fixed time period. More precisely, the

“survival” curve in Figure 2 plots the percent approvals remaining over time in months, one

curve for each of the time periods 1979-86, 1987-92, PDUFA-I and PDUFA-II.

       Survival curves from more recent time periods are clearly separate from and ever closer

to the origin than are those from earlier eras. The more rapid decline in survival curves during

PDUFA-I and II relative to the pre-PDUFA time period indicates faster approvals. Note that the

horizontal line designated with a 90% rate in the graph intersects the various survival curves at

far longer time periods than those stated by the PDUFA goals, since the PDUFA goals involved

review times rather than approval times.

B.      Estimating The Effects of PDUFA on The Approval Time Distribution F(a)

       To estimate the incremental impact of PDUFA on approval times empirically, we used

data on 662 NMEs, small molecule chemicals and biological agents, submitted to the FDA for
                                                                                          15


review on a government fiscal year basis between October 1, 1979 and September 30, 2002.

Initially we report here the main results contained in Berndt et al [2005]7, where we only

assessed the effects on review times and thus did not propose and perform the economic

evaluation discussed here.

       We estimated parameters in multivariate regression specifications in which the dependent

variable was the natural logarithm of the time between NDA/BLA submission and final FDA

approval. An annual time trend counter variable (1979=1, 2002=23) was included as a regressor,

as were 0-1 PDUFA-I and PDUFA-II indicator variables, the latter two interacted with another

time trend counter (1992/1993=1, 2001/2002 = 10).

       Several additional explanatory variables were added to account for potentially

confounding non-PDUFA effects (e.g., efforts by oncology and HIV/AIDS patient advocacy

groups). These variables included binary (0-1) variables for whether the application was

submitted under the Orphan Drug Act provisions, whether the application was designated a

Priority Review status, and whether the sponsor was domestic versus foreign. To account for

differential clinical difficulties in the development process, the time in clinical development

(natural logarithm of time between the Initial New Drug Application (IND) and the NDA/BLA

submission) was added as a regressor, as were 0-1 indicator variables for twelve therapeutic

classes (cardiovascular, anti-infective, anti-neoplastic, CNS, AIDS, metabolic/endocrine,

gastrointestinal, dermatology/ophthalmology, anti-inflammatory, radiopharmaceuticals,

respiratory and other, with biologics being the omitted reference case). To allow for therapeutic

class-specific time trends, each of the twelve therapeutic class indicator variables was interacted

with the PDUFA-I and PDUFA-II time trend interaction variables. Analysis revealed that only

in two therapeutic areas (anti-inflammatory and anti-neoplastic) were PDUFA-related time
                                                                                            16


trends different from the overall trends. Regression results with and without the differential anti-

inflammatory and anti-neoplastic PDUFA-related trends are given in Table 1.

       In the specification assuming equal time trends across therapeutic classes (first column of

Table 1), the parameter estimate on the overall time trend suggests an annual decline of about

1.7% in approval times; the negative coefficients on the PDUFA-I and II variables imply that this

decline accelerated to about 9-10% annually during PDUFA-I, and then declined at a slightly

slower rate of about 5% during PDUFA-II. When differential therapeutic class PDUFA-related

time trends are permitted (the second set of columns in Table 1), the pre-PDUFA and post-

PDUFA annual declines for most therapeutic classes remain the same as in the more restricted

specification. However, during PDUFA-II, the annual declines in approval time for anti-

inflammatory drugs approach 15%, while those for anti-neoplastic agents reach about 10%. In

both specifications, as expected, the regression analysis revealed shorter approval times for

priority vs. standard review (-0.490 exponentiated, about 38%).

       In terms of therapeutic class effects, since the regression coefficients are relative to the

biologics class, controlling for other confounding variables, approval times were shortest for

AIDS applications (about 56% shorter than biologics), about 30% shorter for the “other” class,

and about 25% shorter for applications in the anti-infective and anti-neoplastic therapeutic

classes; each of these was statistically significantly shorter than that for biologics (p-values <

0.05). The only class for which approval times were significantly longer than biologics both pre-

and post-PDUFA was that for respiratory agents (about 33% longer).
                                                                                            17


IV.       THE EFFECT OF PDUFA ON PRODUCER SURPLUS

          We now report results from estimating the effects of PDUFA on the total producer

surplus     dF, which represents the innovative return of the drug after R&D has been undertaken.

PDUFA affects an innovator’s returns by raising both the costs and the benefits of innovation.

The cost is raised by the amount of the use fee taxes levied, while the benefit is raised by the

gains in the present value of the innovator’s return induced by the more rapid FDA approval.

          The effect of faster approval on producer surplus is the difference between the surplus

under the observed approval time and the counterfactual approval time for that drug with

PDUFA interaction variables set to zero in the estimated approval time multivariate regression

specifications discussed in the previous section. A similar set of calculations can be undertaken

to compute the present value of the additional user fee costs associated with PDUFA for a given

drug. The net gain in the present value of an innovative return is then computed by netting out

the user fees from the gains due to faster approvals since the inception of PDUFA, all in present

values.

          To implement these calculations empirically, several estimation issues must be resolved

regarding the discount rate, the estimation of sales profiles and the estimation of drug specific

taxes or user fees. First, we implement the innovative return calculations using a range of real

discount rates from 3 to 9 percent.8

          Second, data are needed on actual and predicted sales of drugs over their life cycle, as

well as actual and predicted PDUFA user fees. Through a third party agreement with IMS

Health Inc., the FDA provided us comprehensive retail plus hospital sales data for all drugs on

the U.S. market from February 1998 through December 2002. The sales data included the

following channels: independent pharmacies, chain pharmacies, mass merchandisers with and
                                                                                             18


without pharmacies, mail order pharmacies, food stores with pharmacies, non-federal hospitals,

federal facilities, clinics, long-term care facilities, home health care, closed HMOs, and

miscellaneous channels (starting in 1999, prisons, universities and other).9 Given that many

drugs were approved prior to 1998 and that data on future sales beyond 2002 were unavailable,

estimates of sales outside years 1998 through 2002 were needed. IMS Health has reported

results of an analysis of launch to peak sales for new chemical entities, based on 816 new

chemical entities launched since 1983 (information on the terminal year is not available).10

Results from this analysis relate over a 15-year life cycle the average yearly sales as a percent of

peak sales. Although the IMS analysis found that a drug on average reached its peak sales 13

years after launch, sales in years 10 through 13 are relatively flat, and then drop off

precipitously.11 Based on the IMS data and analysis, for each drug, sales were first annualized if

the available sales data did not begin in January of a given year.12 Predicted peak sales for that

drug were then computed using the IMS life cycle year to peak percentages, as were sales for all

other years not observed in the IMS data. All sales were then deflated to 1992 dollars using the

GDP deflator.

       Third, incremental costs associated with PDUFA include calculations of the present value

of PDUFA user fees. PDUFA fees consist of application fees, establishment fees, and product

fees; as noted earlier, these have risen sharply since 1992. PDUFA fees for 2005 and forward

were estimated based on the compound annual growth rates (CAGR) observed from 1993 to

2004. Given that the US Congress has renewed PDUFA in 1997 and 2002, and given that the

renewal year has generated a much larger percentage increase in the user fee schedule than the

relatively minor subsequent increases within PDUFA-I, PDUFA-II, and PDUFA-III, we

forecasted significant increases for 2008 and 2013, the next times PDUFA will likely need to be
                                                                                         19


reauthorized. Specifically, we constructed large percentage increases in reauthorization years

and subsequent minor increases between reauthorizations so as to yield a CAGR in real user fees

of 15%, approximately equal to that observed historically. Similar to the sales curves, the actual

PDUFA fees were deflated to 1992 dollars using the GDP deflator.

       Novel NDA/BLA application fees were charged during the year of an NDA/BLA

submission to the FDA. Product fees and establishment fees were allocated during each year of

sales. We allocated 100% of the establishment fee to each NME. This likely overstates such

fees, since many establishments manufacture more than one drug or biologic; informal

conversations with the FDA indicated that on average, approximately three drugs/biologics are

manufactured per location. This allocation therefore biases upward the user fee cost

calculations. It was also necessary to forecast the number of future supplemental applications,

since detailed information is not yet readily available to us. From PDUFA performance reports

of 1997, 1999 and 2003, we noted that between 1993 and 2003, a total of 1,266 original

NDAs/BLAs were filed at the FDA (not all of which were, of course, approved). Over the same

time period, 1,518 efficacy supplements were also filed (of which how many were approved we

do not know). The ratio of filed supplements to filed original NDAs/BLAs over this time period

is 1.199. Since it is plausible to expect that the proportion of supplemental submissions

approved by the FDA is larger than the proportion of novel NDA/BLA submissions that is

approved, we expect the actual number of supplementals approved for each approved NDA/BLA

to be larger than 1.199. We therefore make the assumption that for every approved NDA/BLA,

two supplemental applications are submitted in the second year post market launch. This is a

relatively “conservative” assumption in that 2.0 is a large number, and that the timing of both

supplements being in the second year post launch likely overstates the rapidity with which such
                                                                                           20


supplementals are filed.13 These assumptions on supplementals therefore bias upwards the

present value of the PDUFA supplemental user fees. Since supplemental NDAs/BLAs do not

increase the product fee or establishment fee already being paid by a sponsor, no further

adjustments are made.

       Table 2 reports our principal findings for the effect of PDUFA on producers’ innovative

returns, based on assumptions regarding the share of variable costs of revenues and the real

discount rate. Our estimates of the share of sales that are attributable to costs are from existing

estimates in the literature. For example, using generic prices several years after initial generic

entry as an estimate of marginal costs, and based on data from the 1980s and early to mid-1990s,

Grabowski and Vernon [1992] and Berndt, Cockburn, and Griliches [1996] report that in most

cases the brand price is more than four times the estimated marginal costs.14 In Table 4 we

therefore set variable costs equal to 20% of sales revenue, for drugs during patent protection.

       Table 2 indicates that the aggregate gains in producer surplus ranged from $14 billion

($11 billion with PDUFA and variable costs removed) under a 3% real discount factor to $17

billion ($13 billion with PDUFA and variable costs removed) under a 9% real discount factor.

These gains in producer surplus incorporate the additional user fee costs of PDUFA represented

by an aggregate amount of about $890M in present value in the case of a 3% discount rate and

$390M under a 9% discount rate.



V.     THE EFFECT OF PDUFA ON SOCIAL SURPLUS

       Next we report results from estimating the effects of PDUFA on the total social surplus

WdF by augmenting the estimated effects of PDUFA on producer surplus            dF by the estimated

effects on consumer surplus SdF. However, as opposed to the producer surplus, the annual
                                                                                          21


consumer surplus is lower during the patent period, when it is limited by the degree of market

power by the patent holder, than after the patent has expired, when prices come down and

consumer surplus rises. Annual consumer and social surplus calculations must therefore

differentiate between pre- and post patent expiration, whereas this was not a major issue when

producer surplus was assumed zero after patent expiration.

       In estimating social surplus, we are interested in how one can use readily available sales

data in order to provide a bound on the social surplus before and after expiration. Regardless of

the form of the inverse demand and variable cost functions, sales bound social surplus from

below when

                   +s    py.

Substituting in for (y) and rearranging yields

               s    c,

i.e., consumers’ surplus is at least as large as variable costs. This holds because sales understate

social surplus by the amount of consumer surplus, and overstate social surplus by the costs of

production. Sales always overstate producer surplus, but understate social surplus if variable

costs are small and there is some consumer surplus.

       The degree to which sales captures the social surplus depends on the extent of market

power. Let f be the fraction of social surplus captured by the producer as defined by

               f=f[ + s].

Under perfect competition the fraction f attains its minimum value of zero and the consumers

capture the entire surplus. At the opposite extreme, when producers have sufficient market power

to perfectly price discriminate, this share attains its maximum value of unity. Given the extent to
                                                                                            22


which producers capture social surplus, we can rewrite the condition when sales bound social

surplus according to

       (1/f)     py,

which when rewritten becomes

       p/[c/y]   1/(1-f).

This states that if the average markup is above a threshold level, sales provide a lower bound on

surplus. A special case, potentially applicable to pharmaceuticals when sales perfectly measure

social surplus, is when the producer captures the entire surplus through perfect price

discrimination and variable costs are ignorable; 1-f=s=c=0.

       To illustrate, consider the often estimated constant returns case with a linear demand

function, as in p(y) = a – by and c(y) = cy. In this case, regardless of (a,b,c), the fraction of

surplus captured by the producer is f=2/3, so that sales bound social surplus from below

whenever the variable cost to price ratio is less than a third : c/p < 1/3. This follows from the

result that in this case the monopoly output is half the competitive output, which implies that

consumer surplus is half the profits.

       Using these bounding methods to identify consumer and social surplus from sales data,

we report in Table 3 our principal findings on the estimated effects of PDUFA on these

quantities.

       The various rows in Table 3 are calculated in a relatively straightforward fashion. The

sales bound for the social surplus before expiration (Row A) is simply the present value of gross

sales over a 15 year time period under patent protection. Variable costs and PDUFA fees are not

subtracted. In all cases, the counterfactual calculations use our regression specification to predict

the delay in approval time, which increases the number of years the 15-year sales curve is
                                                                                        23


discounted. The sales bound on social surplus after patent expiration (Row B) is calculated as a

15-year decreasing annuity with the initial payment being the average of the last three years of

sales for each product while on patent. This annual payment then decreases by 10% per annum

and is discounted back to 1992. The calculations are done on a drug by drug basis and then

aggregated.

       We next calculate cases for the highest consumer surplus (corresponding to a linear

demand curve and constant returns) and lowest consumer surplus (producer captures entire social

surplus during time of patent protection). The highest case before patent expiration (Row C) is

calculated as 50% of the net sales that are shown in Table 2 for both PDUFA and the

counterfactual scenario. For the case after patent expiration (Row D), we double the post-patent

expiration social surplus sales bound (Row B). If we sum the pre- and post-patent expiration

periods for the highest case, we obtain the total consumer surplus (Row E). We can then add the

producer surplus, calculated with PDUFA and variable costs removed in Table 2, to obtain the

total social surplus in the highest case (Row F). For the case of the lowest consumer surplus, we

assume that the consumer does not accrue any benefit prior to patent expiration (Row G = 0).

After patent expiration, the consumer accrues a surplus equal to the lower bound of the social

surplus (Row H), which was calculated in Row B. We can then sum the before- and after-patent

expiration (Rows G and H) to obtain the total consumer surplus for the lowest case scenario

(Row I). To calculate the total social surplus under the lowest case scenario (Row J), we simply

add the total consumer surplus we calculate here to the producer surplus in Table 2, which is net

of PDUFA fees and variable costs.

       Table 3 presents our major findings on the consumer and social surplus induced by the

more rapid drug approvals associated with PDUFA. The first set of estimates measures lower
                                                                                          24


bounds on social surplus represented by sales when price-cost margins are high on the patent

together with the last year prior to patent expiration representing the annual surplus after patent

expiration. This provides lower bounds on the social surplus during the patent and assumes the

social surplus is the same after the expiration as during the expiration. Under a low (high)

discount rate of 3% (9%), the table indicates that PDUFA I - II raised the estimated lower bound

on social surplus by $14B or 1.3 % ($17B or 3.7%) before patent expiration and $7B or 1.2%

($5B or 4%) after patent expiration.

       The second set of estimates assumes a consumer surplus under a linear demand and

constant marginal costs. In this case, during the patent the consumer surplus is half the producer

surplus and after patent twice the producer surplus just prior to expiration. Under a low (high)

discount rate of 3% (9%), Table 3 indicates that PDUFA I and II raised the high estimate of

consumer surplus, comprised of both prior-and post-expiration levels, by $19Bor 1.2 % ($17B or

3.8%). Together with the producer surplus estimates of roughly $11B ($13B) from the previous

table, this amounts to a total increase in social surplus of $31B or 1.2% ($30B or 3.7%).

       The third set of estimates is the most conservative estimate of the consumer gains, and is

based on the assumption that there is no consumer surplus while the drug is on patent. Because

of the extensive market power of the patent-monopolist assumed in these estimates, the

consumer surplus after the patent expires equals the producer surplus just prior to patent

expiration. This represents a worst case scenario for consumers. Under a low (high) discount

rate of 3% (9%), Table 3 indicates that PDUFA I and II raised the estimated consumer surplus by

$7 billion or 1.2 % ($5 billion or 4%) in this case. Therefore, even in this conservative case,

there are substantial gains to consumers from the more rapid FDA approval of drugs during

PDUFA I and II .
                                                                                          25


VI.    ESTIMATING THE SAFETY EFFECTS OF PDUFA

       The previous discussion reports findings from estimating the first term or speed

component of the change in aggregate welfare A towards Ao induced by the changes of PDUFA.

In this section we discuss the second term representing any offsetting changes in safety that may

have occurred. We also attempt to price out these safety deteriorations in terms of health effects.

A.     Estimating The Effects of PDUFA on The Market Time Distribution F(m)

       In a previous analysis, we have examined the impact of PDUFA on the market time

distribution F(m) by considering the time until withdrawal of drugs pre- and post-PDUFA.

Specifically, in Berndt et al. [2005] we have reported on various pre- and post-PDUFA

withdrawal comparisons.15 Simple proportion comparisons involving the number of NMEs

withdrawn prior to the passage of PDUFA I relative to the number of NMEs withdrawn during

PDUFA I and II suggest that no difference exists between the two periods. However, these

simple, naïve comparisons do not account for censoring of the data (limited observation time for

post PDUFA NMEs compared to the pre-PDUFA cohort). In order more reliably to assess the

potential difference between the cohort of NMEs with withdrawals prior to PDUFA to the cohort

of NMEs with withdrawals after PDUFA, we constructed Kaplan-Meier curves (see Figure 3).

Based on a log-rank test analysis, we concluded that we could not reject the null hypothesis that

the two curves are identical (p-value of no difference = 0.39). We note that all comparisons,

whether simple proportion comparisons or Kaplan-Meier analysis, are heavily reliant on the

determination of what NMEs belong in the numerator and in the denominator. More

specifically, determining the actual distribution of NMEs withdrawn from market and assigning

them to the appropriate cohort is reliant on three main factors. First, the definition of when the

PDUFA legislation actually took effect and which NMEs were reviewed under the PDUFA
                                                                                        26


guidelines is not definitive. Discussions with FDA personnel confirm that the legislation was

passed as of late 1992 but that the actual effects of PDUFA were only affected sometime in

1993. The “flexibility” in timing can shift several NMEs (e.g., tamfloxacin, cisapride) between

the pre-PDUFA and post-PDUFA cohorts.

       Secondly, as discussed in our 2005 article, the definition of pre-PDUFA is ambiguous as

well. For purposes of our analysis, we defined a time period from roughly 1980 forward;

however, one could easily argue that the pre-PDUDFA period should extend further back in

time. Our choice of the initial year of the pre-PDUFA era was made by simple data availability,

which began in fiscal year 1980.

       Finally, the list of NMEs and withdrawn NMEs may be deemed somewhat arbitrary

given that there are examples of product withdrawals for lack of use (a.k.a. revenue) that may

suggest reduced efficacy or intolerable side effects. These drug withdrawals are not accounted

for in our analysis. Other NMEs have been withdrawn, but later reintroduced.

       While several studies have investigated the withdrawal rate of NMEs (i.e., a Government

Accountability Office study in 2002, and a 1999 FDA analysis published in the Journal of the

American Medical Association) 16, the fact that there are relatively few safety withdrawals, pre-

and post-PDUFA, as compared to the total NMEs approved implies that the statistical power to

detect significantly different safety withdrawal rates pre- and post-PDUFA is likely rather low.

Combined with the additional issues regarding inherent ambiguity in determining the

numerator/denominator, we recognize that there is room for continued debate and discussion of

the withdrawal distribution and whether it has changed pre- and post-PDUFA. Thus we assess

safety issues by making alternative bounding assumptions..
                                                                                          27


B.      Estimating the Potential Health Effects or Quality of Withdrawal

       Even though we believe there is no convincing evidence of differences in the distribution

of market times pre-and post PDUFA, representing the quantity of safety withdrawals, there may

be differences in the quality of drugs that were withdrawn. More precisely, in such cases the

producer surplus would still be estimated by observed revenues, but when a drug is withdrawn

appropriately, there may have been negative consumer surplus levels that more than offset the

positive producer surplus, making the social surplus negative. Ideally, we would subtract the

negative social surplus of such withdrawn drugs from the overall gain in surplus attributable to

their initial more rapid approval. However, it is very difficult to estimate these negative

consumer surplus effects of withdrawn drugs as it entails consumers paying for and consuming

products that are claimed to make them worse off. Nonetheless, to assess the potential health

effects of such unwanted consumption, we estimate the magnitude in the reduction in health that

would eliminate the benefits of more rapid approval of drugs attributable to PDUFA. In Table 4

we report results from computing the equivalent amount of life years that must have been lost in

order for PDUFA to have reduced social welfare. These estimates are derived from dividing the

estimates of the benefits of speed (under 3% discounting) by existing estimates of the value of a

life year, which we assume range between $100,000 and $300,000.

       The estimates in Table 4 indicate how many life years must have been lost on withdrawn

drugs in order to offset the estimated gains in consumer surplus of non-withdrawn drugs, plus

producer surplus gains from both withdrawn and non-withdrawn drugs. Table 4 indicates that

for the lower bound on the social surplus, there must have been a loss of 70,000 life years when

estimated at $100K per life year, and 23,333 life years when estimated at $300K per life year.

Similarly, for the highest surplus estimated, the health loss must have been 310,000 to 103,333
                                                                                           28


and for the lowest social gains estimated, withdrawn drugs must have caused a loss of 180,000 to

60,000 life years, depending on whether an additional life year is evaluated at $100K or $300K,

respectively.

C.     Estimating an Upper bound on The Adverse Safety effects of PDUFA

       For any estimates of the quality or safety effects of PDUFA one needs counterfactual

estimates of the approval- and market times (a,m) in the absence of PDUFA for the withdrawn

drugs observed under PDUFA, analogous to previous sections where we estimated

counterfactual approval times in absence of PDUFA for non-withdrawn drugs.

       We consider an extreme case in which all withdrawals after 1992, for drugs submitted for

review after the passage of PDUFA I, were attributable to PDUFA and where there were no

benefits associated with the drugs so that their social surplus was measured by the harmful health

effects the withdrawn drugs imposed. More precisely, in this extreme case we assume the

counterfactual approval times in the absence of PDUFA to be infinite, a= , and thus

corresponding to no welfare W( ,m)=0. The change in welfare is thus

       W( ,m)-W(a,m).

This is a gain (loss) in welfare if the annual welfare w is negative (positive). In terms of this

expression, this computation estimates a worst case scenario against PDUFA by estimating the

highest welfare losses possible induced by PDUFA. For all the withdrawn drugs discussed here,

we assume that the counterfactual approval time in absence of PDUFA would be infinite, a=

(the drugs would never have been approved), implying that regardless of the assumption of the

counterfactual market time, welfare vanishes, W=0. In addition, though an FDA induced

withdrawal may be inefficient in the sense that those benefiting from a drug may outweigh the

harms imposed, we assume that those benefits are zero for both consumers and producers so that
                                                                                            29


the value of withdrawal is maximized by minimizing the negative annual value of the flow of

pre-withdrawal surpluses w.

        We have calculated the adverse health effects associated with drugs withdrawn from the

market that were submitted for review under PDUFA I and II using historical data available via

The Adverse Event Reporting System (AERS) (http://www.fda.gov/cder/aers/extract.htm for the

format of the data and limitations) which reports individual reports by drug and year, the age of

the patient, and the type of adverse events experienced. Specifically, we investigated the drugs

listed in Table 5.

        In Table 6 we report the estimated cost in life years and calculated value in dollars of the

drugs that were withdrawn. The AERS data were filtered to provide only deaths and

hospitalizations for the selected drugs. For each drug, there were events that did not have an

event date or age of the patient. An average of patient age and event date was calculated with the

existing data for each drug and these values were then completed for the events with missing

information. In order to calculate life years lost, we first had to establish life expectancies. Life

expectancies were calculated for the period of 1990 and 2000 according to the US Census life

tables published by the National Center for Health Statistics. For each individual we were able

to establish a life expectancy that was specific for that individual’s sex, age, and year of event

(i.e., a 30 year-old male in 1990 has a different life expectancy than a 30 year-old male in 2000).

In this analysis, we do not account for hospitalizations that did not result in a fatality and instead

only focus on reported deaths. After calculating the estimated life years lost for each drug, we

can estimate the cost by multiplying the life years either by $100,000 or $300,000, and

discounting as appropriate.
                                                                                            30


       As shown in Table 6, adding up across the universe of withdrawn NMEs since the

enactment of PDUFA, we find that this extreme upper bound entails around 55,600 life years

lost. This upper bound is then compared to the gains in health implicit in the greater speed

generated by PDUFA, which we estimated at the equivalent of 180,000 to 310,000 life years

when valued at $100 thousand per life year (see Table 4). Put differently, monetizing the life-

years lost by $100 thousand per year and discounting these monetized losses to 1992 dollars (at a

real discount rate of 3%) from the average year of the events leads to a value of $4.4 billion,

which is about 40 percent of the estimated value of speed at $11 billion (see Table 2). Note that

these calculations include Vioxx (rofecoxib) and Bextra( valdecoxib), which were both recently

withdrawn, and whether any of them will eventually return to the market is as yet unclear.

Additionally, we include Alosetron in our calculations; this drug has been returned to market

with a more restrictive label.

       Table 6 also reports the number of non-fatal hospitalizations reported for each drug,

which in aggregate for all drugs amounts to approximately 16,000. Although the fatalities

reported from these data seem more likely to be of lower error than hospitalizations, these

hospitalizations, if valued substantially, could potentially lead to offsets larger than the gains of

greater speed induced by PDUFA. However, we stress that these health effects are an extreme

form of upper bounds on the adverse effects of PDUFA, based on the assumption that the

withdrawn drugs had no benefits, that all the drugs that were withdrawn would never have been

approved in the absence of PDUFA, and that all the individuals who died would have had an

average life expectancy but for the consumption of the implicated drug.
                                                                                            31


VII.   DISCUSSION, LIMITATIONS, AND CONCLUDING REMARKS

       Our analysis is based on a number of assumptions and limitations. First, our benefit-cost

and social surplus calculations are aggregated over all drug classes. Further research might

fruitfully focus on disaggregating into specific therapeutic areas and “blockbuster” products.

       Second, we have employed a product life cycle sales profile pattern based on data and

analysis from IMS Health. Other life cycle sales profiles, such as that in the rate of return

calculations by Grabowski, Vernon and DiMasi [2002] could be used instead; moreover, their

framework allows for a more detailed free cash flow analysis that allows the intensity of

marketing, manufacturing, and other costs to vary over the product life cycle. Although we have

interpreted the relationships among social surplus and industry sales within the context of a

linear demand curve, explicit nonlinear formulations of the demand curve are worthy of further

examination. Moreover, though studies exist that indicate fairly little within class substitution

across drugs, more general substitution patterns would of course allow for social surplus

calculations that took into account offsets in producer and consumer surplus due to such

substitution.

       Third, the analysis reported here ends with NDAs/BLAs submitted to the FDA by the end

of PDUFA-II (September 30, 2002), and approved by the FDA up through May 2004. It would

be useful to update the approval data, to ensure that right censoring is not a significant issue.

       Fourth, another limitation of our study is that the sales data used in the benefit

calculations represent U.S. sales only. Foreign sales for drugs sold in the US are typically 75%

to 100% of U.S. sales. The extent to which accelerated approval in the United States affected

international approvals and launch dates was not incorporated into our calculations. If earlier
                                                                                             32


U.S. approval encouraged more rapid approval abroad, then the NPV social surplus benefit of

PDUFA would be greater than we have calculated.

        Fifth, to the extent that accelerated FDA approval of NDAs/BLAs resulted in an increase

in the duration of patent protection prior to patent expiration, it is possible that our calculations

understate producers’ benefits from PDUFA. Two considerations suggest that any such impact

is likely to be rather small. First, patent expiration typically takes place 12 or so years following

product launch (“effective patent life”), and thus viewed in present value terms at the beginning

of PDUFA in 1992, such end of product life benefits are likely to be very small when

discounted.17 Second, under the Hatch-Waxman Act, the maximum amount of time a drug

could enjoy market exclusivity was set at 14 years (with possible 6-month extensions for

sponsors proving efficacy in the pediatric population); precisely how many of the drugs in our

sample would have run into this exclusivity ceiling is unclear, but the number is likely to be non-

trivial. To the extent this would occur, accelerated FDA approval would not translate into longer

effective patent life.

        A final limitation of our study is that we have not undertaken a separate analysis of “fast

track” provisions that involve rolling submissions to the FDA. We believe the impact of this

omission is likely to be relatively minor, for not only is the number of NDAs/BLAs granted fast

track study in our sample up through 2002 likely to be small, but preliminary analyses by several

researchers suggests that the differential impact of fast track from priority status on approval

times is small, and in some cases fast track may even lengthen approval times.18

        The methodology and framework proposed could be extended to numerous policies

beyond PDUFA, such as, for example, facilitating more rapid FDA approvals by allowing

greater use of surrogate markers as endpoints, while simultaneously requiring enhanced post-
                                                                                        33


approval surveillance and monitoring efforts. Since the clinical development time between

filing of the Investigational New Drug application and submission of the NDA/BLA is two to

four times larger than review time of the NDA/FDA at the FDA, the framework developed here

might be useful in examining potential costs and benefits of various other policies that could

affect the critical pathway from pre-clinical discovery through submission of an NDA/BLA.

More generally, in our judgment much more work is warranted providing more evidence-based

and quantitative assessment on the many types of FDA policies that affect the US and other

populations.
                                                                                                                                                                        34


FIGURES AND TABLES

Figure 1: Producer and Consumer Surplus for a given Review and Market Time
Annual Surplus ($)




                                                                                                                                Consumer
                                                                                                                                 Surplus




                                                                                                                                    Producer
                                                                                                                                     Surplus


                                                    Review Time                                                  Market Time


                                                                       FDA Approved                                                                       Withdrawal

                                                                                                                Time



Figure 2: Survival Curve for NMEs pre and post PDUFA
                                                                                     Survival Curves for STANDARD Designated NMES

                                                         110.00%

                                                         100.00%


                                                         90.00%
                     Precentage of Approvals Remaining




                                                         80.00%


                                                         70.00%

                                                         60.00%


                                                         50.00%
                                                                                                                        90% of NMEs Approved Line
                                                         40.00%


                                                         30.00%


                                                         20.00%


                                                         10.00%

                                                          0.00%
                                                                   0   6   12   18     24      30    36    42     48    54     60      66    72     78   84   90   96
                                                                                            Months After Submission of Application for Approval

                                                                                            1979-1986      1986-1992         PDUFA I        PDUFA II
                                                                                                                                                                       35


Figure 3: Survival Curves depicting NME withdrawal rates pre and post PDUFA
                    100.0%

                    90.0%
                                                                   100.5%

                    80.0%
                                                                   100.0%

                    70.0%
 % NMEs Surviving




                                                                      99.5%

                    60.0%
                                                                      99.0%
                    50.0%

                                                                      98.5%
                    40.0%

                                                                      98.0%
                    30.0%


                    20.0%                                             97.5%



                    10.0%                                             97.0%
                                                                              0   1    2   3    4   5    6    7   8    9   10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26

                     0.0%
                             0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8    9      10       11       12       13       14       15   16    17   18    19   20    21   22   23    24   25   26
                                                                              Time (years after launch)

                                                                 Pre-PDUFA NME Cohort                             PDUFA NME Cohort
                                                                                                          36




Table 1: Estimated Effects of PDUFA-I and PDUFA-II on Approval Times

                                            Aggregate Specification            Drug Class Specification
                                            for PDUFA Time Trends               for PDUFA Time Trends
Variable                                  Coefficient   P-Value                Coefficient   P-Value

Intercept Constant                                3.515          < 0.001                 3.524        < 0.001
Natural Log IND to NDA time                      -0.001            0.965                -0.012          0.695
Time Trend                                       -0.017            0.038                -0.016          0.050
Priority Review                                  -0.490          < 0.001                -0.487        < 0.001
PDUFA I Time Trend                               -0.081            0.001                -0.080          0.001
PDUFA II Time Trend                              -0.037            0.018                -0.029          0.062
IND to NDA Data Missing                           0.103            0.521                 0.055          0.728
Orphan Drug                                       0.109            0.094                 0.114          0.078
Domestic Company Sponsor                         -0.072            0.115                -0.074          0.100

Cardiovascular                                   0.120             0.203                 0.136          0.144
Anti-Infectives                                  -0.306            0.001                -0.294          0.002
Anti-Neoplastics                                 -0.304            0.009                -0.143          0.276
CNS                                               0.128            0.211                 0.143          0.159
AIDS                                             -0.812          < 0.001                -0.805        < 0.001
Metabolic/Endocrine                              -0.062            0.514                -0.056          0.550
Gastrointestinal                                 -0.088            0.516                -0.069          0.607
Dermatology/Opthalomology                        -0.188            0.087                -0.179          0.101
Anti-Inflammatories                              0.101             0.505                 0.322          0.061
Radiopharmaceuticals                             0.183             0.122                 0.202          0.085
Respiratory                                       0.288            0.041                 0.309          0.027
Other                                            -0.352            0.019                -0.334          0.025

Anti-Inflammatory PDUFA II Time Trend             N/A              N/A                  -0.114         0.007
Anti-Neoplastic PDUFA II Time Trend               N/A              N/A                  -0.064         0.011

R-squared                                               0.393                  R-squared               0.405
Observations                                              662                  Observations              662




Table 2: The Effects on producer surplus of PDUFA I and II

$'s (Billions)
                                  β = 1 / 1.03                                          β = 1 / 1.09
                          Counter                                                Counter
                  PDUFA factual Difference % Diff                          PDUFA factual Difference % Diff
Sales             $ 1,149 $ 1,134 $     14 1.3%                            $ 482 $ 465 $         17 3.7%
PDUFA Costs       $ 0.89      $    -     $       0.89      N/A             $ 0.39   $    -        $     0.39    N/A
Variable Costs    $   230     $   227    $          3     1.3%             $   96   $        93   $        3    3.7%
Net               $   918     $   907    $         11     1.2%             $ 385    $   372       $       13    3.6%
                                                                                                                 37




Table 3: The Effects on Social Surplus of PDUFA I and II


      $'s Billions                                   β = 1 / 1.03                                 β = 1 / 1.09
                                            Counter                                        Counter
Row                                   PDUFA factual Difference % Diff.               PDUFA factual Difference % Diff.
      Sales Bound on Social Surplus
 A       Before Expiration            $ 1,149   $ 1,134     $           14   1.3%     $ 482   $   465   $            17   3.7%
 B       After Expiration             $   579   $    572    $            7   1.2%     $ 130   $   125   $            5    4.0%

      Highest Consumer Surplus Case
 C       Before Expiration            $   459   $    454    $            5   1.2%     $ 192   $   186   $            7    3.6%
 D       After Expiration             $ 1,158   $ 1,144     $           14   1.2%     $ 260   $   250   $            10   4.0%
 E       Total Consumer Surplus       $ 1,617   $ 1,598     $           19   1.2%     $ 452   $   436   $            17   3.8%
 F       Total Social Surplus         $ 2,536   $ 2,505     $           31   1.2%     $ 838   $   808   $            30   3.7%

      Lowest Consumer Surplus Case
 G       Before Expiration            $   -     $     -     $       -        0.0%     $ -     $   -     $        -        0.0%
 H       After Expiration             $   579   $    572    $            7   1.2%     $ 130   $   125   $            5    4.0%
  I      Total Consumer Surplus       $   579   $    572    $            7   1.2%     $ 130   $   125   $            5    4.0%
 J       Total Social Surplus         $ 1,497   $ 1,479     $           18   1.2%     $ 515   $   497   $            18   3.7%




Table 4: Estimate of Life Years Impacted to Offset Benefits of PDUFA I and PDUFA II
                                                    PDUFA Benefit            Life Years Valued Life Years Valued
                                                      $ Billions                  at $100K          at $300K
Social Surplus Lower Bound                                 $7                          70,000                     23,333
Social Surplus High Consumer Surplus                       $31                        310,000                    103,333
Social Surplus Low Consumer Surplus                        $18                        180,000                     60,000
                                                                                                                                        38


Table 5: List of NMEs submitted during PDUFA I/II that were subsequently withdrawn
for safety reasons
Drug Name                  NDA Submission Date                            Year Approved                  Year Withdrawn
Bromfenac                               Dec 30, 1994                                 1997                            1998
Cerivastatin                            Jul 26, 1996                                 1997                            2001
Grepafloxin                             Nov 08, 1996                                 1997                            1999
Mibefradil                              Mar 11, 1996                                 1997                            1998
Troglitazone                            Aug 01, 1996                                 1997                            2000
Rapacuronium                            Jun 25, 1998                                 1999                            2001
Rofecoxib***                            Nov 23, 1998                                 1999                            2004
Alosetron**                             Jun 30, 1999                                 2000                            2000
Valdecoxib***                           Jan 16, 2001                                 2001                            2005

* Not considered an NME
** Returned to market in 2002 w/ restrictions
*** Not in CDER's 2004 Report to Nation - added by authors



Table 6: Estimated cost of NMEs withdrawn from market that were submitted for review
         during PDUFA I/II
                                                                                                        β = 1/1.03                   β = 1/1.09
                    # of
              Hospitilzations           Average                   Cost at $100K Cost at $300K Cost at $100K Cost at $300K Cost at $100K Cost at $300K
              Not Resulting in  # of    year of   Life Years     per Life Year ($ per Life Year per Life Year per Life Year per Life Year per Life Year
 Drug Name         Death       Deaths    event       Lost*              M)            ($ M)      (1992 $ M)    (1992 $ M)    (1992 $ M)    (1992 $ M)
  Alosetron                685     46    2000            1,037                104            311           81           244            51           153
 Bromfenac                 257     77    1998            1,787                179           536           151           453           109           328
 Cerivastatin            4,455    883    2000           14,086              1,409         4,226         1,099         3,297           683         2,049
Grepafloxacin               72     13    1998              228                 23            68            19            57            13            40
  Mibefradil               665    129    1998            2,029                203           609           172           517           126           377
Rapacuronium                22     11    2000              516                 52           155            41           122            26            77
  Rofecoxib              8,013  1,349    2001           21,815              2,181         6,544         1,669         5,007           999         2,998
 Troglitazone            1,444    688    1998           13,048              1,305         3,914         1,094         3,282           780         2,341
 Valdecoxib                581     56    2003            1,056                106           317            77           231            42           126
   TOTAL               16,194   3,252                   55,601              5,560        16,680          4,403        13,209         2,830         8,490
                                                                                         39


FOOTNOTES



1
  See, for example, Sam Peltzman [1974], The Regulation of Pharmaceuticals: Balancing the
Benefits and Risks, Washington DC: American Enterprise Institute for Policy Research; Mary K.
Olson [1997], “Firm Characteristics and the Speed of FDA Approval”, Journal of Economics and
Management Strategy, Summer, 377-401; Olson [1998], “Pharmaceutical Regulation”, in The
New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics and the Law, Peter Newman, ed., New York: Stockton
Press, 40-45; Olson [2005], “Managing Delegation with User Fees: Reducing Delay in New
Drug Review”, Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law, forthcoming; Daniel P. Carpenter
[2002], “Groups, the Media, Agency Waiting Costs, and FDA Drug Approval”, American
Journal of Political Science, July, 490-505; and Michael Dickson and Jean Paul Gagnon [2004],
“Key Factors in the Rising Cost of New Drug Discovery and Development”, Nature Reviews:
Drug Discovery, 3, May, 417-429. ..
2
  The only related study of which we are aware that assesses costs and benefits of regulations is
that by Sam Peltzman, who examined growth in market shares of drugs launched prior to 1962 to
those launched after the 1962 Kefauver-Harris Amendments were passed by Congress. See Sam
Peltzman [1973], “Evaluation of Consumer Protection Legislation – 1962 Amendments”, Journal
of Political Economy, 81(5), 1049-1091; this research is also discussed in Peltzman [1974],
supra.
3
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration, FY 2002 PDUFA Financial Report [2003], p. 6, and p. 9.
4
  Much of the material that follows is taken from Ernst Berndt, Adrian Gottschalk, Tomas
Philipson and Matthew Strobeck [2005], “Industry Funding of the FDA: Effects of PDUFA on
Approval Times and Withdrawal Rates”, Nature Reviews: Drug Discovery, 4, July, 545-554; and
by the same authors, “Assessing the Impacts of the Prescription Drug User Fee Acts (PDUFA)
on the FDA Approval Process”, Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research,
Working Paper No. 10822, October 2004. Forthcoming in David M. Cutler and Alan M. Garber,
eds., Frontiers in Health Policy, Vol. 8, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press for the National Bureau of
Economic Research, late 2005.
5
 U.S. Food and Drug Administration [2004], “Prescription Drug User Fees—Overview”, U.S.
Food and Drug Administration [online] (cited 27 April 2004),
http://www.fda.gov.oc/pdufa/overview.html.
6
 U.S. Food and Drug Administration [2004], “PDUFA Reauthorization Performance Goals and
Procedures”, U.S. Food and Drug Administration [online], (cited 27 April 2004),
<http://www.fda.gov/oc/pdufa/PDUFAIIIGoals.html>.
7
    See Berndt, Gottschalk, Philipson and Strobeck [2005], supra. .
8
    A 0% discount rate assumes there is no time value for moneys, and is therefore implausible.
                                                                                       40



The NIH Cost-effectiveness panel suggested using 3% as a preferred real discount rate, but also
recommended assessing sensitivity at 0%, 5% (used most commonly) and 7%. See Martha R.
Gold, Joanna E. Siegel, Louise B. Russell, and Milton C. Weinstein, eds., Cost-Effectiveness in
Health and Medicine, New York: Oxford University Press, 1996. The Office of Management
and Budget has recently recommended use of 3% and 7% real discount rates, the former to
capture intergenerational discounting, and the latter representing an estimate of the average
before-tax rate of return to private capital in the U.S. See Office of Management and Budget
[2003], Regulatory Analysis: Circular A-4, September 17, pp. 31-34. Finally, in their recent cost
of drug development analyses, DiMasi and coauthors use 11% as the real cost of capital. See
Joseph A. DiMasi, Ronald W. Hansen and Henry G. Grabowski [2003], “The Price of
Innovation: New Estimates of Drug Development Costs”, Journal of Health Economics, 22:2,
March, 151-185; and Grabowski, John Vernon and DiMasi [2002], “Returns on Research and
Development for 1990s New Drug Introductions”, PharmacoEconomics, 20 (Supplement 3), 11-
29.
9
  The U.S. Food and Drug Administration provided IMS sales data via a signed contract
involving Professor Berndt of the MIT Sloan School of Management,, the FDA and IMS Health.
10
   The information on life cycle sales is taken from “An Analysis of Launch-to-Peak Sales for
NCEs”, in M. P. Mathiew, ed., PAREXEL’s Pharmaceutical Statistical Sourcebook 2003/2004,
p. 46.
11
  Average sales as a percent of peak sales were, for years 1 through 15, 6%, 21%, 32%, 41%,
46%, 53%, 64%, 75%, 83%, 96%, 96%, 95%, 100%, 76% and 71%, respectively.
12
   For 56 of the 341 NDAs/BLAs submissions filed during PDUFA-I and II and approved up to
May 2004, there is no sales data in the IMS Health data set. These could include drugs whose
sales did not meet a minimum reporting threshold, or drugs approved but never marketed. We
also excluded one drug from the anti-infective class since it was withdrawn from the US market.
13
  Supplemental applications and approvals are discussed in greater detail in Ernst R. Berndt, Iain
M. Cockburn and Karen Grepin, “Biopharmaceutical R&D: Is the Productivity Decline
Overstated?”, paper presented at the Conference on “Health Reform in Europe and the United
States: Is There Common Ground?”, Tufts European Center, Talloires, France, July 13-15, 2005.
Available upon request from eberndt@mit.edu.
14
  Henry G. Grabowski and John M. Vernon [1992], “Brand Loyalty, Entry, and Price
Competition in Pharmaceuticals After the 1984Drug Act”, Journal of Law and Economics, Vol.
35, October, 331-350; Ernst R. Berndt, Iain M. Cockburn and Zvi Griliches [1996],
“Pharmaceutical Innovations and Market Dynamics: Tracking Effects on Price Indexes for
Antidepressant Drugs”, Brookings Papers: Microeconomics 1996, 133-188.
15
     See Berndt, Gottschalk, Philipson and Strobeck [2005], supra.
                                                                                        41


16
  These and other related studies are referenced in Berndt, Gottschalk, Philipson and Strobeck
[2005], supra.
17
  See, for example, Henry G. Grabowski and John Vernon [2000], “Effective Patent Life in
Pharmaceuticals”, International Journal of Technology Management, 19, 98-100.
18
  See, for example, Christopher Milne and E. M. Bergman [2001], “Fast Track Designation
Under the Food and Drug Administration Modernization Act: The Industry Experience,” Drug
Information Journal, 35:1, 71-83; also see Lisa Piercey [2003], “Life in the Fast Lane”, Signals
[online], http://signalsmag.com/signalsmag.nsf/, May 23, 1-14.
