                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    IDENTIFYING AGE, COHORT AND PERIOD EFFECTS
                        IN SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH PRODUCTIVITY:
                   DISCUSSION AND ILLUSTRATION USING SIMULATED
                       AND ACTUAL DATA ON FRENCH PHYSICISTS

                                            Bronwyn H. Hall
                                            Jacques Mairesse
                                              Laure Turner

                                         Working Paper 11739
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11739


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2005




This is a revision of a paper prepared for the SPRU Conference in Memory of Keith Pavitt at the University
of Sussex, 13-15 November, 2003. We are extremely grateful to Serge Bauin and Michele Crance from
UNIPS-CNRS, France for their invaluable help in constructing the database of condensed matter physicists,
and to two anonymous referees for helpful comments.The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Bronwyn H. Hall, Jacques Mairesse, and Laure Turner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Identifying Age, Cohort and Period Effects in Scientific Research Productivity: Discussion and
Illustration Using Simulated and Actual Data on French Physicists
Bronwyn H. Hall, Jacques Mairesse, and Laure Turner
NBER Working Paper No. 11739
November 2005
JEL No. C23, O31, J44

                                             ABSTRACT

The identification of age, cohort (vintage), and period (year) effects in a panel of individuals or other
units is an old problem in the social sciences, but one that has not been much studied in the context
of measuring researcher productivity. In the context of a semi-parametric model of productivity
where these effects are assumed to enter in an additive manner, we present the conditions necessary
to identify and test for the presence of the three effects. In particular we show that failure to specify
precisely the conditions under which such a model is identified can lead to misleading conclusions
about the productivity-age relationship. We illustrate our methods using data on the publications
1986-1997 by 465 French condensed matter physicists who were born between 1936 and 1960.

Bronwyn H. Hall
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall, #3880
University of California-Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
bhhall@econ.berkeley.edu

Jacques Mairesse
INSEE, CREST
15, Boulevard Gabriel PERI
92245 MALAKOFF CEDEX
FRANCE
and NBER
mairesse@ensae.fr

Laure Turner
ENSAE
laure.turner@ensae.fr
Hall-Mairesse-Turner                                                               October 2005




                    Identifying Age, Cohort and Period Effects

                          in Scientific Research Productivity:
    Discussion and Illustration Using Simulated and Actual Data on French Physicists


               Bronwyn H. HALL, Jacques MAIRESSE, and Laure TURNER


1      Introduction
Empirical studies in the social sciences often rely on data and models where a number of
individuals born at different dates are observed at several points in time, and interest centers
on the identification of age, cohort, and time or period effects in the relationship of interest.
However, modeling and identification of such relationships has proved to be problematic,
largely because of the obvious impossibility of observing two individuals at the same point in
time that have the same age but were born at different dates. The identification problem is
further aggravated if one uses standard panel data estimators in which one takes first
differences (or within individual differences) of the variables, in order to control for
unobserved individual effects. In this case, the cohort effect disappears completely (because it
is collinear with the individual effects), which obscures but does not eliminate the problem of
identifying year and age effects simultaneously.


A number of “solutions” to this identification problem have been offered in the literature in
different contexts (e.g., R. E. Hall 1971, Mason et al. 1973, Rodgers 1982a,b, Mason and
Fienberg 1985, Berndt and Griliches 1991), all of which assume restrictions on the
specification of the general underlying model, usually by imposing some sort of functional
form assumption on the way the three effects enter. R. E. Hall (1971) was concerned with
disentangling depreciation (the age effect), embodied technical change (the cohort effect),
and disembodied technical change (the period effect) in a vintage capital model applied to
trucks, in which he imposed the constraint that the two most recent vintages were identical in
order to identify the model. Berndt and Griliches (1991) were interested in a problem similar
to that confronting Hall: the construction of a hedonic pricing model of personal computers
that incorporates technical change, vintage, and age effects. Unlike Hall, they explored and




                                               2
Hall-Mairesse-Turner                                                               October 2005

exposited the full range of assumptions available for identification of the additive dummy
variable model.


At the same time that this economic research was being undertaken, the problem had not
gone unnoticed in the sociological literature, especially as it related to the interpretation of
cohort effects. In a series of papers William Mason and his co-authors proposed estimating
cohort-age-period models using identification assumptions similar to the one used by Hall
(1971). This work culminated in a conference volume published in 1985 (Mason and
Fienberg 1985) that provides an excellent overview of the state of the art and the views of
sociologists, statisticians, and economists on the problems associated with this kind of
modeling, both conceptual and methodological.


One of the many domains in which this identification problem is prevalent is the study of the
scientific productivity of researchers, where we would like simultaneously to take account of
differing productivity over time, as a function of age, and as a function of the vintage of the
researcher. Scholars in the sociology of science, and more recently economists, have tried to
measure the age-related productivity curve, and to purge it of effects due to the vintage of the
researchers and the periods in which they are being observed. A major problem in such
analysis is the need to take into account two major tendencies: the exogenous increase of
publications with time and with cohort. Descriptive statistics on scientific publications
suggest that they tend to increase over time more or less rapidly in many scientific fields,
overall but also per researcher. A way to capture such time effects, as well as any general
changes in the state of art and work environment is simply to introduce period (year)
indicators in the model. In the same manner, it seems that younger cohorts tend to publish
more than older ones when they were the same age, which may be related to the fact that
there are increased incentives and competition for the younger generations, and/or they are
more motivated and better trained, and/or that the cost of publishing is less (with the use of
computers and internet, and growing numbers of journals, etc.). However, including cohort
indicators (or for that matter individual effects) together with period indicators in the model
introduces the aforementioned identification problem with the age variable.


In this paper we give an overview of the general identification problem of age, cohort, and
period effects in a panel data regression model, of the estimation and interpretation
difficulties it raises, and propose what we think a practical approach to deal with them

                                               3
Hall-Mairesse-Turner                                                               October 2005

(second section); we illustrate these difficulties and the suggested solutions on simulated data
(third section), and on a rich longitudinal database of the publications over 20 years (1980-
2002) of about 500 French condensed matter physicists (fourth section). We have three goals
in undertaking this work: 1) to illustrate the potential for such data to lead to misleading
inference if the identification problem is overlooked or not confronted; 2) to discuss the
estimation and interpretation of cohort-age-period models when there are individual effects;
3) to apply our methods to a panel of real data in order to draw some conclusions about the
evolution of scientific research productivity over time and age.


We want to emphasize that we do not break new statistical ground on these questions here.
Instead we outline how to apply the methods proposed by previous researchers to the problem
of scientist productivity and we explore the implications of the resulting estimates for
substantive research questions, in particular to highlight the ambiguous nature of some of the
previous results in this area. To put it another way, we want to underline the importance of a
priori assumptions in interpreting results from a cohort-age-period regression. Our research
questions are the following: How do we interpret results when there is more than one way to
achieve identification? What happens when we remove the individual effects (effectively
removing the cohort information) and how do we interpret the results in this case?




2      The Age, Cohort and Period Identification Problem

2.1    Problem statement

It is well-known that the identity age = year (period) - year of birth (cohort) implies that all
three effects cannot be identified in a linear model. It is somewhat less well-known that
identification can be achieved in a dummy variable model by dropping a small number of
variables (e.g., see Berndt and Griliches 1991). In fact, no experiment can be devised to
identify a completely general model with cohort (C), age (A), and period (P) effects. Given
the identity A = P-C that exists in the data, it is obvious that any function f(C, P, A) can be
written as f(C, P, P-C) = f(C,P), so that it does not depend on the value of A. It will therefore
always be necessary to impose some constraints or prior information on f(.) if we wish to
identify an age effect that is parsimonious and not simply derived from the cohort-period
behavior.



                                               4
Hall-Mairesse-Turner                                                                   October 2005

The requirement for parsimony is another way of saying that we expect the age effect to be
rather smooth and slow to change and that we would like to impose that belief on the model.
Conceptually if it were not for our a priori belief that things change slowly with age, we
could simply derive the age effect from the observed cohort and period effects via the
identity. In fact, some scholars (notably Rodgers, cited below) would argue that, in any case,
this is the only solution available without external prior information such as the
macroeconomic environment. That is, the identification problem is fundamental, given the
impossibility of observing A such that P-C         A. Or alternatively, one could argue that the age
effect is whatever we obtain from the interaction of period and cohort effects, and therefore is
identified simply from the combination of those two effects. Unfortunately, an age effect
identified in this way is not stationary from cohort to cohort and cannot be presumed to apply
when we look at a different time period. So we might prefer to find a way to identify a more
parsimonious age effect via reasonable assumptions on the cohort and period effects.


There exists a large body of prior research and debate in sociology, demography, and
economics over the question of exactly how to identify all three effects using suitable
constraints on the functional form of the relationship or other prior information. In sociology
a rather heated debate over identification between William Mason and his co-authors and
Willard Rodgers was conducted in the pages of the American Sociological Review in 1982
(Mason et al. 1973; Rodgers 1982a,b; Smith et al 1982). Mason et al. (1973) had proposed a
method of identifying a model with three sets of dummy variables for age, period, and birth
by constraining some of the coefficients, and Rodgers critiqued their approach strongly
because of its ad hoc nature, arguing that a better method of identification was to replace one
of the sets of dummy variables with ‘real” variables that were correlated with that particular
aspect of the relationship (i.e., replacing period dummies with variables describing the
macro-economy during the period). Part of his critique was based on the argument that
modeling the effects as additively separable already imposed too many constraints on the
model and did not allow for interactions between, for example, cohort and changes over time.


Nevertheless, most researchers who are interested in identifying three separate effects do
begin by assuming that they are additive, that is, that


                                 f (C , P, A) = f C (C ) + f P ( P ) + f A ( A)                        (1)



                                                    5
Hall-Mairesse-Turner                                                                     October 2005



Clearly when the {fJ , J = C, P, A} are linear we have the well-known case that one of the
three functions is not identified. However, Heckman and Robb (1985) show more generally
                                                              J +1                             J +2
that when the fJ are polynomials of order J, only                     combinations of the
                                                                  J                              J
coefficients on the terms of order J are identified. That is, for the linear model, only 2 of the 3
linear coefficients are identified. For a quadratic model, only 3 of the 6 quadratic coefficients
are identified, and so forth. So although low-order polynomials seem an attractive way to
model these effects because of their smoothness, in practice they have not been much used
because the lack of identification is so obvious.


Given additivity, the most general semi-parametric model is a model that simply includes
dummy variables for all three effects. However, if we do not impose additivity, a more
general model is available, one which is simply the means of the dependent variable for each
cohort-period combination. If there are no covariates other than cohort, age, and period, these
means are the sufficient statistics for the data.2 In the next section of the paper we begin with
this model as our baseline and then present a series of models that are nested within it.

2.2     Model with age, cohort, and year dummies

Suppose that we have data on a variable of interest Yit on N individuals from C cohorts,
observed for P periods. If we have no prior information on the relationship of Y to cohort and
period other than assuming that it is multiplicative in levels (and therefore additive in
logarithms), the natural semiparametric regression model simply includes a dummy variable
for each cohort-period combination. Such a method uses all the information available from
the means of the data by cohort and period (and therefore age), and exhausts the degrees of
freedom.


Using lower case y to denote the logarithm of Y, this model can be written as


                                    saturated: yit = act + ε it                                           (2)



2
  Strictly speaking, we would also need the total and within variances of the dependent variable and an
assumption of normality and conditional homoskedasticity for these means to be sufficient.


                                                   6
Hall-Mairesse-Turner                                                                              October 2005

where i = 1,…,N individuals; t = 1,…,P periods; and c = 1,…,C cohorts. We are implicitly
assuming that the data are balanced across P and C (although not necessarily across N). That
is, for each cohort we observe a complete set of P periods.3 Given the assumption of balance
in the P and C dimension, when we observe PxC cells, we are observing A = P+C-1 ages.
This model, which we call the saturated model, allows us to identify PC means of y, one for
each cohort-period combination. However writing the model this way does not provide
estimates of age, cohort, or period effects separately, nor does it impose constancy on these
effects.


As the saturated model is the most general model that can be estimated using this type of
data, it is a useful starting point, but most researchers prefer to impose constancy of the
coefficients across the same ages, cohorts, and periods, which leads to a model that we call
the three-way or CAP model:


                                      CAP: yit = µ + α c + β t + γ a + ε it                                        (3)


We know that one cannot estimate equation (3) directly: the coefficients of the different
indicators can only be estimated relative to a reference value for each of the three dimensions.
Therefore one imposes (for example) nullity on the coefficients                   1,   1,   and   1,   which are
respectively those of the first cohort, the first period, and the first age. However, the
collinearity between the indicators of age, period, and cohort has not been removed by this
procedure: in fact, it is easy to show that even the variables in this new equation will not be
linearly independent. How can one then estimate this model? As discussed earlier, several
methods of identification have been proposed in the past; here we focus our discussion on
those that involve simple restrictions on the dummy variables, rather than the addition of new
variables such as macro-economic indicators.


Mason et al. (1973) proposed determining the number of restrictions which it is necessary to
impose on equation (3) in order to eliminate the problem of collinearity and identify the
model. They demonstrated that one possible sufficient condition is to constrain two

3
  Symmetrical treatments where the data are balanced for C and A (we observe the same number of ages for
each cohort), or where the data are balanced for P and A (we observe the same number of ages in each period,
and therefore cohorts are unbalanced) are possible. We present the C and P case here because that is the way our
data is organized: the changes necessary to estimate with data balanced for CA or PA are obvious but tedious.


                                                       7
Hall-Mairesse-Turner                                                               October 2005

coefficients in the same dimension (age, period, or cohort) to be equal. For example, by
imposing that the effects of the first and last ages are equal, one can identify the model,
provided that there are at least 12 cohort-period combinations. The number of coefficients
that can be estimated is therefore 1 + (P-1) + (C-1) + (A-1) - 1 = 2(P+C) – 4, as compared to
PC for the saturated model. When P=C=2, the three-way model coincides with the saturated
model, implying that at least one of P or C must be larger than 2 for this model to impose
meaningful constraints.


Naturally, the problem with identifying the three-way model using an equality constraint on
two of the coefficients is that the different equality constraints will correspond to different
estimates of the coefficients. The explanatory power of the models (measured by the R-
squared) estimated under the different equality constraints will be the same. As a
consequence, in the absence of an equality constraint that is preferred a priori, identifying the
model in this way does not allow the selection of a “good” model. A secondary problem is
that the identification may be fairly weak, relying as it does on a single equality constraint
between coefficients.


However, as Berndt et al. (1995) showed, when the number of periods and cohorts is large
enough, the three-way model imposes a number of constraints on the saturated model that can
be tested in order to determine its plausibility. Similarly, models with only two or one set of
dummies are nested within the three-way model, so that it is possible to test their validity
using either the saturated or the three-way model as the maintained hypothesis. We write the
two-way models as follows:


                                    CP: yit = µ + α c + βt + ε it
                                    CA: yit = µ + α c + γ a + ε it                                  (4)
                                    PA: yit = µ + βt + γ a + ε it


and the one-way models similarly:


                                       C: yit = µ + α c + ε it
                                       P: yit = µ + β t + ε it                                      (5)
                                       A: yit = µ + γ a + ε it



                                                 8
Hall-Mairesse-Turner                                                                  October 2005

For example, testing the CP model against the CAP model is equivalent to testing whether the
A-1 coefficients 2, 3, …,    A   are equal to zero, which corresponds to testing the constraints on
the saturated model given in Table 1.


                                        [Table 1 about here]


Similar tables apply for the other models. The implication of this particular set of constraints
(those for the CP model) is that the change in y from period to period is the same for each
cohort, but that the change in y from age to age is different for each cohort. The number of
constraints relative to the saturated model is equal to PC – (P-1) – (C-1) – 1 = (P-1) (C-1),
which can be a sizable number. In section 4 of the paper we present empirical results for a
panel of French physicists which has 25 cohorts and either 12 or 21 periods. For the shorter
sample using these data, the number of implied constraints for the CP model is equal to 264
out of 300 coefficients. Table 2 gives the general formulas for the number of constraints in all
the models when the data are balanced in the cohort and period dimension. Table 3 illustrates
the computations for our two panels, where we have i = 1,…,N individuals (N=465 for the
short panel and 418 for the long); p = 1,…,P years (P=12 or 21); c = 1,…,C cohorts (C=25);
and therefore age a=t-c (A=36 or 45).


                                     [Tables 2 and 3 about here]


It is clear from these tables that when there are a large number of years or cohorts, there are a
large number of implied constraints. The implication is that even though it is not possible to
identify a model with a full set of cohort, year, and age dummies, it is still possible to test for
the presence of any one set of these dummies conditional on including the other two sets.
That is, because only one additional constraint is required to identify the model with all three
effects, when more than one additional constraint is implied by dropping a set of dummies,
we can still perform a test. As mentioned earlier, in the case of data balanced in the cohort
and period dimension, this will be true when either the number of periods or the number of
cohorts is at least three.




                                                  9
Hall-Mairesse-Turner                                                                             October 2005

2.3        Including individual effects

In many situations, it is desirable to control not only for effects due to the cohort to which an
individual belongs, but for permanent differences in individuals as well, leading to a variation
of the CAP model:
                                         IAP: yit = µi + α c + β t + γ a + ε it                                  (6)
It is obvious that this will create a further identification problem: given any individual i, the
cohort c to which he belongs is known, and the cohort effect                       c   is therefore completely
unidentified in a model with individual effects. In addition, some of the identification
strategies discussed above (specifically those involving constraining the cohort dummies) are
unavailable, because including individual effects necessarily involves including a complete
set of cohort dummies. One additional danger with including individual effects in this models
(and as a consequence differencing out the cohort effect) is that the identification problem
itself is therefore obscured and may be missed by the researcher.


Heckman and Robb (1985) discuss the identification issue in CAP models with individual
effects and suggest an alternative identification strategy using a variance components
decomposition. That is, they propose modeling using random effects in cohort, age, and
period, and then estimating the model using the moment matching methods associated with
Joreskog’s LISREL program.4


3          An illustration using simulated data
In order to illustrate the identification problem and the difficulties it creates for measuring
age effects in researcher productivity, we performed a simulation using data calibrated to
match the panel of French physicists analyzed in Turner and Mairesse (2005) and also in
section 4 of this paper. That dataset had observations on the publications of 465 individuals
who were born between 1936 and 1960 (25 cohorts), for the period 1986 to 1997 (12 years).
In this section of the paper we present the results of a series of structured statistical tests on
the simulated data that are designed to choose the correct model from among the various
dummy variable alternatives discussed earlier. In addition, we show the results of one draw
from our simulation graphically. The model we chose for simulation illustrates the potential


4
    Information about this program can be found at http://www.ssicentral.com/lisrel/




                                                        10
Hall-Mairesse-Turner                                                                  October 2005

for a model that has only cohort and period effects to generate data that may appear to have
peak in productivity at a certain age in spite of there being no age effect in reality.


Our approach here is to generate data that looks like the real data using a negative binomial
model (so we obtain counts with overdispersion), but to estimate using the log-linear dummy
variable model that is common in the literature. Given the generally small values of the
dependent variable and the fact that we are using dummy variables, the differences between
using OLS or using the more correct ML on a negative binomial model for estimation are
likely to be slight. Figures 1a-1c show the results of one simulation draw of the model given
below:


                                     yit ~ NB(λit , σ 2 )
                                                                                                        (7)
                                     λit = exp µ0 + α t + β c + γ c 2


where NB denotes the negative binomial distribution, t is the period (1986-1997, centered at
1991.5), c is the cohort (1936-1960, centered at 1948),         = .022,   = .001,   = -.0015,   0   =
1.09, and   = 3.1.    0   and   were chosen so that the logarithms of the simulated data had the
same mean and variance as the actual data. These parameter values imply that the quadratic
in c reaches its maximum in about 1948-49, in the middle of our data period, but that the
slope ranges from a minus 4 per cent growth rate to a plus 4 per cent growth rate in
publications per year for the observed cohorts and is usually much lower, of the same order
of magnitude as the year effect. In levels and at the mean of the data (2.7 publications per
year), 4 per cent corresponds to a growth rate of about 0.1 articles per year.


                                    [Figures 1a-1c about here]


Each panel of Figure 1 shows the resulting data from one draw of this simulation, plotted
three different ways: 1a shows the means by age, 1b the means by year, and 1c the means by
cohort. In each case we also show the best fit line for the dummy variable model that
excludes the variable on the X axis, as a guide to the eye. Note that any dummy variable
model which includes a set of dummies for the X-axis variable will fit the means of the data
perfectly. For example, in Figure 1a we show the fit from a model that includes only the
cohort and period dummies (the CP model). Any model that includes age dummies (that is,


                                                  11
Hall-Mairesse-Turner                                                                                  October 2005

the CAP, CA, PA, or A models of Section 2) would have matched the overall age means
exactly. Of course, were we to examine the fit of the age distribution for particular cohorts or
particular years, only the saturated model would be able to match the data exactly. This fact is
illustrated in Figure 2, which shows the data and the fit of the various models for three
separate cohorts (1936, 1948, and 1960) that have three sets of non-overlapping ages (50-61,
38-49, and 26-37).


                                             [Figure 2 about here]


The main message of Figure 1 is that although the year and cohort distributions look the way
we would expect, given the simulation, the resulting age distribution exhibits smooth
behavior with peaking during the 40s, even though there is no age effect in our simulated
model. As we expected, the year distribution shows a modest trend increase of about 0.06
publications on average throughout the twelve-year period and the cohort distribution a slight
peaking tendency in the late 1940s. Our conclusion is that for samples of our size, averaging
approximately 17 observations per period-cohort cell, it would be possible to observe a
peaked age effect even if one is not there, at least if there is curvature in the cohort or period
dimension.5 That is, the observed age effect can be generated simply by the interaction of
period and cohort effects.


What are the implications of this “age” effect for model selection? That is, even though we
observe something that looks like an age effect in Figure 1a, the testing strategy outlined in
section 2 of the paper may allow us to choose correctly among the many possible models that
are given in Tables 2 and 3, at least when the number of cells or observations are large
enough, and to reject models that are inappropriate for the data. The tests corresponding to
the eight different models in Table 2 are nested in the way shown in Figure 3: the three-way
CAP model is nested within the saturated model, the three two-way CP, CA, and PA models
are nested within the CAP model, and the three one-way C, P, and A models are nested
within either of their corresponding two-way models. Thus we can test for the correct
specification using a general-to-specific sequence of tests: first we test the CAP model using


5
 In this investigation we have focused on a quadratic age effect because that is a typical finding of the human
capital literature and is therefore of considerable interest to researchers of scientific productivity. Spurious linear
age effects would be even easier to generate using trends in period and cohort.


                                                         12
Hall-Mairesse-Turner                                                                             October 2005

the saturated model as the maintained hypothesis, and if we accept, then we can test the three
two-way models (CP, CA, and PA) using the CAP model as the maintained hypothesis. Each
of the three two-way models has nested within it two one-way models and each one-way
model (C, A, and P) can be obtained from two different two-way models. Because this is a
sequence of nested tests, one might want to adjust the corresponding significance levels when
conducting the tests. In the case shown here, the tests are sharp enough (either very
significant or very insignificant) that such an adjustment would make little difference.6


                                           [Figure 3 about here]


As we suspected from Figures 1 and 2, for the simulated data the results of this model
selection approach are somewhat ambiguous. Given the saturated model, we can easily accept
a model with cohort, year, and age effects only (F-statistic (230,5280) = 1.01), but
conditional on that model, there are two models that will describe the data accurately: one is
the cohort-year model (F-statistic (34,5050) = 1.04), which is consistent with the data
generating process we used for the simulation, and the second is the cohort-age model (F-
statistic (10,5050) = 1.03), which is not. The year-age model and the three one-way models
are clearly rejected, regardless of the model that is taken as the maintained hypothesis. Our
conclusion is that for data like ours, it may be difficult to discriminate between some of the
models using samples of the size available to us, although clearly we are able to reject the
more restrictive specifications. In particular, we are likely to find age effects in a model that
has only a linear time trend and a smooth quadratic cohort effect. In the next section of the
paper we apply the same sequence of tests, this time to the real data, and reach similar
conclusions.


4       An application using data for a panel of French physicists
There are many studies of age and/or gender differences in research production in the
sociology of science and in scientometrics (for example Cole, 1979; Cole and Zuckerman,
1984; Cole and Singer, 1991; see also Stephan, 1996). Economists have also investigated
them in the framework of cumulative advantage models and/or life cycle models (Diamond,
1984; Levin and Stephan, 1991; David, 1994; Stephan, 1998). These models reveal the

6
  For example, to obtain a nominal size of 5 per cent for the overall test, the individual significance level for
each of 3 nested tests should be somewhat smaller, equal to (1-(1-.05)1/n) = 0.017 (see Kennedy (1996), p. 92,
for a discussion of nested testing).

                                                      13
Hall-Mairesse-Turner                                                                               October 2005

consequences of events arriving in the early career of the scientist on the one hand and of the
anticipation of the coming end of career on the other on the allocation of research efforts over
time and individual productivity. However, there has been relatively little research based on
individual panel data, which could allow disentangling the effects of age and gender from
cohort and period effects, as well as from other unobservable individual effects. One of the
few exceptions is Levin and Stephan (1991), in which the proposition that research activity
declines over the life cycle is tested on publication panel data for scientists in six sub-fields of
earth science and physics (including condensed matter physics), over the period 1973-1979.

4.1        The dataset

The database with which we work is an original panel database that was created from the
records of 523 French condensed matter physicists working at the Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) between 1980 and 2002, and born between 1936 and 1960.
Condensed matter (solid state) physics comprises half of all French academic physics. During
the period of study, it was a rapidly growing field with relatively little mobility towards the
private sector or the universities, and with well-identified journals.7 The group of physicists
studied here represents a majority of all CNRS researchers in this discipline (they numbered
598 in 2002). The CNRS and universities are the main public research institutions in this
domain in France. In 2002, 28.3% of the condensed matter physicists in France belonged to
the CNRS and 70.5% to the academic sector (1489 researchers).


Our panel database is unbalanced both because the scientists enter at different dates, and
because some exit before 2002.8 We restrict the analysis in this paper to a panel analyzed by
Turner and Mairesse (2005) containing 465 physicists, observed from 1986 to 1997, aged 26
to 60 and with twelve years of data. Tables 4 and 5 contain some simple statistics for our
data. 18 per cent of these researchers are female, rising from 15 per cent in the earliest cohort
(those born 1936-40) to over 20 per cent in the last two cohorts (those born 1951-1960).
About the same number have a doctorate degree from a Grande Ecole, of this number about


7
    For further information on the database and its creation, see Turner (2003).
8
  The identification problem is complicated in our setting by the fact that there is a small amount of variation in
the identity given above due to entry at different ages (90% of the researchers enter between age 23 and 32)
which yields apparent identification, but where such identification is achieved using only a few of the
observations. In this paper we abstract from this complication by defining age to be year less entry cohort rather
than calendar age.


                                                          14
Hall-Mairesse-Turner                                                                                   October 2005

16 per cent are female.9 Over half of them (62 per cent) started their career in either Grenoble
or Paris, which are considered the most important centers in this field. Almost half of the
researchers changed labs at least once during their career. The median number of researchers
in the labs in which they worked was 43, and the sample published at a slightly higher rate
than their labs (2.7 papers per year versus 2.3 for the average researcher in the lab).


As is usual in this literature (Levin and Stephan 1991), our measure of researcher
productivity is the count of articles published during the year.10 The total number of articles
published is about 15,000 (2.7 per person per year) but 25% of the observations have no
publications in a given year and one individual has 62. Fitting a simple Pareto distribution to
these data yields a coefficient of about 0.1, which implies that the distribution from which
they are drawn has neither a mean nor a variance.11 Figures 4 and 5 show the smoothed
sample averages of the productivity measure plotted versus age and calendar year
respectively, for five year groupings of the cohorts (year of birth). As expected, the average
number of articles published tends to increase over time, although the main differences seem
to be by cohort rather than year, with the exception of the most recent cohort. The age
distributions for the earlier cohorts suggest a peak somewhere in the late 40s or early 50s,
although not very strongly.


                                          [Tables 4 and 5 about here]
                                         [Figures 4 and 5 about here]




9
  The Grande Ecole degree is a high-level pre-doctoral degree. In the French educational system, after
graduation from high school, students can either go directly to university, which does not require any grade or
level of achievement in high school, or they can apply to a preparatory class where they spend two years
studying the material required to compete for the very selective admission into a Grande Ecole. Every student of
a Grande Ecole has therefore been successful in passing a two phase selection process: selection on the basis of
their grades in high school, and on the basis of the Grandes Ecoles entrance exams.
10
   We also have several other measures available: articles published weighted by the number of co-authors, the
average number of pages in an article, and measures based on citations received in the first two and five years,
weighted by the impact factors for the journals in which the citing papers appeared (the average citation rate of
its articles). However, in the present paper we focus on the article count itself, which is sufficient to illustrate the
various identification strategies. See Table 5 for simple statistics on the other measures.
11
  Obviously the Pareto properties of the distribution are merely indicative of the level of dispersion in the data.
We do not really believe that there is a nonzero probability that an individual researcher will publish an
arbitrarily large number of papers per year, so the actual distribution must be bounded, which would imply that
the mean and variance exist.

                                                          15
Hall-Mairesse-Turner                                                                                   October 2005

4.2        Productivity and age

In this section of the paper we use the sequence of tests described earlier to ask whether the
apparent peak in productivity as a function of age could be due to the confluence of cohort
and year effects. In Figures 6a and 6b we show the results of our tests applied to the actual
data on French solid state physicists. Figure 6a considers models with cohort, year, and age
effects and Figure 6b considers the same models, but this time with individual effects
substituted for cohort effects.


The results in Figure 6a are similar to those for the simulated data in Figure 3. The preferred
specifications with only two sets of dummies are those with cohort and year or cohort and age
effects. Although they are both rejected at the 5 per cent level in favor of a specification with
all three sets of dummies, using a size adjusted for the fact that the test is nested yields a more
equivocal result. Note that the test for a model with only cohort and year effects versus that
which includes age effects in addition has a p-value of 0.034, which is fairly large given the
number of observations (5580) and larger than the adjusted size of 0.025.12 The conclusion is
that the independent effect of researcher age above and beyond that due to the cohort in
which he or she entered and the year of publication is slight.


                                               [Figure 6 about here]


Alternatively, if we prefer a specification with cohort and age effects only, that is, a model
where calendar time influences only the “initial condition” for the researcher, such a model
would be only marginally less preferred to the cohort-year model. The point is that in order to
distinguish these alternatives it will be necessary to appeal to some prior information, as the
data themselves cannot really tell us which is correct.


To underline this point, we show the actual and fitted values from the two models in Figures
7 and 8, plotted first versus age and then versus time. Figure 7 shows the geometric means of
the data (publication counts) for each age, and the geometric means of the values predicted by
the cohort-year model (those predicted by the cohort-age model will lie precisely on the




12
     Because we are looking at the combination of two tests here, the correct size is equal to (1-.950.5) = 0.025.


                                                           16
Hall-Mairesse-Turner                                                                           October 2005

actual data).13 Similarly, Figure 8 shows the same thing by time, with the fitted values from
the cohort-age model, since the cohort-year predictions will coincide exactly with the data
when it is displayed in this way. Looked at in the age dimension, the cohort-year model
appears to miss a bit at the youngest and oldest ages, although it does reproduce the slight
peaking. Looked at in the time dimension, the cohort-age model appears to impose an
acceptable smoothness on the data. So from this perspective we might prefer the cohort-age
model, even though the fit of the two models is nearly identical (R-squareds of .047 and .052
respectively).


Now suppose the research question concerns the age at which publication productivity peaks.
In this case the choice of model may matter. For example, consider the choice between the
three-way model and the cohort-age model, both of which will reproduce the data means
when looked at in the cohort-age dimension. Nevertheless, the two models may predict a
different productivity peak. A quadratic fit to the two sets of age dummies obtained from
these two models using our data yielded the following result: research productivity peaks at
52.2 years of age using the three-way model and at 53.7 years of age using the cohort-age
model and ignoring the calendar time effects if they are there. Although this difference is not
large, it is significant.14


                                     [Figures 7 and 8 about here]


But that is not the end of the problem. Consider the following model which combines a
quadratic in age with sets of year and cohort dummies:


                                     yit = µ + α c + β t + γ 1ait + γ 2 ait2 + ε it                              (8)


At first glance, this model looks sensible and in fact has often been estimated, sometimes
with individual effects rather than cohort effects included (Levin and Stephan 1991; Turner
and Mairesse 2005). Identification (with an intercept included) requires omission both of one


13
  Geometric means are used because the model was fit in log-linear form, so these are the unbiased predictions
(but without the correction for the residual variance, which is small).
14
  If a quadratic model in age is included directly in the model with cohort-year dummies and that with cohort
dummies alone, the difference in peak age is even larger: 50.6 years versus 53.8 years.


                                                        17
Hall-Mairesse-Turner                                                                      October 2005

of the cohort dummies and of one of the year dummies. However, because age (ait) is an
exact linear function of cohort and period, which identifying assumption you choose (and
there are potentially a large number) will affect the estimates of    1   and   2,   and therefore, the
estimate of the age at which productivity peaks (which is - 1/2 2).


Figure 9 shows a representative result for our data. The identifying assumptions used were to
include a complete set of year dummies, exclude the intercept, and include all but one of the
cohort dummies. The excluded cohort dummy was allowed to vary from 1936 to 1960. The
figure shows a few representative examples of the resulting age profile (excluding year and
cohort effects). Note that all the fits were identical, in the sense that the sum of squared
residuals were exactly equal, and they all generated the same age-cohort-year means, but very
different age-productivity profiles. The problem is interpretive: the age-cohort-year identity
means that it is impossible to identify the productivity curve as a function of age without
strong prior restrictions on the year and cohort effects (such as their absence). The age at
which productivity peaks also varies significantly for the different normalizations: it is 39.6,
41.3, 42.4, 37.9, and 50.4 when we drop the dummy for entry in 1936, 1940, 1944, 1948, and
1952 respectively.


The situation is even worse for the model with individual effects in place of the cohort
effects, along with the year and age effects. For this model, we obtained identification by
setting the coefficients of two of the adjacent years equal to each other, again varying the
choice of years for which we did this from 1986/87 to 1996/97. In this case, the age at which
productivity peaked varied all the way from 0 to 100, of course with large standard errors.
Figure 6b shows the results of conducting our testing methodology on the model with
individual, year, and age effects. In contrast to the models with cohort effects, the only model
that is accepted is the three-way model. The implication of the results is that we need to
include individual, year, and age effects in our model, but that we cannot use the results to
infer the age productivity peak, since it is so sensitive to the choice of normalization.


5      Conclusions
This paper has explored a familiar identification problem, that of vintage, age, and time, in a
context where it does not seem to have been sufficiently recognized: the identification of
cohort, age, and period effects in scientific productivity. We have emphasized the fact that


                                                18
Hall-Mairesse-Turner                                                                            October 2005

identifying an age-related productivity effect or the presence and location of a productivity
peak relies crucially on what we are willing to assume about the variation in the other two
dimensions, cohort and time. There is no universal solution to this problem, given the identity
that relates the three.


Therefore we recommend the following: test for the presence of each of the three effects
semi-parametrically as we have done in this paper. If the tests reveal that one dimension can
be ignored, then the most parsimonious specification will include only the other two
dimensions. However, the power of such a test clearly goes up with the dimensions of the
data: in some unreported experiments, we found that 12 years and 36 ages led to confusion
between a cohort-age and a cohort-year model when the former was the true model, whereas
25 years and 44 ages allowed us to distinguish the two.


Alternatively, we return to the original recommendations of Rodgers, who strongly advocated
the use of a priori information about cohorts or the time period to help identify the model.
We note that this approach was the one taken by Stephan and Levin (1991) when they
achieved identification by grouping the cohorts in their sample according to the knowledge
base to which they were exposed in their graduate training.15 One solution sometimes
proposed, grouping cohorts in multi-year intervals seems somewhat less satisfactory in this
context. This amounts to achieving identification of the age effect by comparing closely
adjacent ages and assuming they come from the same cohort. In this case, it would seem
preferable to use the actual variation in year of entry into the sample (cohort) for individuals
of the same age rather than creating spurious age variation by holding the cohort fixed.


We conclude with a discussion of the impact of the identification problem discussed here on
the coefficient estimates for other variables that may be included in the regression. For
example, a researcher may be interested in gender differences in scientific productivity, or in
the impacts of productivity on the part of other researchers in the lab. Although clearly these
coefficients will be affected by the choice of model when the models differ in their
implications (and when the variables of interest are correlated with cohort, age, or period), in
this case, the choice of assumption used to identify the three-way model will not matter for


15
  However as we discuss in the paper, and as is clear from their detailed discussion of the tables in Levin and
Stephan, this method of identification breaks down if individual rather than cohort effects are included.


                                                     19
Hall-Mairesse-Turner                                                                 October 2005

the coefficients of interest. As long as the assumptions used are equivalent in the sense of
yielding the same (identical) fit of the model, the estimated coefficients on the variables of
interest will be the same. This fact suggests that the safest procedure when the variables of
interest are other than age may indeed be to use the saturated or three-way model to estimate
scientific productivity, in order to provide maximum control for unknown cohort, year, and
age effects. This is the good news. The bad news is that it appears impossible to estimate age
productivity effects without strong a priori assumptions on the rest of the model.




                                              20
Hall-Mairesse-Turner                                                              October 2005


                                        References

   •   ARORA A., P. A. DAVID and A. GAMBARDELLA. 1999. "Reputation and
       Competence in Publicly Funded Science: Estimating the Effects on Research Group
       Productivity," Annales d'Economie et de Statistique 49/50: 163-198.
   •   BERNDT E. R., Z. GRILICHES and N. RAPPAPORT. 1995. "Econometric
       Estimates of Prices Indexes for Personal Computers in the 1990s," Journal of
       Econometrics 68: 243-268.
   •   BERNDT E. R. and Z. GRILICHES. 1991. “Price Indices for Microcomputers: An
       Exploratory Study, “ In Price Measurements and their Uses, Chicago: University of
       Chicago Press, pp. 63-93.
   •   BLUNDELL R., R. GRIFFITH and F. WINDMEIJER, 1995, “Individual Effects and
       Dynamics in Count Data”, discussion paper 95-03, department of economics,
       University College, London
   •   BONACCORSI A. and C. DARAIO. 2003. "A robust nonparametric approach to the
       analysis of scientific productivity," Research Evaluation 12 (1): 47-69.
   •   BONACCORSI A. and C. DARAIO. 2003. "Age effects in scientific productivity:
       The case of the Italian National Research Council (CNR)," Scientometrics 58 (1): 49-
       90.
   •   COLE S., 1979, “Age and Scientific Performance”, American Journal of Sociology,
       84(4): 958-977.
   •   COLE J. and H. ZUCKERMAN, 1984, “The Productivity Puzzle: Persistence and
       Change in Patterns of publications of Men and Women Scientists”, in Advances in
       Motivation and Achievement, vol. 2, pp. 217-258.
   •   COLE J. and B. SINGER, 1991, “A Theory of Limited Differences: Explaining the
       Productivity Puzzle in Science”, in The Outer Circle: Women in the Scientific
       Community, H. Zukerman, J. Cole and J. Bruer eds., Norton, New York.
   •   DAVID P., 1994, “Positive Feedbacks and Research Productivity in Science:
       Reopening Another Black Box”, in The Economics of Technology, Ove Granstrand
       ed., Amsterdam: Elsevier Science: 65-89.
   •   DIAMOND A., 1984, “An economic model of the life-cycle research productivity of
       scientists”, Scientometrics, 6(3): 189-96.




                                              21
Hall-Mairesse-Turner                                                         October 2005

   •   HALL R. E., 1971, "The Measurement of Quality Change from Vintage Price Data,"
       chapter 8 in Zvi Griliches (ed.) Price Indexes and Quality Change, Cambridge, MA:
       Harvard University Press, 240-271.
   •   HALL R. E., 1968, “Technical Change and Capital from the Point of View of the
       Dual,” Review of Economic Studies 35: 35-46.
   •   HAUSMAN J. A., B. H. HALL and Z. GRILICHES, 1984, “Econometric Models of
       Count Data with an Application to the Patents-R&D Relationship”, Econometrica,
       52(4): 909-38.
   •   HECKMAN, J., and R. ROBB, 1985, “Using Longitudinal Data to Estimate Age,
       Period, and Cohort Effects in Earnings Equations,” in W. Mason and S. Fienberg
       (eds), Cohort Analysis in Social Research: Beyond the Identification Problem, New
       York: Springer Verlag.
   •   JORESKOG, K. G. 2005. The LISREL program, http://www.ssicentral.com/lisrel/.
   •   KENNEDY, P., 1996. A Guide to Econometrics, Oxford, UK: Blackwell Publishers,
       Ltd., pp. 75-93.
   •   LANCIANO-MORANDAT, C. and H. NOHARA, 2002, "The new production of
       young scientists (PhDs): a labour market analysis in international perspective,"
       DRUID Working Paper No. 03-04.
   •   LEVIN S. and P. STEPHAN, 1991, “Research productivity over the life cycle:
       evidence for academic scientists,” American Economic Review, 81(1):114-32.
   •   MASON K. O., W. M. MASON, H. H. WINSBOROUGH and W. K. POOLE, 1973
       ”Some Methodological Issues in Cohort Analysis of Archival Data,” American
       Sociological Review 38(2): 242–258.
   •   MASON W. and S. FIENBERG (eds), 1985, Cohort Analysis in Social Research:
       Beyond the Identification Problem, New York: Springer Verlag.
   •   RODGERS W. L., 1982a, ”Estimable Functions of Age, Period, and Cohort Effects,”
       American Sociological Review 47(6): 774–787.
   •   RODGERS W. L., 1982b, ”Reply to Comment by Smith, Mason and Fienberg,”
       American Sociological Review 47(6): 787–793.
   •   SMITH H. L., W. M. MASON and S. E. FIENBERG, 1982, ”Estimable Functions of
       Age, Period, and Cohort Effects: More Chimeras of the Age-Period-Cohort
       Accounting Framework: Comment on Rodgers,” American Sociological Review
       47(6): 787–793.



                                             22
Hall-Mairesse-Turner                                                         October 2005

   •   STEPHAN P. E. 1996. "The Economics of Science," Journal of Economic Literature
       XXXIV: 1199-1235.
   •   STEPHAN P. E. 1998, “Gender Differences in the Rewards to Publishing in
       Academic Science in the 1970’s”, Sex Roles, 38(11/12).
   •   TURNER L. and J. MAIRESSE. 2005. “Individual Productivity Differences in
       Scientific Research: An Econometric Study of the Publication of French Physicists,”
       Paper presented at the Zvi Griliches Memorial Conference, Paris, August 2003;
       Annales d’Economie et de Statistique, forthcoming.
   •   TURNER L., 2003, “La recherche publique dans la production de connaissances,
       contributions en économie de la science”, PhD Dissertation, Université Paris 1
       (http://www.crest.fr/pageperso/lei/laure.turner/these.htm)




                                             23
Hall-Mairesse-Turner                                                                     October 2005



                                           Table 1
                         Constraints for the Cohort-Period Model
  Periods/         P1             P2                   P3                  P4              ……
  Cohorts
  C1             a11 =         a12 = + 1            a13 = + 2       a14 = + 3                 …
  C2           a21 = +   1   a22 = + 1+    1           a23 =      a24= + 1+        3          …
                                                      + 1+ 2
  C3           a31 = +   2   a32 = + 2+    1           a33 =      A34 = + 2+        3         …
                                                      + 2+ 2
  ….               …              …                      …                 …                  …

                                           Table 2
             Number of Parameters and Constraints for the Different Models
                                                              Number
                                                                                Minimum P, C for
Model                           Free parameters                  of
                                                                                over identification
                                                             constraints
Saturated                               PC                        0                      NA
CAP - cohort, age, and
                              P+C+A-3 = 2(C+P)-4             (P-2)(C-2)                P=3,C=3
period
CP – cohort and period              P+C-1                    (P-1)(C-1)                P=2,C=2
CA – cohort and age             C+A-1 = 2C+P-2               (C-1)(P-2)                P=3,C=2
PA – period and age             P+A-1 = C+2P-2               (P-1)(C-2)                P=2,C=3
C – cohort                            C                        C(P-1)                  P=2,C=1
P – period                            P                        P(C-1)                  P=1,C=2
A - age                           A = P+C-1                  (P-1)(C-1)                P=2,C=2

                                           Table 3
                  Number of Parameters and Constraints for the Data
                                       Short Sample                 Long Sample
                                                                            Number
                                 Free             Number         Free
  Model                                                                        of
                              parameters       of constraints parameters
                                                                           constraints
  Saturated                       300                0           525            0
  CAP - cohort, age, and
                                   70                  230             88                 437
  period
  CP – cohort and period           36                  264             45                 480
  CA – cohort and age              60                  240             69                 456
  PA – period and age              47                  253             65                 460
  C – cohort                       25                  275             25                 500
  P – period                       12                  288             21                 504
  A - age                          36                  264             45                 480




                                               24
Hall-Mairesse-Turner                                                                      October 2005


                                        Table 4
                       Sample Statistics for 465 CNRS Physicists
                                             Dummy variables

                    Description                              Number            Share
                    Gender (1 = female)                        84              18%
                    D (started in Grenoble)                    121             26%
                    D (started in Paris)                       167             36%
                    D (PhD from a Grande Ecole)                79              17%
                    Changed labs one or more times             205             44%



                                        Table 5
                       Sample Statistics for 465 CNRS Physicists
                                        Variables constant over time

     Description                                Median     Mean Std. Dev.          Min    Max

     Date of birth                               1945     1946.8        7.3       1936    1960
     Average lab productivity*                   2.29      2.37         0.88      0.11     7.59
     Average lab impact factor*                  3.58      3.53         0.64      1.61    7.62
     Intl openness - share art pub intl          0.037    0.039        0.028      0.000   0.109
     No. of researchers in lab                    43       46.4         26.3        0      134
     No. of labs in career                         1       1.61         0.79        1       4
                    Time-varying variables (5,580 observations for 1986-1997)
     Age of researcher this year                   45      44.6        8.0           20    61
     No of articles published in year               2      2.69        3.21           0    62
     No of articles weighted by authors           0.20     0.21        0.19           0     1
     Average number of pages                      5.40     5.49        4.68           0    58
     Impact factor (2 years)                      2.54     2.66        2.30           0   21.48
     Impact factor (5 years)                      4.36     4.15        3.18          0    26.56
     *Based on only 447 observations.




                                                    25
Hall-Mairesse-Turner                                                                                                               October 2005


                                                                    Figure 1a
                                      Data Simulation with Cohort and Period Effects Only, Plotted versus Age
                                       4.0

                                       3.5

                                       3.0




                 Number of articles
                                       2.5

                                       2.0

                                       1.5

                                       1.0

                                       0.5

                                       0.0
                                                 26         31      36        41            46          51          56      61
                                                                                   Age
                                                                     Estimated CP model      Means of the data




                                                              Figure 1b
                              Data Simulation with Cohort and Period Effects Only, Plotted versus Period
                                               3.5

                                               3.0

                                               2.5
                          Number of articles




                                               2.0

                                               1.5

                                               1.0

                                               0.5

                                               0.0
                                                      1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997
                                                                                    Year
                                                                     Estimated CA model      Means of the data




                                                             Figure 1c
                             Data Simulation with Cohort and Period Effects Only, Plotted versus Cohort
                                      4.0

                                      3.5

                                      3.0
               Number of articles




                                      2.5

                                      2.0

                                      1.5

                                      1.0

                                      0.5

                                      0.0
                                                 1936     1939    1942    1945     1948          1951        1954    1957   1960
                                                                                   Cohort
                                                                   Estimated PA model      Means of the data




                                                                                   26
Hall-Mairesse-Turner                                                                                      October 2005

                                                          Figure 2

                        Estimated Models for Data Simulated with Cohort and Period Effects
                                          1936, 1948, and 1960 Cohort
             1.8
             1.6
             1.4
             1.2
    Number




             1.0
             0.8
             0.6
             0.4
                             1960 Cohort                      1948 Cohort                      1936 Cohort
             0.2
             0.0
                                                                                                                 61
                   26                               38              Age             50

                             CP model         CA model        PA model        CAP model         Simulated Data




                                                Figure 3
                               F-tests for Cohort, Age, and Period Models
                                                        Simulated Data

                                                        Saturated model
                                                        300 coefficients

                                                          1.00 (.497)

                                                  Cohort, Year, and Age
                                                     70 coefficients
                   1.01 (.447)                                                     1.98 (.004)
                                                          1.12 (.343)
             Cohort and year                            Cohort and age                         Year and age
              36 coefficents                            60 coefficients                        47 coefficients

                        2.00 (.005)            4.25 (.000)          2.14 (.000)          3.15 (.000)

                                       Cohort only                             Age only
             4.25 (.000)              25 coefficients                       36 coefficients       3.73 (.000)

                                                           Year only
                                                         12 coefficients




                                                               27
Hall-Mairesse-Turner                                                                                  October 2005


                                                        Figure 4
                                       Average Number of Articles Published by Age
                                                (5-year Moving Average)

          4.50
          4.00
          3.50
                                                                                                             1936-40 Cohort
          3.00
                                                                                                             1941-45 Cohort
 Number




          2.50                                                                                               1946-50 Cohort
          2.00                                                                                               1951-55 Cohort
                                                                                                             1956-60 Cohort
          1.50
                                                                                                             All Cohorts
          1.00
          0.50
          0.00
                 26   28   30   32   34   36 38   40   42    44   46   48   50   52   54   56   58   60
                                                            Age



                                                       Figure 5
                                      Average Number of Articles Published by Year
                                               (5-year Moving Average)

          4.00

          3.50

          3.00
                                                                                                             1936-40 Cohort
          2.50
                                                                                                             1941-45 Cohort
 Number




          2.00                                                                                               1946-50 Cohort
                                                                                                             1951-55 Cohort
          1.50
                                                                                                             1956-60 Cohort
          1.00

          0.50

          0.00
                 1986           1988          1990            1992          1994           1996
                                                        Year




                                                            28
Hall-Mairesse-Turner                                                                           October 2005


                                       Figure 6a
                      F-tests for Cohort, Age, and Period Models
                                        Actual Data (N = 465)

                                               Saturated model
                                               300 coefficients

                                                 0.83 (.973)

                                        Cohort, year, and age
                                           70 coefficients
           1.49 (.034)                                                   6.17 (.000)
                                                 2.10 (.021)
       Cohort and year                         Cohort and age                       Year and age
        36 coefficents                         60 coefficients                      47 coefficients

              7.75 (.000)            3.27 (.000)          8.24 (.000)        7.08 (.000)

                             Cohort only                             Age only
       7.56 (.000)          25 coefficients                       36 coefficients      2.57 (.000)

                                                 Year only
                                               12 coefficients

                                    Figure 6b
            F-tests for Age and Period Models with Individual Effects
                                        Actual Data (N = 465)

                                               Saturated model
                                               740 coefficients

                                                 1.01 (.447)

                                       Individual, year, and age
                                            511 coefficients
           2.64 (.000)                                                   6.05 (.000)
                                                 3.60 (.000)
      Individual and year                  Individual and age                       Year and age
        476 coefficents                     500 coefficients                        47 coefficients

              13.79 (.000)           5.81 (.000)          6.10 (.000)        7.08 (.000)

                             Individual only                         Age only
       6.08 (.000)          465 coefficients                      36 coefficients      2.57 (.000)

                                                 Year only
                                               12 coefficients




                                                     29
Hall-Mairesse-Turner                                                                            October 2005


                                                     Figure 7
                              Geometric Average of Number of Articles Published by Age

          3.50

          3.00

          2.50                                                                                     Data (cohort-
                                                                                                   age model)
          2.00
 Number




                                                                                                   Cohort-year
                                                                                                   model
          1.50

          1.00

          0.50

          0.00
                 26 28   30    32   34 36 38   40   42    44    46 48 50 52 54   56   58   60
                                                         Age




                                                 Figure 8
                          Geometric Average of Number of Articles Published by Year

          3.50

          3.00
                                                                                                   Data (cohort-
          2.50
                                                                                                   year model)

          2.00
 Number




                                                                                                   Cohort-age
                                                                                                   model
          1.50

          1.00

          0.50

          0.00
                 1986           1988       1990            1992       1994       1996
                                                     Year




                                                               30
Hall-Mairesse-Turner                                                                               October 2005



                                                   Figure 9


        Age quadratic estimated with alternative identifying assumptions for cohort effects
                                                                         C1952 dropped
  0.6



  0.4
                                                           C1944 dropped

  0.2
                                             C1948 dropped                       C1940 dropped

  0.0



 -0.2                                                                                            C1936 dropped



 -0.4
         27.5   30.0   32.5   35.0   37.5   40.0    42.5   45.0   47.5    50.0     52.5   55.0    57.5   60.0
                                            Age




                                                     31
