                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         A PORTFOLIO VIEW OF CONSUMER CREDIT

                                            David K. Musto
                                          Nicholas S. Souleles

                                         Working Paper 11735
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11735


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2005




We would like to thank Anna-Maria Lusardi and seminar participants at Columbia, the Carnegie-Rochester
Conference on Public Policy (for which this paper was prepared), the Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank and
various workshops at the University of Chicago and The Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania.
We also thank Lily Fang, Sanjay Chugh, and Nicola Tosini for excellent research assistance. Souleles
acknowledges financial support from the Rodney L. White Center for Financial Research, through the NYSE
and Merrill Lynch Research Fellowships. We are grateful to the Wharton Financial Institutions Center and
Experian for assistance in acquiring the data. All remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2005 by David K. Musto and Nicholas S. Souleles. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
A Portfolio View of Consumer Credit
David K. Musto and Nicholas S. Souleles
NBER Working Paper No. 11735
November 2005
JEL No. E21, E51, G21

                                            ABSTRACT

To compute risk-adjusted returns and gauge the volatility of their portfolios, lenders need to know
the covariances of their loans' returns with aggregate returns. Cross-sectional differences in these
covariances also provide insight into the nature of the shocks hitting different types of consumers.
We use a unique panel dataset of credit bureau records to measure the 'covariance risk' of individual
consumers, i.e., the covariance of their default risk with aggregate consumer default rates, and more
generally to analyze the cross-sectional distribution of credit, including the effects of credit scores.
We obtain two key sets of results. First, there is significant systematic heterogeneity in covariance
risk across consumers with different characteristics. Consumers with high covariance risk tend to
also have low credit scores (high default probabilities). Second, the amount of credit obtained by
consumers significantly increases with their credit scores, and significantly decreases with their
covariance risk (especially revolving credit), though the effect of covariance risk is smaller in
magnitude.

David K. Musto
Finance Department
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
musto@wharton.upenn.edu

Nicholas S. Souleles
Finance Department
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER
souleles@wharton.upenn.edu
        A basic principle of financial economics is that risk is properly viewed in a portfolio

context. That is, the relevant measure of an investment’s risk (i.e., the measure relevant for

discounting) is the risk that it adds to the portfolio of all investments. The traditional subject of

portfolio-risk research has been equities. By contrast consumer loans have received little

academic analysis, especially portfolio-level analysis, even though they are typically held in large

portfolios of thousands or even millions of loans, orders of magnitude more populated than most

equity portfolios. The consumer credit market in the US is quite large, amounting to about $7

trillion by 2000 (of which about $5.4 trillion is mortgage debt, $800 billion is other installment

debt, and $700 billion is revolving debt) [Federal Reserve System (2001)]. Much of this debt is

originated by large, national lenders. The debt is typically either held by the originator in large

portfolios, or sold into large securitization pools [e.g., see Gorton and Souleles (2004)].

        The goal of this paper is to provide a portfolio view of consumer credit. Lenders usually

gauge the risk of their consumer loans by credit-risk scores, which measure a consumer’s

expected probability of default in isolation (a first moment). But the aggregate volatility of a

portfolio of loans also depends on the cross-sectional covariances of the default risks of its

component loans (second moments), which likely vary across borrowers. For example, the

economies of some regions of the country are more cyclical than others. Suppose that default

rates in Alaska have a relatively low covariance with default rates in other states; i.e., that

Alaskans default relatively less when people in other states default relatively more, and vice

versa. Then loans to Alaskans would entail less ‘covariance risk’ and so bring diversification

benefits to a large portfolio of debt, contributing relatively little to the volatility of the portfolio.

        This paper uses a unique panel dataset of credit bureau data to construct measures of

covariance risk analogous to those from equity research, and more generally to study the cross-


                                                                                                            1
sectional distribution of credit. We analyze the underlying demographic determinants of

consumers’ covariance risk, and test whether consumers with lower covariance risk (among other

characteristics) receive more credit, ceteris paribus (c.p.). We also measure the effect of the

credit scores on the amount of credit, and contrast this with the effect of covariance risk.

         There are several reasons for lenders to care about covariance risk. First, the insight of

Sharpe (1964) and Lintner (1965) applies to all assets, not just equities: In equilibrium, the

market price of a consumer loan should depend on the risk that the loan adds to the market

portfolio. If, analogously to the literature on equity investors, we take consumer lenders to be

optimizing primarily over their own asset class, in this case consumer loans, then the risk-

adjusted expected return of a consumer loan would decline as its covariance with the return on

the market portfolio of all consumer loans declines.

         Second, there are several important institutional features of the consumer credit market

that directly motivate lenders to regulate the volatility of their portfolios. Lenders typically assess

the adequacy of their capital through ‘Value-at-Risk’ calculations, which estimate the probability

that losses at the portfolio-level exceed some given threshold [e.g., see Saunders (1999)]. Indeed,

the new Basel Accord requires lenders to set their capital levels as a function of such

calculations. Also, many lenders rely on securitization to finance a large part of their loans. If

total losses in a pool of securitized loans exceed a given threshold, the securitization typically

either defaults or enters early amortization, a pre-payment risk for the lender. The portfolio risk

of the pool determines how the securitization must be structured to avoid such outcomes and

receive desired bond ratings.1 Hence the insight of Markowitz (1959) applies to the construction


1
  For instance, imagine that a lender knows, based on credit-risk scores, that the expected default rate on a pool of
consumer receivables is 5%. This is consistent with two very different scenarios: 1) in a state of the world that occurs
5% of the time (e.g. a recession), everyone in the pool defaults, and 2) everyone in the pool has an independently-


                                                                                                                      2
of portfolios of consumer loans: If a lender cares about the risk that a loan adds to his portfolio,

he should prefer loans with low covariance risk, c.p.

         Our methodology is analogous to that of the equity-pricing literature. Using individual

consumers as our unit of observation, we track their credit scores to approximate the monthly

returns experienced by their lenders. We then aggregate these individual time series into a time

series of aggregate returns on consumer loans, and compute each consumer’s ‘default beta’ as the

covariance of his individual returns with the aggregate returns. These default betas measure

consumers’ covariance risk.

         After computing the default betas, we investigate two key issues. First, is there systematic

heterogeneity in the betas across consumers? For instance, how does covariance risk vary with

income and age and with local economic conditions? The answers to such questions help

characterize the shocks hitting different types of consumers, and so are of macroeconomic

interest.2 The answers are also of interest from the point of view of a lender. A lender can directly

compute the beta of a current borrower assuming that a suitable time series of her credit usage is

available in-house. But in the absence of such a time series, a potential new borrower’s beta must

be estimated from her current characteristics. The second issue we investigate is whether

empirically lenders put some weight on covariance risk in determining the amount of credit they


distributed 5% probability of defaulting, so in all states of the world 5% of the pool defaults. In scenario 1 the
individual receivables are perfectly correlated (maximal covariance), whereas in scenario 2 they are uncorrelated.
The lender would presumably prefer scenario 2, c.p. Since a constant 5% of the pool is defaulting in every given
year, the aggregate cash flows from the pool are smooth relative to scenario 1. This makes it easier to securitize the
pool, since a claim on say the first 95% of the pool’s cash flows would pay 100 cents on the dollar no matter what.
By contrast, a lender in scenario 1 has a problem. No claim on the pool is risk-free without complete credit-
enhancement. Hence the receivables’ covariance structure determines how the pool can be carved into different
securities, and the type and amount of credit-enhancement required. The securitization market shows informal
appreciation of this covariance risk, in that a new issue’s prospectus will usually include some information regarding
the diversification of the pool, such as its distribution across geographic and other characteristics (e.g., the
age/seasoning of the debts).




                                                                                                                    3
provide. It is well known that lenders take into account a consumer’s expected probability of

default, in particular as measured by his credit score. The open question is whether consumers

with greater covariance risk obtain less credit, even controlling for their scores and other factors.

We compare the heterogeneity in covariance risk with the heterogeneity in credit risk as

measured by the credit scores, and also compare the effect on credit of covariance risk with the

effect of the credit scores. More generally, this is the first paper we know of to systematically

study the determinants of the cross-sectional distribution of credit using the comprehensive credit

bureau data.

          We obtain two key sets of results. First, there is significant systematic heterogeneity

across consumers in covariance risk. Covariance risk is higher for younger and single consumers,

lower-income consumers, those who rent rather than own, and those from states with higher rates

of divorce and lower rates of health-insurance coverage. Consumers with high covariance risk

also tend to have low credit scores (high default probabilities). Second, the amount of credit

obtained by consumers significantly increases with their credit scores, c.p. Even controlling for

the credit scores and other factors, the amount of credit significantly declines with consumers’

covariance risk, c.p.. We find declines in both non-revolving debt and especially revolving debt

such as bankcard credit, in the number of loans and in the dollar value of credit limits extended.

It appears that some lenders do take covariance risk into account, at least in part, in determining

the amount of credit they provide. Nonetheless, the effect of covariance risk on credit is much

smaller in magnitude than that of the credit scores.

          The rest of the paper is divided into five sections. Section I discusses how we extend

asset pricing theory to consumer credit. Section II describes the dataset, and Section III our

2
    Souleles (2004) finds that ‘aggregate’ macroeconomic shocks have disparate effects across different types of


                                                                                                              4
econometric methodology. Section IV reports the results, and Section V concludes.



I.       Applying Asset-Pricing Theory to Consumer Credit

         As Markowitz (1959) observes, the risk of a security that affects the risk borne by its

investors is the risk that it adds to a well-diversified portfolio.                    Consequently, risk-averse

investors should prefer securities whose payoffs covary relatively less with their current

portfolios, c.p. Sharpe (1964) and Lintner (1965) show that, in equilibrium, all investors hold the

value-weighted portfolio of all assets, and so they predict that investors prefer lower covariance

with this portfolio. Specifically, they predict that expected returns are linear in betas.

         The standard application of this covariance-pricing theory is to equities. Much of the

equity market is held through well-diversified portfolios, so it is plausible that there is greater

investor demand for stocks with a low covariance vis-à-vis the value-weighted portfolio of all

equities (i.e., for stocks with a low CAPM beta). This theory is relatively easy to test because

equity-return data are widely available. Empirical research (e.g., Fama and MacBeth (1973))

generally supports covariance-pricing: Stocks with higher CAPM betas have historically paid

higher subsequent returns on average.

         Our analysis applies this covariance-pricing intuition to consumer credit, where data has

been more scarce. Like stocks, consumer credit is also held through well-diversified portfolios.

In fact, the major components of household debt, i.e., mortgages, car loans and bankcard debt,

are held almost exclusively in portfolios with thousands or even millions of loans, so by this

measure there is even greater diversification in the consumer credit market than in the stock




households. Pesaran et al. (2004) analyze heterogeneity in credit-risk diversification across firms.


                                                                                                               5
market. This suggests that consumer lenders might prefer lending to consumers who bring a

covariance benefit to the aggregate portfolio of consumer loans.

       The equity-market literature relates expected stock returns to covariances relative to the

market portfolio of equities, which is only a subset of the market portfolio of all assets. Strictly

speaking, this is consistent with the underlying theory under the additional simplifying

assumption that equities are held by investors who hold only equities. We can motivate our

application to consumer credit analogously, by assuming that consumer loans are held by agents

who hold only (or largely) consumer loans. As discussed above, institutional features of the

consumer lending market provide independent motivation for our application.

       The equity-market literature focuses on the pricing of securities, taking the quantities of

securities to be fixed. That is, the preference for lower covariance is associated with a higher

price, not higher quantity. However, if quantities are endogenous we should expect adjustment

of both quantities and prices in equilibrium. Both are surely endogenous even in the short run in

the consumer credit market, so in this case covariance theory would predict that credit supply

increases as covariance risk declines, c.p. Indeed, the credit bureaus collect rich data on the

quantities of credit, not the prices (nor interest rates), so this is the prediction on which we focus.

       To apply covariance theory to consumer credit we need to calculate the return that a

consumer’s lenders make on their loans to him during each month. Unlike stocks, consumer debt

is not publicly marked to market. Even the credit bureaus do not directly record these returns, but

we can proxy for them by using the reported time-variation in consumers’ probability of

repayment. The change in this probability approximates the price return on loans to the

consumer.




                                                                                                      6
        Our dataset includes for each consumer monthly observations of their Fair Isaacs

Company (FICO) credit-risk score, which is the industry-standard measure of consumers’ default

risk. The credit scores aim to summarize the information in each consumer’s credit file regarding

the probability of being seriously delinquent over the next two years, where ‘seriously

delinquent’ means anything from 90+ days delinquent to bankrupt.3 In practice lenders rely very

heavily on the scores in setting their credit policy for each consumer, often using them as

summary statistics for the consumer’s credit-worthiness and profitability [Moore (1996)]. Thus

we let pi,t be the default probability implied by consumer i’s credit score as of date t.

        We can use these default probabilities to mark to market a stylized consumer credit.

Consider a consumer who has borrowed one dollar and promised to repay it at a future date, so

that the market value of the loan on date t is approximated by 1-pi,t, the current probability of

repayment. Then the return on the loan at date t is approximated by pi,t-1 - pi,t, the change in the

probability of repayment. Because it is more natural to analyze the change in p rather than -1

times the change in p, we analyze pi,t - pi,t-1. That is, we refer to changes in the probability of

default -- and ‘default betas’ -- as opposed to changes in the probability of repayment. Because

we will look at covariances between time series that have both been multiplied by -1, this

normalization is of no consequence.4



II.     Data Description

        This paper uses a unique, proprietary panel dataset of credit files from one of the major

U.S. credit bureaus, Experian. The dataset tracks approximately 100 thousand randomly sampled

3
  Gross and Souleles (2002) verify that the credit scores are very significant predictors of consumer default. Musto
(2004) analyzes additional properties of the scores.




                                                                                                                  7
consumers monthly from 1997:03 to 2000:03, a total of 37 months. (See Musto (2004) for

additional information about the dataset.)5,6

         Credit bureau files contain comprehensive summaries of the credit relationships (‘trades’)

held by each consumer. For each credit trade, there are various measures of the amount of debt

held and the repayment performance. The underlying data are obtained primarily from the

creditors, mostly financial institutions and retail lenders. Our dataset contains the partially

aggregated credit reports for each consumer that are available to and used by lenders to evaluate

whether to lend to the consumer. These reports aggregate the consumer’s individual trades into

categories reflecting different types of credit, such as mortgages, auto loans, credit cards, etc. For

each consumer-month, the dataset includes dozens of variables summarizing credit usage and

delinquency, as well as credit limits where applicable. For example, for bankcards the available

variables include “Total number of open bankcard trades,” “Total number of bankcard trades

presently 90 or more days delinquent or derogatory,” and “Total (sum) of credit limit on all open

bankcard trades.”7 There are analogous variables for the other credit categories.

         We merge this data with another, proprietary research dataset from Experian that contains

salient individual demographic characteristics such as marital status, gender, number of children,

housing status (rent vs. own), date of birth and income. This demographic information covers


4
  More generally, we need only that the p we use be linear in default probability. As noted below, this means that the
credit scores need to be transformed, because they are calibrated as a non-linear function of default probability.
5
  The sample is a geographically stratified random sample. The dataset includes an artificially generated ID variable
that allows us to cross-link the various data available for a given individual without identifying the individual.
6
  The unit of observation in the data is an individual, not a household. Thus it is not possible to study issues like risk-
sharing within households. If both members of a couple are jointly responsible for a loan, e.g. a mortgage, then the
loan will appear in both of their credit files. It is not possible to directly adjust for such joint accounts in the data,
though the analysis of credit allocations below will control for the sample members’ demographic characteristics,
including marital status and gender.
7
  Bankcards include general purpose credit cards like Visa, Mastercard, Discover, and Optima cards, as opposed to
cards from retailers. Since the unit of observation is an individual, not a trade, consumers with multiple bankcards or
multiple other trades appear in the sample just once.


                                                                                                                         8
about 80% of the credit-file sample, though some variables are populated more than others.8 We

further augment this individual-level data with measures of local economic conditions in the

region in which each consumer lives (based on state and zip codes), such as the state

unemployment and divorce rates. These individual and regional variables allow us to investigate

the underlying demographic determinants of covariance risk.

        Table 1 provides summary statistics for the main variables used in the analysis below. In

2000 the average consumer in our sample has a total of 6.6 currently open credit relationships

(AllTrades00). Of these trades, 1.7 are non-revolving trades, such as mortgage, auto, and other

installment loans (Nonrevolving00), and 4.9, the majority, are revolving trades such as credit

cards (Revolving00). The average sum of credit limits across all open bankcards (CardLimits00)

is about $18 thousand. The large standard deviations around these averages imply substantial

heterogeneity in all these measures of credit. Along the extensive margin, 92% of the sample

have at least one open credit trade (AllTrades00 > 0), with 73% having non-revolving trades and

85% having revolving trades.

        The resulting dataset is ideally suited for the purposes of this paper. Most notably it

includes the credit-risk scores, which summarize lenders’ own expectations regarding

consumers’ probabilities of default – the first moments p. We do not need to estimate these

probabilities ourselves; we use the actual (calibrated) probabilities that the lenders themselves

use. With a long time series of credit scores for each consumer, we can compute for each

consumer the covariance – a second moment – of the time series of changes in his probability of

default with the corresponding aggregate time series. Also, we have rich measures of the credit

8
 This demographic information is not part of consumers’ credit bureau files. It was obtained from a variety of public
and propriety sources, including census and marketing databases. For example, homeownership is determined from




                                                                                                                   9
obtained by each consumer, so we can test whether credit supply varies with the consumer’s

covariance risk, even controlling for his credit score and other characteristics.

         The credit score measures the likelihood of default over the next 24 months. While it is

scaled from 300-850 (with larger values representing smaller likelihoods of default), it was

originally calibrated from actual default rates. We invert this calibration to recover the underlying

default probability units. For each consumer i and month t we produce pi,t, the expected

probability of default. 9 Then ri,t ≡ pi,t - pi,t-1 is the monthly change in the probability of default.

As discussed above, with its sign reversed, ri,t proxies for the monthly return to lending to the

consumer.

         Table 1 illustrates the importance of the credit scores in the allocation of credit. The third

and fourth columns split the sample at the average score in 1999:03. Consumers with the higher

scores have much more credit in the subsequent year, along both the extensive and intensive

margins. For instance, 99% of these consumers have at least one open credit trade, compared to

85% of the low-score consumers. The high-score consumers hold almost twice as many total

trades, and over twice as many revolving trades. Their credit limits are about six times larger,

$32 thousand versus $5.5 thousand.

         The default betas that we estimate below capture the systematic component of each

consumer’s default risk. The remaining component is idiosyncratic. In principle a lender can

diversify away this idiosyncratic risk by holding a large, diversified portfolio of loans. To gauge


tax assessor and deed information, supplemented by a model predicting homeownership as a function of consumer
characteristics.
9
  We divided the initial credit scores in 1997:03 into 20 (5 percentile) bins, and then within each bin measured the
default rate over the next 24 months. As indicated by the Experian User Guide, the resulting relation is exponential.
Accordingly we regressed the log of the average default rate across bins on a cubic polynomial in the average score,
and use the resulting predicted probabilities of default for p. Consistent with the definition of the scores, we include
in default both bankruptcy and non-bankruptcy delinquency (90+ days late), conditional on not already starting in




                                                                                                                     10
the potential scope for diversification of consumer loans, we first contrast the results of holding

diversified and undiversified portfolios of various sizes. Figure 1 illustrates the distribution of

‘long-run returns’ across various portfolios, using the 3-year change in the probability of default,

ri,long = pi,2000:03 - pi,1997:03. The horizontal axis records the number of consumers in each portfolio,

the vertical axis measures the standard deviation of returns cross-sectionally across 100

portfolios of each size. The figure is analogous to well-known figures showing the effects of

diversification across stocks, sometimes constraining stock portfolios to one country or industry

[e.g., Solnik (1974)].

         The (lower) line labeled ‘random’ allocates consumers randomly across the 100

portfolios. The resulting standard deviation drops quickly with portfolio size, from about 1.6%

for a portfolio with only one consumer, to only .06% for a portfolio with six hundred consumers,

with most of the decline coming from the first few hundred consumers. This decline suggests a

large scope for diversification. Lenders do not, however, hold exactly equally weighted, random

portfolios of consumer loans. For comparison, the line labeled ‘geo-undiversified’ reflects the

geographically worst diversified portfolio, successively adding to each portfolio the consumer

with the next closest zip code in the sample.10 The standard deviation still drops quickly with

portfolio size. Nonetheless for a portfolio of size 600 it drops to only about .10%, about two-

thirds larger than for the random portfolio. This difference suggests that the costs of holding



default in 1997:03. As a robustness check we also estimated a logit model of default over the next two years as a
function of a cubic polynomial in the initial score. This produced very similar results to those below.
10
   To construct the random portfolios, within each portfolio we randomly ranked each consumer 1-600, then formed
portfolios of size 1-600 based on these ranks. We compute the mean return r*,long within each portfolio, and then
compute the cross-sectional standard deviation of r*,long across the 100 portfolios. We repeat this exercise 10 times
and graph the average results. To start each of the 100 geographically undiversified portfolios, we randomly sampled
consumers subject to the constraint that the consumer have 600 unselected consumers around him (in zip-code
space). To each of these starting portfolios we add the consumer with the closest zip code, among the remaining
consumers, to the first portfolio-member’s zip code.


                                                                                                                  11
undiversified portfolios, even large portfolios, can be significant. More generally, these results

suggest that there might be substantial systematic heterogeneity in default risk across consumers

of different characteristics, including here geographic location. It remains to be seen whether

lenders take this heterogeneity into account in extending credit.


III.    Econometric Methodology

        We begin by estimating consumers’ default betas, by computing the covariance of the

time series of each consumer’s monthly changes in default probability with the corresponding

time series for the monthly ‘aggregate’ changes in default probability. Specifically, for each

consumer i, we run the following time-series regression:

        ri,t = αi + βi r*t + εi,t ,                                                                              (1)

where r*t is the cross-sectional average of the change in default probabilities ri,t within the entire

sample in month t. The resulting coefficient βi is consumer i’s ‘default beta’. A larger default

beta represents greater covariance risk.

        Below we study how these betas affect credit supply, including the change in credit over

the final year of the sample period, 1999:03-2000:03. Accordingly, to avoid endogeneity, we

compute the betas in equation (eq.) (1) using data from the preceding part of the original sample

period, 1997:04 through 1999:03. Reducing the beta-estimation period increases the estimation

error in our betas, making it harder to find an effect of the betas on credit.11 Even so, almost a

fifth of the resulting betas are statistically significantly different, at the 5% level, from 1.0 (the




11
   To improve precision we limited the sample to consumers where the default probabilities p are available for all 24
months after the first month of the sample, i.e. 1997:04-1999:03. This retains about 94% of consumers. Hence in eq.
(1) rit is available for every month t=1997:05-1999:03 for all consumers. The results below are similar, though
sometimes less significant, on including the consumers with fewer available observations of p.


                                                                                                                  12
average beta). This suggests that the informational content of the estimated betas is relatively

high.

          We also considered a number of robustness checks in computing the default betas. For

instance, we computed analogous betas using the change in credit scores directly (Scoret - Scoret-

1),   as opposed to the change in the calibrated probabilities of default. We also used non-

overlapping, two-month changes in the default probabilities (pt - pt-2). The conclusions below are

robust to these alternatives, though sometimes somewhat weaker in magnitude using the two-

month changes because of the smaller effective sample.12

          After computing the default betas, we investigate two issues. First, is there systematic

heterogeneity in the betas? Second, do lenders take covariance risk into account in determining

the amount of credit they provide? We compare the results with analogous results using the credit

scores.

          To investigate the first issue, heterogeneity in the default betas, we estimate the following

equation, cross-sectionally across consumers i:

          βi = γ0 + γ1 Xi + εi ,                                                                                   (2)

where vector Xi includes the key demographic characteristics of consumer i available in the

dataset. These variables are flexibly specified as a series of indicator variables. To maintain

sample size, instead of dropping observations with missing demographic characteristics, we

include additional indicator variables for the missing values with the corresponding original

indicator variables then set to zero.13,14


12
   We do not include stock returns as an independent variable in eq. (1), partly due to the differences in the way that
they and our changes in default probabilities are computed. The correlation between r*t and monthly returns on the
S&P 500 stock index is negative (recall that r*t is -1 times the estimated return) but statistically insignificant.
13
   The indicator ‘DemographicsMis’ in the tables refers to a subset of the auxiliary demographic dataset, constituting
about 20% of total sample consumers (Table 1), for whom the individual-level demographic variables are mostly all


                                                                                                                    13
        We sometimes augment these individual-level demographic variables with measures of

local economic conditions in the region in which each consumer lives. Gross and Souleles (2002)

show that such economic variables can improve predictions of consumer default, even after

controlling for the credit scores. Unemployment measures the state-level unemployment rate.

This data is available monthly. Since the betas are computed using data starting in 1997:04, we

take the unemployment rate from 1997:03. This timing allows us to assess the effect of

unemployment on subsequent default behavior. It is also consistent with the point of view of a

lender who wishes to estimate betas for potential new customers using already available

information. Xi also includes the fraction of people in the state without health insurance

(Noinsurance) and the divorce rate in the state (Divorce). These variables are available only

annually, and so we take them from 1997. In specifications including the regional variables, the

standard errors are adjusted to allow for within-state correlation.15

        Other specifications replace the regional variables with state dummy variables. These

dummy variables control for all state-level geographic effects on covariance risk, including state

regulations that affect the costs of default (e.g., state bankruptcy laws), the composition of jobs


unavailable. The other indicators with the suffix ‘Mis’ identify additional missing demographic values for the
remaining consumers for whom some demographic characteristics are usually available. (The variable for number of
kids is taken from birth records and other sources that help identify the number of children when children are
present, but do not directly identify households with no children. Hence ‘KidsMis’ reflects both missing/uncertain
values and zero children.) Since these individual demographic characteristics are still sometimes not populated, for
different subsets of the sample, limiting the sample to consumers with all of their demographic characteristics
populated would eliminate about 90% of the sample. Dropping only the smaller set of consumers with
DemographicsMis=1 eliminates 20% of the sample, but nonetheless the results are similar to those below. (The main
exception is that in Table 4 beta becomes less significant for non-revolving trades.)
14
   Eq. (2) does not control for consumers’ credit scores because they are likely to be simultaneously determined with
the betas and hence endogenous. Eqs. (3) and (4) by contrast can use both the scores and the betas as independent
variables.
15
   The results below are similar using the Department of Labor’s county-level unemployment rate (substituting the
state-level rate when the county-level rate is unavailable). The divorce variable (which comes from the Department
of Health and Human Services) is missing for a few states. To avoid dropping all observations in these states, we
instead introduce a dummy variable for missing divorce data. The divorce rate is computed in per capita terms, since
the only readily available normalizing variable is state population.


                                                                                                                  14
across occupations and industries in the state, the correlation of the state business cycle with the

national business cycle, etc. The state dummies also control for all differences in average

household characteristics across states. For comparison, we re-estimate eq. (2) with the credit

score in 1999:03 as the dependent variable.

         The second issue we examine is whether lenders take some account of covariance risk in

their lending decisions, at least implicitly. To test whether default betas influence the amount of

credit obtained by consumers, and to analyze the distribution of credit more generally, we

estimate the following equation, again cross-sectionally across consumers i:

         Crediti,00 = γ0 + γ1 Scorei,99 + γ2 βi + γ3 Xi + εi ,                                                    (3)

where Crediti represents various measures of the credit granted to consumer i, and Scorei is i's

credit-risk score. The score summarizes the expected probability of default. Although lenders are

known to rely heavily on the scores in allocating credit, since the scores are not available in

traditional household datasets used in previous studies, their importance in credit supply has not

been previously systematically studied. Since larger scores imply a smaller probability of default,

we expect to find larger scores associated with more credit, c.p. We will quantify how much

credit increases with the score.16

         By contrast, less is known about the extent to which lenders also take covariance risk into

account. They might put some weight on diversifying their loans across certain characteristics,

but this weighting might be done informally, not systematically. If lenders exhibit some

16
   We use in eq. (3) the scores and not the underlying probabilities of default because lenders themselves use the
scores, not the probabilities directly. The conclusions below are robust to using cubic polynomials in the scores.
Hence the default betas are not simply picking up nonlinearities in the effect of the scores. Eq. (3) introduces the
scores linearly only for ease of exposition. Also, we report the results estimating eq. (3) by OLS, but the estimated
effects are quantitatively similar using tobit models. Since the vast majority of the sample has credit relationships,
the reported results emphasize the intensive margin using OLS. Some recent papers have analyzed the effects of
credit scores and credit quality on mortgage debt; see e.g. Pennington-Cross and Nichols (2000), Barakova et. al.
(2003), and Chomsisengphet and Elul (2004).


                                                                                                                   15
preference for consumers with low covariance risk, even after controlling for consumers’ credit

scores, the coefficient γ2 on the default beta will be negative. On the other hand, if lenders care

only about the first moment of default, then γ2 will be insignificantly different from zero.17,18

         Of course, the probabilities of default, and so the credit scores, are themselves influenced

by the amount of debt consumers hold. Covariance risk might also be affected by debt. To

minimize endogeneity, in eq. (3) the score and the beta are lagged one year relative to the

dependent variable Credit. Specifically, we measure Credit as of 2000:03 and the score as of

1999:03, while the beta was computed using information from 1997:04 to 1999:03. This timing

is also consistent with the analysis below of the change in credit over the final year of the sample

period, 1999:03-2000:03, which further helps avoid endogeneity.

         Eq. (3) will sometimes also control for Xi, the same individual-level demographic

characteristics and state dummy variables described above. Including these variables does not

imply that lenders directly condition on them in setting credit supply; the variables might simply

be correlated with other factors on which lenders condition, including e.g. application data that is

not available in the credit bureau files.19 Nonetheless we sometimes include Xi in order to test

whether any estimated effect of the default beta on credit might reflect the correlation of beta

with demographic and regional characteristics. This provides a more conservative estimate of the

effect of beta. If beta is significant even controlling for Xi, then beta contains additional

17
   To minimize the role of outliers when the estimated betas are used as independent variables, in eqs. (3) and (4)
below we drop betas with absolute values above 10. Such outliers represent only about 1-2% of the sample. In eq.
(2), which has beta as the dependent variable, we do not drop the outliers in the reported results, but we have verified
that the conclusions are not driven by outliers.
18
   Eqs. (3) and (4) do not take into account the fact that the default betas were estimated in a previous stage, and so
their reported standard error must be interpreted with some caution. Nonetheless, as noted above, measurement error
in the betas could substantially attenuate their point estimate, making it on balance harder to find that they have a
significant effect on credit.




                                                                                                                     16
information relevant for credit allocations above and beyond the heterogeneity studied in eq. (2).

On the other hand, if Xi is significant or reduces the significance of beta, it remains possible that

the demographic variables in Xi are still partly picking up aspects of covariance risk that are not

fully captured by the imperfectly measured beta. Xi also helps control for differences across

households in the demand for credit.

        The credit bureaus characterize credit relationships by type, one of the key distinctions

being revolving versus non-revolving credit. Non-revolving credit consists mostly of mortgages,

auto loans, and other installment loans. Such loans typically involve borrowing a fixed amount

against a given purchase and repaying this amount with interest over time according to a pre-

arranged schedule. By contrast, revolving loans are typically open-ended and uncollateralized.

The most important example is bankcard credit cards, which give the borrower a flexible line of

credit. In addition to having different contractual features, revolving and non-revolving loans can

differ in the type of information available to lenders, in addition to credit bureau information,

that might help them assess the covariance risk of different consumers. For both types of loans

lenders can obtain additional information at the time of application, but the application

information is typically richer for non-revolving loans. On the other hand, credit card issuers

continue to manage their credit limits over time. In doing so they can take advantage of the rich

information that they internally accumulate over time concerning the past behavior of their

customers.

        Accordingly, to allow for potential differences in the ability and practice of different

lenders to assess and put weight on consumers’ covariance risk, in eq. (3) we use different


19
   Indeed, under the Equal Credit Opportunity Act lenders cannot directly condition on certain demographic
characteristics, including gender, age and marital status, as well as race, religion and national origin.



                                                                                                       17
measures of Credit00. We distinguish the number of non-revolving and revolving trades. Since

the latter largely reflects bankcards, we also consider the dollar-magnitude of revolving credit by

studying total bankcard credit limits for each consumer. Compared to non-revolving debt, with

revolving debt one can more readily distinguish credit supply from credit demand by focusing on

credit limits as opposed to credit balances.20

          Even though the credit score and default beta used in eq. (3) are lagged, and so contain

only information available by 1999:03, some of the credit relationships recorded in the dependent

variable might have been initiated before 1999:03. To minimize any resulting endogeneity, we

also estimate the relation between credit and beta in differences:

        d(Credit)i,00 = γ0 + γ1 Crediti,99 + γ2 d(Score)i,99 + γ3 βi + γ4 βi* d(Score)i,99 + γ5 Xi + εi , (4)

where d(Credit)00 is the change in credit between 2000:03 and 1999:03. Working in differences

also controls for all individual fixed effects in the level of credit. Further, to allow the magnitude

of the change in credit to vary with the initial amount of credit, Credit99 is the starting amount of

credit in 1999:03. To allow a discontinuity for people starting without any credit, we also include

an indicator (Credit99_zero) that equals one if the amount of credit in 1999:03 is zero.

          What could prompt lenders to supply more credit to a given consumer? One of the most

important factors would be an increase in her credit score. Accordingly the independent variables

include the change in the score. To avoid endogeneity the change is lagged, and computed over

the prior two-year period over which the beta was also computed: d(Score)i,99 = Score99:03 –

Score97:03. This timing treats the beta and the score symmetrically. It is also consistent with the

point of view of a lender who, in considering in 1999 whether to extend credit to consumer i,

considers variables potentially available at the time.

20
     E.g., see Gross and Souleles (2002a). The results for bankcard limits below are similar on also controlling for


                                                                                                                 18
         For a given change in the credit score, the resulting change in credit might vary with the

consumer’s default beta. Hence eq. (4) also includes the interaction of beta with the change in

score, βi*d(Score)i,99, as well as the beta directly. If consumers with larger default betas receive

smaller increases in credit for the same increase in their scores, then the coefficient γ4 on the

interaction term would be negative. Such a result would be especially suggestive that lenders

give some consideration to covariance risk in allocating credit, since eq. (4) controls for both beta

and the change in the score separately (and sometimes also for the demographic characteristics

and state dummies in Xi).21


IV.      Results

         We begin by analyzing the estimated default betas. Is there systematic heterogeneity in

the betas across consumers, which lenders can potentially take into account in supplying credit?

We next proceed to analyze the actual supply of credit. Do consumers with greater covariance

risk obtain less credit, even controlling for their expected probability of default (as measured by

the credit scores) and other factors?

         Table 2 presents tests for heterogeneity in the estimated default betas, following eq. (2).

As a starting point, column (1) considers only individual-level demographic characteristics. The

omitted demographic categories are low income (below $25 thousand), young (below age 30),

unmarried, female, one child, one adult, renter, and not a business owner. The indicator variables




bankcard balances in eq. (3), and for the change in balances in eq. (4), despite the potential endogeneity of balances.
21
   One could additionally consider in eq. (4) the effect of a change in beta, but it cannot be readily estimated in the
data. E.g., betas estimated over two-year windows will be slow to adjust over time, and 1999:03-2000:03 would be a
short period for estimating the updated value of beta. Similarly in eq. (3), one could consider the effect on credit of
the ‘contemporaneous’ beta, instrumenting for it with a lagged beta, but it is difficult to estimate a contemporaneous
beta corresponding to Credit00 at the point in time 2000:03.


                                                                                                                    19
for missing or unknown demographic values are labeled with the suffix ‘Mis’.22 The

demographic variables are jointly statistically significant, and many are individually significant.

Starting at the top of the column, the default betas significantly decline with income. The beta of

a high-income consumer (above $50 thousand) is about 0.24 smaller than that of a low-income

consumer, c.p. Relative to the average beta of 1.0, this effect is also economically significant.

The betas also decline monotonically with age, with the effect large in magnitude. Consumers

aged 60 and above have average betas about .42-.56 smaller than those of young consumers.

Hence high-income and older consumers exhibit less covariance risk – they are less likely to

default when the aggregate default rate is high, and vice versa, relative to other consumers. The

betas are also smaller for consumers who are married, female, have children, or own their homes.

By contrast, business ownership is insignificant, but that might be driven by the small incidence

of business ownership reported in the data.

           Column (2) instead considers regional economic conditions in the state in which the

consumer lives. These conditions are measured as of 1997, in order to see their effect on the

default betas, which were estimated over 1997-1999. The regional variables are jointly

significant. The betas significantly increase with the fraction of people in the state lacking health

insurance and with the divorce rate in the state. The coefficient on the state unemployment rate is

also positive, though insignificant. Hence, in addition to increasing the probability of default, as

previously studied, adverse regional conditions also tend to increase covariance risk. Column (3)

includes both the individual and regional characteristics. The results are qualitatively similar to

those in the previous columns, though the divorce rate is less significant in conjunction with the

individual controls.

22
     Recall that for missing values the corresponding original indicator variables are set to zero, so the coefficients on


                                                                                                                       20
         Column (4) replaces the regional controls with state dummy variables, which control for

all state-level geographic effects on covariance risk. The (unconditional) sample average default

betas vary substantially across states, ranging from about .7 in Vermont and Alaska to about 1.3

in Delaware. Generally the betas tend to be larger in the South and smaller in New England.23 In

column (4) of Table 2 the state dummies (not shown) are jointly statistically significant. That is,

even controlling for the available individual-level characteristics, the betas still vary significantly

across states. Nevertheless the individual characteristics remain significant.

         For comparison, column (5) repeats the specification of column (3) using the credit score

in 1999 as the dependent variable instead of the default beta. It is important to recognize that the

score does not directly condition on the individual and regional demographic control variables

used here. (Indeed, the controls come from different datasets.) Instead, the results simply reflect

reduced-form correlations between these demographic characteristics and the credit bureau

information predictive of default that is used in constructing the scores (mostly debt holdings and

repayment histories).24 Because they tend to be less likely to default, high-income, older, married,

and home-owning consumers have significantly larger scores. Scores also tend to be greater in

states with lower rates of unemployment, divorce, and lack of health insurance, though only the

latter is statistically significant.25




the ‘Mis’ indicators should be interpreted relative to the omitted categories.
23
   In light of the smaller bin sizes, these unconditional results by state drop outliers in the betas, as in Tables 3 and 4.
24
   According to Fair Isaacs, about 35% of the score reflects measures of payment history, 30% amounts owed, 15%
length of credit history, 10% new credits applied for, and 10% other factors such as the mix of credit types. The
scores are not functions of demographic characteristics like gender and marital status disallowed under the Equal
Credit Opportunity Act [Fair Isaacs (2005)].
25
   The significance of regional shocks might vary with the sample period. Our sample period ends before the 2001
recession, so there might not be enough variation in unemployment in the sample to attain significance in Table 2.
By contrast, Gross and Souleles (2002) found that cross-state differences in unemployment rates were correlated
with consumer bankruptcy probabilities over their 1995-97 sample period.


                                                                                                                         21
         Notably, the effects of the demographic characteristics on the scores in column (5)

usually have the opposite sign as their effects on the default betas in column (3). For instance,

younger and lower-income consumers tend to have both lower scores and higher betas, and so

might receive less credit for both reasons. Hence, consumers who are risky in terms of their

default probability (the first moment p) also tend to have greater covariance risk (the second

moment β). This could reflect the possibility that consumers who are near the edge of default

(with large p) are very vulnerable to aggregate shocks, whereas those far from default might face

more idiosyncratic shocks. As a result, the betas and the scores overall have a negative

correlation (of about -.2 and significant), as is also evident in Table 1.26

         In all columns in Table 2 the R2 is relatively small, indicating that the individual and

regional characteristics explain only a small fraction of the cross-sectional variation in the credit

scores and estimated default betas. This could partly reflect measurement error in the

demographic characteristics. The R2 is much smaller for the betas however, which could reflect

the imprecision in their estimation.27 Nonetheless the individual and regional variables are jointly

statistically very significant in explaining the betas in columns (1)-(4). We conclude that there is

significant systematic heterogeneity across consumers in their default betas.

         Table 3 tests whether the differences in consumers’ default betas affect the amount of

credit they actually receive. The four pairs of columns consider the total number of credit trades,

the number of non-revolving and revolving trades, and total credit card limits for each consumer,

respectively. Following eq. (3), to minimize endogeneity credit is measured as of 2000

26
  Suppose consumer i's probability of default can be described as Pit = δi + γiYt, where δi captures his average
probability of default, and γi his sensitivity to an aggregate state variable Y such as the business cycle (consistent
with heterogeneity in the default betas). These results are consistent with δi and γi being positively correlated.




                                                                                                                         22
(Credit00), whereas the credit score is taken from 1999 and the default beta is computed over

1997-1999. Table 3 begins with the total number of trades, AllTrades00. Column (1) includes as

independent variables only the credit score and beta. The score has a large, positive effect on the

number of trades. This effect is highly significant, with a t-ratio above 100. Cross-sectionally,

increasing the score by one standard deviation (about 0.9) increases the number of trades on

average by about 2 (≈ .9*2.095), c.p. Since the average number of trades is under 7, this effect is

also economically quite significant. As expected, credit scores play an important role in the

allocation of credit. The coefficient on the default beta is also significant, with a negative sign.

Consumers with greater covariance risk do in fact obtain less credit, even controlling for their

expected probability of default. Cross-sectionally, a one standard deviation increase in beta

(about 2.5 in this sample) reduces the total number of trades by about 0.22. While this effect is

much smaller than that due to the score, it is nonetheless statistically significant.

        Column (2) adds the individual-level demographic characteristics and state dummies (not

shown). The individual and state variables are each jointly significant, though less so than the

credit score. Ceteris paribus, the number of trades increases with income, and exhibits an

inverted-U shape life-cycle profile in age, peaking in the 50s. These effects are large in

magnitude, with high-income and middle-aged (50-59) consumers having about 1.3 more trades

on average than low-income and young consumers. The number of trades is also larger for

consumers who are married and have larger households. Homeowners and business-owners also

hold significantly more trades.




27
   Tables 3 and 4 below will control for the same demographic characteristics as in Table 2. Hence the significance
of beta in Tables 3 and 4 implies that the variation in beta unexplained in Table 2 cannot reflect only measurement
error.


                                                                                                                23
       Adding the demographic characteristics and state dummies increases the R2 somewhat

relative to column (1), but as already explained this does not imply that lenders directly condition

on these variables. Moreover these variables can of course also capture differences across

consumers in the demand for credit, not just in the supply of credit. Nonetheless, controlling for

the individual and state variables has little effect on the coefficients for beta and the score.

       Columns (3) and (4) show analogous results for only non-revolving trades. The pattern of

coefficients is qualitatively similar to that for all trades, except for gender and an earlier peak in

the effect of age. Beta again has a significant negative effect.

       Columns (5) and (6) instead isolate only revolving trades. The results are quantitatively

similar to those in the first two columns for all trades. This is not surprising since the majority of

total trades are revolving. The coefficient on beta for revolving trades (column (5)) is almost four

times that for non-revolving trades (column (3)), a somewhat larger effect than the ratio of

revolving to non-revolving trades. Moreover, the R2 for revolving trades is much larger. While

the demographic controls provide relatively less incremental explanatory power for revolving

trades (columns (6) relative to (5) versus columns (4) relative to (3)), the default betas and

especially the credit scores are relatively more significant in explaining revolving trades

(columns (5) versus (3)).

       Columns (7) and (8) instead consider total credit card limits. In column (7) the credit

score has a significant and large, positive effect on credit. Cross-sectionally, increasing the score

by one standard deviation increases average credit limits by about $13 thousand. The default beta

again has a significant negative effect. A one standard deviation increase in beta reduces credit

limits by almost $900, a substantial amount. Column (8) adds the individual characteristics and

state dummies, which again are each jointly significant. The pattern of signs on the coefficients is


                                                                                                   24
qualitatively similar to that in column (2). The demographic effects are often large in magnitude.

The credit limits of high-income and middle-aged consumers are $8-12 thousand larger on

average than those of low-income and young consumers, c.p. Homeowners and business owners

also have relatively large credit limits.

        Overall, the results of Table 3 suggest that lenders put some weight, at least implicitly, on

covariance risk in their decisions about credit allocation, though much less weight than on the

credit scores. Moreover, given the negative correlation between the score and the default beta

(and the imprecision in estimating the beta), by regulating the score lenders also indirectly

regulate their covariance risk at the same time. To illustrate the potential effect of the correlation

between the two measures of risk, one can re-estimate eq. (3) without the credit score. This

significantly increases the magnitude of the estimated coefficients on beta, by almost half for

non-revolving debt in column (3) and by about three times for revolving debt in columns (5) and

(7).

        Table 4 instead investigates the relation between credit and beta in differences, following

eq. (4). In columns (1) and (2) the dependent variable is the change between 1999-2000 in the

number of total trades, d(All Trades)00. To control for factors motivating the change in credit,

we control for the change in the consumer’s credit score over the previous period

(d(Creditscore)99), and focus on the interaction of beta with the change in score

(d(Score)99*Beta99). For a given increase in the score, we test whether the resulting increase in

credit is smaller for consumers with a larger default beta.

        The dependent variables include the lagged, starting number of trades in 1999 (Credit99),

as well as an indicator (Credit99_zero) that equals one if the number of trades in 1999 starts at

zero. In column (1), the lagged number of trades has a significant negative coefficient. Thus the


                                                                                                   25
increase in credit is smaller for consumers starting with a greater amount of credit, suggesting

some mean reversion in the reported amount of credit across consumers. On the other hand, the

indicator for zero credit also has a significant negative coefficient, consistent with a potential

discontinuity at zero: Consumers starting with no credit receive relatively less credit going

forward.

       The coefficient on the change in the credit score is significantly positive, with a large t-

ratio of about 40. To interpret its effect, consider a consumer with a beta of zero. If her score

increases by .6 (the cross-sectional standard deviation in d(Creditscore)), over the next year this

would boost her number of trades by, on average, (0.6)(0.628) ≈ .38, c.p. Even when estimated in

differences using only within-consumer variation, the score continues to have a substantial effect

on the amount of credit, even within a short period of 12 months. Nonetheless the coefficient on

the default beta is significantly negative, implying that consumers with greater covariance risk on

average experience smaller increases in credit over time. Notably, the interaction of beta with the

change in score has a significant negative effect. For a given increase in the score, consumers

with higher covariance risk do in fact receive a smaller increase in credit. Consider for

comparison a second consumer, same as the first except that his beta is not zero but 2.5, one

standard deviation higher. Even with no change in his credit score, the growth in his number of

trades would be lower on average by (2.5)(0.019) ≈ 0.048, c.p. If his score increases by .6, this

would have the additional effect of boosting his number of trades by, on average, .38-

(0.6)(2.5)(0.029) ≈ 0.333, c.p. So overall after a .6 increase in score, the second consumer would

experience over the next year a net increase in trades of 0.333-0.048 ≈ 0.29, which is about 25%

less than the first consumer facing the same increase in score.




                                                                                                26
       Column (2) adds the individual demographic characteristics and state dummies, which are

again each jointly significant. For instance, the change in the number of trades between 1999 and

2000 is on average greater for higher-income consumers, but smaller for older consumers.

Nonetheless the coefficients on both beta and the interaction of beta with the change in score

remain significant and negative. Moreover, the R2 starts large at .31 in column (1) and increases

very little in column (2). Hence, after differencing out fixed effects in the level of credit, much

more of the variation in the change in credit is accounted for by the covariates in column (1),

especially the change in score and its interaction with beta, than by the demographic controls.

       In columns (3) and (4), for non-revolving trades, while the effects of beta and its

interaction term remain negative in sign, the interaction term is less statistically significant,

especially in column (4). By contrast, in columns (5) and (6) for revolving trades, both beta and

its interaction term are significantly negative. The patterns of the other coefficients in columns

(3)-(6) are generally qualitatively similar to those in columns (1) and (2).

       In column (7) for total bankcard limits, beta and the interaction term again have

significant negative effects. For a consumer with zero beta, if her score increases by .6, over the

next year her credit limits would increase on average by about $1000, c.p. For an otherwise

similar consumer with a one standard deviation larger beta, the resulting increase in limits,

including both the interacted and uninteracted effect of beta, would be only about $200,

substantially smaller. In column (8) the pattern of demographic coefficients is generally

qualitatively similar to that in column (2), with the exception that the effect of age is positive.

       Overall, the results of Table 4 imply that consumers with greater covariance risk obtain

significantly less credit over time. Covariance risk appears to be particularly important for




                                                                                                      27
revolving credit. This could reflect the fact that providers of revolving credit have available a rich

prior performance history for their borrowers.



V.      Conclusion

        This paper takes a portfolio view of consumer credit. It uses a unique credit bureau

dataset to estimate the covariance risk of individual consumers and to analyze its underlying

demographic determinants, as well as more generally the determinants of the cross-sectional

distribution of credit, including the credit scores.

        We obtain two key sets of results. First, there is significant systematic heterogeneity

across consumers in covariance risk. Covariance risk tends to be higher for younger and single

consumers, lower-income consumers, those who rent rather than own, and those from states with

higher rates of divorce and lower rates of health-insurance coverage. Consumers with high

covariance risk also tend to have low credit scores (high default probabilities). Second, the

amount of credit obtained by consumers significantly increases with their credit scores, and,

especially for revolving credit, significantly decreases with their covariance risk. This conclusion

holds both in levels (in the cross-section) and in differences (for given consumers over time). It

appears that some lenders assess borrowers’ covariance risk, at least implicitly, and put some

weight on it in determining the amount of credit they provide. Nonetheless the effect of

covariance risk on credit is much smaller in magnitude than that of the credit scores, suggesting

the possibility that lenders might benefit from more systematic and quantitative consideration of

covariance risk.




                                                                                                   28
References

Barakova, I., R. W. Bostic, P.S. Calem, and S.M. Wachter, 2003, “Does Credit Quality Matter
      for Homeownership,” Journal of Housing Economics, 12, pp. 318-336.

Chomsisengphet, S. and R. Elul, 2004, “Bankruptcy Exemptions, Credit History, and the
      Mortgage Market,” working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, 04-14R.

Fair Isaacs, 2005, “Your Credit Scores.”

Fama, E. F., and J. D. MacBeth, 1973, “Risk, Return and Equilibrium: Empirical Tests,” Journal
      of Political Economy, 71, May-June, pp. 607-636.

Federal Reserve System, Board of Governors, 2001, Flow of Funds Accounts of the United
       States.

Gorton, G., and N.S. Souleles, 2004, “Securitization and Special Purpose Vehicles,” working paper,
       University of Pennsylvania.

Gross, D., and N.S. Souleles, 2002, “An Empirical Analysis of Personal Bankruptcy and
       Delinquency,” Review of Financial Studies, 15(1), Spring, pp. 319-347.

Gross, D., and N.S. Souleles, 2002a, “Do Liquidity Constraints and Interest Rates Matter for
       Consumer Behavior? Evidence from Credit Card Data,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
       117(1), February, pp. 149-185.

Lintner, J., 1965, “The Valuation of Risk Assets and the Selection of Risky Investments in Stock
       Portfolios and Capital Budgets,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 47, February, pp.
       13-37.

Markowitz, H.M., 1959, Portfolio Selection: Efficient Diversification of Investments.      John
     Wiley, New York.

Moore, M., 1996, “Credit Scoring’s Uses Expand as It Gains Acceptance,” The American
      Banker, p. 4A.

Musto, D.K., 2004, “What Happens when Information Leaves a Market? Evidence from Post-
       Bankruptcy Consumers,” Journal of Business, 77(4), pp. 725-748.

Pennington-Cross, A., and J. Nichols, “Credit History and the FHA-Conventional Choice,” Real
      Estate Economics, 28(2), pp. 307-336.

Pesaran, M. H., T. Schuermann, and B.-J. Treutler, 2004, “The Role of Industry, Geography and
       Firm Heterogeneity in Credit Risk Diversification,” working paper.




                                                                                              29
Saunders, A., 1999, Credit Risk Management. John Wiley & Sons, New York.

Sharpe, W. F., 1964, “Capital Asset Prices: A Theory of Market Equilibrium under Conditions of
       Risk,” Journal of Finance, 19, September, pp. 425-442.

Solnik, B.H., 1974, “Why Not Diversify Internationally Rather Than Domestically?” Financial
       Analysts Journal, July-August, pp. 48-54.

Souleles, N.S., 2004, “Expectations, Heterogeneous Forecast Errors, and Consumption: Micro
  Evidence from the Michigan Consumer Sentiment Surveys,” Journal of Money, Credit, and
  Banking, 36(1), February, pp. 39-72.




                                                                                           30
Figure 1: Diversified vs. Undiversified Credit Portfolios


                                    0.006


                                    0.005
    s.d.(r) across 100 portfolios




                                    0.004
                                                                                           random                 geo-undiversified
                                    0.003


                                    0.002


                                    0.001


                                       0
                                            10
                                                 45
                                                      80
                                                           115
                                                                 150
                                                                       185
                                                                             220
                                                                                   255
                                                                                         290
                                                                                               325
                                                                                                     360
                                                                                                           395
                                                                                                                 430
                                                                                                                       465
                                                                                                                             500
                                                                                                                                   535
                                                                                                                                         570
                                                                 # of consumers in portfolio


Notes: The vertical axis records the standard deviation of 'long-run returns' r*,long, cross-sectionally across
100 portfolios of the size indicated on the horizontal axis (averaged over 10 replications). The random
portfolio adds consumers randomly in building the portfolios, the geo-undiversified portfolio successively
adds the consumers in the sample with the next closest zip code. For clarity, the horizontal axis shows
portfolios of size 10 and above.
 Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                                                      Creditscore99
                                   Mean          S.D.              Low             High

                   AllTrades00     6.66          5.32             4.59             8.79
               Nonrevolving00      1.77          1.80             1.55             1.99
                   Revolving00     4.89          4.53             3.05             6.80
          CardLimits00 ($1000)     18.65         32.97             5.53            32.19
                AllTrades00 >0     0.92          0.28             0.85             0.99
            Nonrevolving00 >0      0.73          0.44             0.66             0.80
               Revolving00 >0      0.85          0.36             0.73             0.98
              CardLimits00 >0      0.75          0.43             0.59             0.92
                 Creditscore99     6.45          0.92             5.66             7.25
                         Beta99    1.00          2.96             1.50             0.49
                  Income25-50      0.55          0.50             0.59             0.51
                    Income50+      0.30          0.46             0.23             0.36
                    IncomeMis      0.01          0.09             0.01             0.01
                     Age30_39      0.19          0.39             0.20             0.18
                     Age40_49      0.19          0.39             0.18             0.20
                     Age50_59      0.13          0.34             0.11             0.16
                     Age60_69      0.06          0.24             0.04             0.08
                        Age70+     0.04          0.21             0.03             0.06
                        AgeMis     0.10          0.30             0.10             0.09
                        Married    0.31          0.46             0.25             0.37
                    MarriedMis     0.13          0.34             0.13             0.14
                       SexMale     0.50          0.50             0.49             0.51
                        SexMis     0.25          0.43             0.22             0.27
                          Kids2    0.05          0.22             0.04             0.06
                         Kids3+    0.03          0.16             0.02             0.03
                        KidsMis    0.61          0.49             0.59             0.64
                        Adults2    0.24          0.43             0.22             0.26
                       Adults3+    0.35          0.48             0.31             0.40
                     Homeown       0.40          0.49             0.31             0.49
              HomeownMaybe         0.16          0.37             0.16             0.17
                 HomeownMis        0.21          0.41             0.26             0.16
                        Busown     0.011         0.11             0.009            0.014
             DemographicsMis       0.20          0.40             0.25             0.16
                Unemployment       5.10          1.01             5.14             5.05
                      Noinsure     16.74         4.49             17.13            16.34
                        Divorce    0.40          0.19             0.41             0.39
                    DivorceMis     0.12          0.33             0.12             0.13

Notes: The sample corresponds to that in Table 2. (N = 87,013, but sample size for individual variables
may vary with missing values.) The omitted demographic categories are low income (below $25
thousand), young (below 30), unmarried, female, one child, one adult, renter, and not a business owner.
‘DemographicsMis’ is a dummy variable indicating that most demographic variables are missing.
Additional missing or unknown demographic values are labeled with the suffix ‘Mis’. ‘KidsMis’ reflects both
missing values and 0 children. HomeownMaybe is predicted homeownership. State divorce rate is in per
capita terms. Creditscore is the FICO credit bureau score/100. Credit limits are in $1000s. AllTrades00 >0
is an indicator for having a positive numbers of trades, etc. Columns (3) and (4) split the sample at the
average credit score of 6.45.
Table 2: Heterogeneity in the Default Beta

                                         (1)                          (2)                            (3)                          (4)
                                      Individual                    Regional               Individual and Regional      Individual Demographics
                                    Demographics                  Demographics                  Demographics                w/ State Dummies

                             coef        s.e.      p-val   coef       s.e.       p-val    coef      s.e.       p-val    coef     s.e.      p-val
          Income25-50       -0.084      0.030      0.005                                 -0.086    0.033      0.011    -0.078   0.030      0.010
            Income50+       -0.235      0.033      0.000                                 -0.227    0.039      0.000    -0.247   0.034      0.000
             IncomeMis      -0.318      0.113      0.005                                 -0.131    0.126      0.304    -0.201   0.116      0.082
              Age30_39      -0.123      0.043      0.004                                 -0.130    0.044      0.005    -0.125   0.043      0.003
              Age40_49      -0.165      0.043      0.000                                 -0.167    0.040      0.000    -0.168   0.043      0.000
              Age50_59      -0.189      0.046      0.000                                 -0.192    0.044      0.000    -0.190   0.046      0.000
              Age60_69      -0.422      0.054      0.000                                 -0.437    0.046      0.000    -0.429   0.054      0.000
                Age70+      -0.558      0.060      0.000                                 -0.562    0.060      0.000    -0.569   0.060      0.000
                AgeMis      -0.185      0.048      0.000                                 -0.190    0.052      0.001    -0.197   0.048      0.000
                Married     -0.137      0.033      0.000                                 -0.129    0.030      0.000    -0.124   0.033      0.000
            MarriedMis      -0.017      0.040      0.681                                 -0.018    0.032      0.584    -0.018   0.040      0.650
               SexMale      0.062       0.027      0.021                                  0.065    0.034      0.058    0.062    0.027      0.019
                SexMis      0.020       0.034      0.552                                  0.025    0.043      0.554    0.020    0.034      0.551
                  Kids2     -0.114      0.055      0.037                                 -0.105    0.039      0.010    -0.107   0.055      0.051
                 Kids3+     -0.070      0.069      0.314                                 -0.057    0.081      0.484    -0.064   0.069      0.355
                KidsMis     -0.021      0.035      0.534                                 -0.025    0.033      0.464    -0.020   0.035      0.570
                Adults2     0.013       0.037      0.726                                  0.001    0.037      0.978    0.004    0.037      0.909
               Adults3+     0.033       0.039      0.390                                  0.022    0.032      0.504    0.019    0.039      0.623
              Homeown       -0.203      0.070      0.004                                 -0.210    0.102      0.045    -0.190   0.071      0.007
        HomeownMaybe        -0.069      0.072      0.343                                 -0.074    0.111      0.505    -0.050   0.073      0.490
          HomeownMis        0.063       0.072      0.381                                  0.049    0.114      0.669    0.076    0.072      0.294
                Busown      -0.004      0.095      0.970                                 -0.020    0.084      0.817    -0.019   0.095      0.839
       DemographicsMis      -0.088      0.087      0.315                                 -0.100    0.112      0.374    -0.089   0.088      0.309
         Unemployment                                      0.022     0.019    0.257       0.024    0.019      0.222
               Noinsure                                    0.015     0.004    0.001       0.013    0.004      0.002
                Divorce                                    0.358     0.109    0.002       0.255    0.137      0.069
            DivorceMis                                     0.239     0.069    0.001       0.197    0.078      0.015
                   cons     1.379       0.088      0.000   0.468     0.123    0.000       0.935    0.170      0.000

         (Adj.) R-squared              0.0059                        0.0011                        0.0069                       0.0082
                     Obs.              87,013                        85,961                        85,961                       87,013
Table 2: Heterogeneity in the Default Beta (ctd)

                                      (5)
                                Credit Score
                              on Demographics

                           coef       s.e.     p-val
         Income25-50       0.127     0.016    0.000
           Income50+       0.340     0.021    0.000
            IncomeMis      0.293     0.048    0.000
             Age30_39      0.121     0.012    0.000
             Age40_49      0.194     0.014    0.000
             Age50_59      0.357     0.021    0.000
             Age60_69      0.573     0.020    0.000
               Age70+      0.726     0.030    0.000
               AgeMis      0.233     0.017    0.000
               Married     0.110     0.008    0.000
           MarriedMis      0.007     0.008    0.440
              SexMale     -0.016     0.013    0.224
               SexMis      0.015     0.007    0.041
                 Kids2     0.060     0.019    0.002
                Kids3+     0.061     0.027    0.026
               KidsMis     0.028     0.013    0.034
               Adults2     0.012     0.012    0.344
              Adults3+    -0.036     0.008    0.000
             Homeown       0.230     0.021    0.000
       HomeownMaybe        0.125     0.022    0.000
         HomeownMis       -0.085     0.024    0.001
               Busown     -0.030     0.027    0.268
      DemographicsMis      0.154     0.031    0.000
        Unemployment      -0.004     0.012    0.701
              Noinsure    -0.015     0.002    0.000
               Divorce    -0.067     0.112    0.550
           DivorceMis     -0.083     0.066    0.218
                  cons     6.223     0.071    0.000

       (Adj.) R-squared             0.1058
                   Obs.             85,961
Notes: See eq. (2). In columns (1)-(4), the dependent variable is the Default Beta, computed over 1997:04-1999:03. In column (5), it is the Creditscore, from
1999:03. See Table 1 for description of the independent variables. Regional demographics are taken from 1997 (3/1997 for unemployment). Column (4) includes
state dummies (not shown). Columns (2), (3) and (5), with state demographics, adjust the standard errors for within-state correlation and report the unadjusted R-
squared.
Table 3: The Amount of Credit and the Default Beta -- Levels


                                             All Trades00                                        Nonrevolving Trades00
                                    (1)                       (2)                         (3)                         (4)
              Credit00                               w/ demographic controls                                 w/ demographic controls


                          coef      s.e.     p-val     coef     s.e.    p-val    coef     s.e.      p-val     coef        s.e.   p-val
        Creditscore99     2.095    0.019    0.000    1.859     0.019    0.000   0.152    0.007      0.000   0.110        0.007   0.000
                Beta99   -0.087    0.007    0.000    -0.083    0.007    0.000   -0.019   0.002      0.000   -0.017       0.002   0.000
         Income25-50                                  0.550    0.050    0.000                               0.136        0.018   0.000
           Income50+                                  1.354    0.056    0.000                               0.353        0.020   0.000
            IncomeMis                                 0.867    0.189    0.000                               0.077        0.068   0.259
             Age30_39                                 0.466    0.070    0.000                               0.072        0.025   0.005
             Age40_49                                 1.034    0.070    0.000                               0.074        0.025   0.004
             Age50_59                                 1.338    0.075    0.000                               -0.007       0.027   0.789
             Age60_69                                 0.398    0.090    0.000                               -0.436       0.033   0.000
               Age70+                                -1.000    0.099    0.000                               -0.868       0.036   0.000
               AgeMis                                 0.708    0.079    0.000                               0.158        0.029   0.000
               Married                                0.247    0.054    0.000                               0.093        0.020   0.000
           MarriedMis                                -0.078    0.066    0.235                               -0.065       0.024   0.006
              SexMale                                -0.415    0.044    0.000                               0.245        0.016   0.000
               SexMis                                 0.005    0.056    0.924                               -0.050       0.020   0.014
                 Kids2                                0.350    0.089    0.000                               0.065        0.032   0.045
                Kids3+                                0.265    0.113    0.019                               -0.028       0.041   0.485
               KidsMis                               -0.198    0.057    0.000                               -0.073       0.020   0.000
               Adults2                                0.115    0.061    0.061                               0.067        0.022   0.003
              Adults3+                                0.203    0.064    0.001                               0.070        0.023   0.002
             Homeown                                  1.424    0.116    0.000                               0.911        0.042   0.000
      HomeownMaybe                                    0.290    0.119    0.015                               0.386        0.043   0.000
        HomeownMis                                    0.015    0.118    0.897                               0.314        0.043   0.000
               Busown                                 1.106    0.156    0.000                               0.307        0.057   0.000
     DemographicsMis                                  0.340    0.144    0.018                               0.314        0.052   0.000
                  cons   -7.073    0.122    0.000                               0.808    0.045      0.000

        Adj. R-squared             0.136                       0.189                     0.007                           0.073
                  Obs.             85,903                      85,903                    85,903                      85,903
 Table 3: The Amount of Credit and the Default Beta -- Levels (ctd)


                                           Revolving Trades00                                      Credit Card Limits00
                                   (5)                        (6)                          (7)                         (8)
             Credit00                                w/ demographic controls                                  w/ demographic controls


                          coef     s.e.      p-val    coef       s.e.    p-val    coef     s.e.       p-val    coef        s.e.    p-val
        Creditscore99     1.943   0.016     0.000     1.749     0.016    0.000   14.277   0.116      0.000    12.509      0.119    0.000
                Beta99   -0.069   0.006     0.000    -0.066     0.006    0.000   -0.349   0.042      0.000    -0.329      0.041    0.000
         Income25-50                                 0.415      0.042    0.000                                 2.013      0.307    0.000
           Income50+                                 1.002      0.047    0.000                                 8.174      0.346    0.000
            IncomeMis                                0.789      0.160    0.000                                 1.514      1.166    0.194
             Age30_39                                0.394      0.059    0.000                                 2.428      0.432    0.000
             Age40_49                                0.960      0.059    0.000                                 7.530      0.434    0.000
             Age50_59                                1.345      0.064    0.000                                12.615      0.466    0.000
             Age60_69                                0.834      0.076    0.000                                 9.266      0.554    0.000
               Age70+                                -0.132     0.083    0.113                                 2.833      0.608    0.000
               AgeMis                                0.551      0.067    0.000                                 6.538      0.490    0.000
               Married                               0.153      0.046    0.001                                 1.506      0.334    0.000
           MarriedMis                                -0.013     0.056    0.816                                -0.247      0.408    0.545
              SexMale                                -0.660     0.037    0.000                                 2.923      0.270    0.000
               SexMis                                0.055      0.047    0.241                                 0.901      0.343    0.009
                 Kids2                               0.285      0.075    0.000                                 0.824      0.550    0.134
                Kids3+                               0.293      0.095    0.002                                 1.611      0.695    0.020
               KidsMis                               -0.126     0.048    0.009                                -0.887      0.349    0.011
               Adults2                               0.048      0.052    0.354                                -0.152      0.377    0.686
              Adults3+                               0.133      0.054    0.013                                 0.878      0.393    0.025
             Homeown                                 0.513      0.098    0.000                                 4.731      0.715    0.000
      HomeownMaybe                                   -0.095     0.101    0.345                                 1.900      0.736    0.010
        HomeownMis                                   -0.299     0.100    0.003                                 0.191      0.729    0.794
               Busown                                0.798      0.132    0.000                                 7.269      0.963    0.000
     DemographicsMis                                 0.026      0.121    0.832                                 5.423      0.887    0.000
                  cons   -7.567   0.104     0.000                                -73.06   0.762      0.000

        Adj. R-squared            0.159                         0.203                     0.159                           0.201
                 Obs.             85,903                        85,903                    85,903                          85,903

Notes: See eq. (3). The dependent variable, Credit00, is from 2000:03. The Creditscore is from 1999:03, and Beta is computed over 1997:04 -
1999:03. Demographic controls include state dummies.
Table 4: The Amount of Credit and the Default Beta -- Changes


                                             d(All Trades)00                                  d(Nonrevolving Trades)00
                                    (1)                         (2)                        (3)                        (4)
                                                          w/ demographic                                       w/ demographic
             dCredit00                                        controls                                             controls


                           coef      s.e.    p-val    coef       s.e.    p-val    coef     s.e.    p-val    coef     s.e.    p-val
               Credit99   -0.253   0.001    0.000    -0.258     0.001    0.000   -0.280   0.003    0.000   -0.292   0.003    0.000
         Credit99_zero    -0.285   0.039    0.000    -0.224     0.038    0.000   -0.081   0.012    0.000   -0.043   0.012    0.000
       d(Creditscore)99    0.628   0.016    0.000    0.627      0.016    0.000    0.119   0.008    0.000   0.113    0.008    0.000
                 Beta99   -0.019   0.003    0.000    -0.017     0.003    0.000   -0.004   0.002    0.008   -0.004   0.002    0.021
     d(Score)99*Beta99    -0.029   0.005    0.000    -0.027     0.005    0.000   -0.005   0.002    0.057   -0.004   0.002    0.105
          Income25-50                                 0.152     0.026    0.000                              0.051   0.012    0.000
            Income50+                                 0.181     0.029    0.000                              0.122   0.014    0.000
             IncomeMis                                0.089     0.097    0.361                             -0.034   0.047    0.473
              Age30_39                               -0.093     0.036    0.010                             -0.058   0.017    0.001
              Age40_49                               -0.039     0.036    0.282                             -0.065   0.017    0.000
              Age50_59                               -0.030     0.039    0.435                             -0.109   0.019    0.000
              Age60_69                               -0.215     0.046    0.000                             -0.259   0.022    0.000
                Age70+                               -0.583     0.050    0.000                             -0.383   0.024    0.000
                AgeMis                                0.019     0.041    0.646                              0.001   0.020    0.941
                Married                               0.012     0.028    0.670                              0.022   0.013    0.105
            MarriedMis                               -0.093     0.034    0.006                             -0.036   0.016    0.030
               SexMale                                0.220     0.022    0.000                              0.075   0.011    0.000
                SexMis                                0.123     0.029    0.000                              0.009   0.014    0.511
                  Kids2                               0.061     0.046    0.182                             -0.004   0.022    0.854
                 Kids3+                               0.001     0.058    0.986                              0.003   0.028    0.928
                KidsMis                              -0.006     0.029    0.842                             -0.035   0.014    0.012
                Adults2                               0.093     0.031    0.003                              0.027   0.015    0.079
               Adults3+                               0.106     0.033    0.001                              0.022   0.016    0.168
              Homeown                                 0.175     0.060    0.003                              0.248   0.029    0.000
       HomeownMaybe                                   0.086     0.061    0.162                              0.122   0.030    0.000
          HomeownMis                                  0.068     0.061    0.265                              0.093   0.029    0.002
                Busown                                0.104     0.080    0.193                              0.112   0.039    0.004
      DemographicsMis                                -0.190     0.074    0.010                             -0.008   0.036    0.821
                   cons   0.693    0.016    0.000                                0.426    0.008    0.000
         Adj. R-squared             0.305                       0.315                     0.153                     0.165
                  Obs.             85,704                       85,704                    85,704                    85,704
Table 4: The Amount of Credit and the Default Beta -- Changes (ctd)


                                            d(Revolving Trades)00                                    d(Credit Card Limits)00
                                    (5)                          (6)                          (7)                         (8)
                                                           w/ demographic                                        w/ demographic controls
             dCredit00                                         controls


                           coef      s.e.       p-val    coef        s.e.   p-val    coef     s.e.       p-val    coef         s.e.   p-val
               Credit99   -0.264   0.001       0.000    -0.266      0.001   0.000   -0.092   0.002      0.000    -0.102    0.002      0.000
         Credit99_zero    -0.062   0.024       0.010    -0.015      0.024   0.527   -3.506   0.140      0.000    -2.917    0.142      0.000
       d(Creditscore)99    0.491   0.013       0.000    0.494       0.013   0.000    1.719   0.106      0.000    1.714     0.105      0.000
                 Beta99   -0.019   0.003       0.000    -0.017      0.003   0.000   -0.228   0.023      0.000    -0.213    0.023      0.000
     d(Score)99*Beta99    -0.026   0.004       0.000    -0.025      0.004   0.000   -0.170   0.033      0.000    -0.152    0.033      0.000
          Income25-50                                    0.114      0.021   0.000                                 0.759    0.172      0.000
            Income50+                                    0.094      0.024   0.000                                 1.945    0.194      0.000
             IncomeMis                                   0.152      0.080   0.057                                 0.754    0.653      0.248
              Age30_39                                  -0.018      0.030   0.544                                 0.455    0.242      0.060
              Age40_49                                   0.053      0.030   0.076                                 1.190    0.243      0.000
              Age50_59                                   0.114      0.032   0.000                                 1.863    0.262      0.000
              Age60_69                                   0.069      0.038   0.068                                 1.891    0.309      0.000
                Age70+                                  -0.190      0.041   0.000                                 0.496    0.338      0.142
                AgeMis                                   0.041      0.033   0.217                                 1.364    0.274      0.000
                Married                                 -0.001      0.023   0.973                                 0.312    0.187      0.096
            MarriedMis                                  -0.057      0.028   0.041                                -0.369    0.228      0.106
               SexMale                                   0.141      0.018   0.000                                 0.626    0.151      0.000
                SexMis                                   0.109      0.023   0.000                                 0.286    0.192      0.136
                  Kids2                                  0.072      0.038   0.054                                 0.742    0.307      0.016
                 Kids3+                                  0.002      0.047   0.959                                 0.844    0.389      0.030
                KidsMis                                  0.026      0.024   0.271                                -0.240    0.195      0.218
                Adults2                                  0.069      0.026   0.008                                 0.186    0.211      0.378
               Adults3+                                  0.086      0.027   0.001                                 0.309    0.220      0.160
              Homeown                                   -0.026      0.049   0.599                                 1.163    0.401      0.004
       HomeownMaybe                                     -0.018      0.050   0.727                                 0.721    0.412      0.080
          HomeownMis                                    -0.021      0.050   0.674                                -0.391    0.409      0.339
                Busown                                   0.010      0.066   0.881                                -0.396    0.539      0.463
      DemographicsMis                                   -0.159      0.061   0.009                                 0.344    0.497      0.489
                   cons   0.400    0.013       0.000                                4.461    0.081      0.000

         Adj. R-squared             0.349                           0.358                    0.031                         0.039
                  Obs.             85,704                        85,704                      85,704                       85,704
Notes: See eq. (4). The dependent variable, dCredit00, measures the change in credit over 1999:03-2000:03. The initial amount of credit Credit99 is
from 1999:03, and Credit99_zero is a dummy variable indicating no credit in 1999:03. The Creditscore is from 1999:03, and the Default Beta is
computed over 1997:04 - 1999:03. Demographic controls include state dummies.
