                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    COLORISM AND AFRICAN-AMERICAN WEALTH:
                  EVIDENCE FROM THE NINETEENTH-CENTURY SOUTH

                                         Howard Bodenhorn
                                        Christopher S. Ruebeck

                                         Working Paper 11732
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11732


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2005




Corresponding author: Department of Economics, Lafayette College, Easton, PA 18042-1776
bodenhoh@lafayette.edu. Bodenhorn thanks the National Science Foundation (SES-0109165) and the Earhart
Foundation for financial support. We thank Sandy Darity, Patrick Mason, Darrick Hamilton, Deborah
Cobb-Clark, two anonymous referees, and seminar participants at Binghamton University, the Brookings
Institution, George Mason University, Florida State University, Lafayette College, Lehigh University, and
the NBER for many useful comments on earlier versions.The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Howard Bodenhorn and Christopher S. Ruebeck. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Colorism and African American Wealth: Evidence from the Nineteenth-Century South
Howard Bodenhorn and Christopher S. Ruebeck
NBER Working Paper No. 11732
November 2005
JEL No. N3, J7

                                            ABSTRACT


Black is not always black. Subtle distinctions in skin tone translate into significant differences in
outcomes. Data on more than 15,000 households interviewed during the 1860 federal census exhibit
sharp differences in wealth holdings between white, mulatto, and black households in the urban
South. We document these differences, investigate the relationships between wealth and the recorded
household characteristics, and decompose the wealth gaps into treatment and characteristic effects.
In addition to higher wealth holdings of white households as compared to free African-Americans
in general, there are distinct differences between both the characteristics of and wealth of free
mulatto and black households, whether male- or female-headed. While black-headed households'
mean predicted log wealth was only 20% of white-headed households', mulatto-headed households'
was nearly 50% that of whites'. The difference between light- and dark-complexion is highly
significant in semi-log wealth regressions. In the decomposition of this wealth differential, treatment
effects play a large role in explaining the wealth gap between all subpopulation pairs.

Howard Bodenhorn
Department of Economics
Lafayette College
Easton, PA 18042
and NBER
bodenhoh@lafayette.edu

Christopher S. Ruebeck
Department of Economics
Lafayette College
Easton, PA 18042
ruebeckc@lafayette.edu
                               Colorism and African-American Wealth:

                            Evidence from the Nineteenth-Century South




1. Introduction

The first documented case of a white man being punished for engaging in miscegenation

occurred in Virginia in 1630, just 10 years after the arrival of the first Africans into the colony

(Mumford 1999). Interracial sex is not new and neither are the questions of the relationship

between identity and race. Throughout the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, both whites and

blacks were uncomfortable with miscegenation and mixed-race people (Bynum 1998). Although

the number of interracial unions in the United States is currently increasing, the desire of mixed-

race individuals to seek a racial identity separate from their constituent racial ancestries is not

new. For many of African descent, black is not black—both in terms of how they view

themselves and how others view them. There are meaningful subtleties of shade, differences that

have socially and politically meaningful distinctions today—just as they have in the past.1

        Despite the complex history of miscegenation, researchers have been complacent about

the content of federally defined racial categories (Snipp 2003). With a few recent exceptions

(Bodenhorn and Ruebeck 2003; Darity, Mason, and Stewart Forthcoming), economists have used

the blunt instrument of binary racial classifications to categorize individuals as either black or

white. Researchers consider all individuals within a category to be subject to similar treatment.

Relatively little attention, if any, is paid to the concordance between social constructions of race

and official categorizations. What may appear to be self-evident—whether an individual is black


1
 Modern studies of the social consequences of skin shade differences include Russell, Wilson and Hall (1992),
Root (1996), Daniel (2002), Tizard and Phoenix (2002), Herman (2002), and Doyle (undated).


                                                       -2-
or white—actually masks a complex reality and likely does not capture the subtleties of racial

interactions. If different skin tones are treated unequally, the continued practice of scholarly

racial categorization based on anachronistic notions developed in the Jim Crow South may not

lead to useful or relevant insights into modern phenomena. As Trina Jones (2000, p. 1499) notes,

to understand “the nuanced ways in which discrimination operates and differentially impacts

similarly but not identically situated people, we must examine and attempt to understand color.

Such an understanding begins with history.”

        Embracing Jones’ call for historical understanding, our paper turns to history to

document the economic consequences of colorism, thereby providing fresh insights into an

increasingly modern concern. Using data on more than 15,000 households interviewed during the

1860 federal census, we find sharp differences in wealth holdings between white, mulatto and

black households in the urban South.2

        This study advances the literature in two ways. First, we consider the operation and

effects of colorism closer to its historical origins. Historians attribute the origins of light-

complexion preferences to slaveholders. By investigating data on complexion-based differences

in attainment of free African-Americans in the pre-Civil War South, our study provides a more

objective basis for such beliefs and provides a baseline against which to consider modern

outcomes. Second, recent economic and sociological research has stressed the importance of

household wealth, rather than income, for the determination of socioeconomic status (Conley

1999; Shapiro 2004). Accumulations of household wealth have been shown to insulate middle-

2
  Teo (2003) notes how the use of terms such as mulatto and colored, as well as the conception of mixed-blood, are
terms heavily laden with racial, often racist, connotations. This is not the place to develop a new terminology. We
will use the term mulatto in the contemporary context to describe mixed-race and, generally, light-complected
African Americans. We recognize that some readers dislike the word, and ask for their indulgence. Some have
suggested the terms biracial or multiracial be used instead, but we resist because the modern use of these terms is
politically charged and does not capture the meaning of mulatto as it was used in the mid-nineteenth century. We
will also use the terms light-complected and dark-complected to recognize the likely factor that determined the
“mulatto” and “black” identifications and to refer to modern studies of colorism.


                                                        -3-
and working-class families from falling into poverty when they face even short-term labor

market disruption or other temporary crises (Oliver and Shapiro 1995). Previous studies of the

economic consequences of modern colorism have focused on income (Goldsmith, Hamilton, and

Darity (2004); Darity, Dietrich and Hamilton (Forthcoming)), which incompletely captures the

consequences of differential treatment according to skin shade. With its twin focus on wealth

holdings and complexion, this paper demonstrates that the economic consequences of colorism

were (and likely are) far reaching.

       Section 2 summarizes the history and modern experience with colorism in the African

American community, including just a handful of recent economic studies. We then proceed

through an empirical analysis in three steps. Section 3 describes the data and takes a first look at

the three sub-populations’ differences evident in the 1860 census manuscripts. In Section 4 we

present several regressions in which we show that bivariate racial classification does not capture

the subtleties of race even after controlling for a wide variety of individual and household

influences. By separating African-Americans into blacks and mulattoes, we find meaningful

differences in outcomes between households with a black or a mulatto head. Section 5 presents

decompositions of the complexion wealth gap to identify how the wealth gaps are influenced by

differences in wealth-generating characteristics between the groups and by differences in

treatment between the groups not explained by the observed characteristics other than skin color.

The decompositions show that this treatment effect explains a substantial fraction of the

observed complexion wealth gaps among all sub-populations. Section 6 summarizes and offers

some concluding remarks.



2. Colorism and socioeconomic outcomes




                                                -4-
History provides compelling evidence of a consistent pattern of preferences shown, by both

whites and blacks, toward light-complected African Americans. The economic advantages of a

light complexion date back to slavery. Reuter (1918) and Frazier (1957), among others, argue

that a complexion advantage appeared early in the slavery era when slaveholders

disproportionately selected light-complected blacks to work as house servants and field foremen.

Indeed, some slaveholders contended that “no man would buy a mulatto for field work” (Johnson

1996, p. 111), while others reported that light-complected slaves resisted field work by arguing

that their physical constitutions could not stand up to the demands of hard labor (Kemble 1863,

p. 193). Although few slaveholders balked at setting light-complected slaves to field work, they

preferentially selected light-complected slaves for craft training and apprenticeship.

       According to Frazier (1957) a fair complexion improved a slave’s life chances by

significantly reducing his or her toil and drudgery, by improving his or her access to food and

shelter, and by exposure to the culture, as well as the manners, dress, and linguistic conventions

of whites. Light-complected, mixed-race slaves were also more likely to be educated and

manumitted. Moreover, despite legal prohibitions in many states against slaveholders providing

for slaves in their wills, masters did occasionally provide for their mixed-race offspring at their

passing, sometimes at the expense of white offspring (Horowitz 1973).

       In the antebellum South, free light-complected blacks were more likely than dark-

complected blacks to be literate. Horton and Horton (1997, p. 154), for example, report general

white opposition to black school attendance except for those of “very light complexion.” With

greater access to education, mulattoes labored at more remunerative occupations than blacks.

Neither mulattoes nor blacks labored in high prestige occupations but, among African

Americans, mulattoes dominated positions at the top of the employment ladder—merchants,




                                                -5-
shopkeepers, and skilled craftsmen. Those with fair complexions were also overrepresented

among skilled workers and professionals. Among rural free African Americans, Bodenhorn

(2003) finds that mulattoes were more likely than blacks to work as tenants or to own their own

farms.

         Gatewood (2000) shows that social preferences for light-skinned blacks persisted through

the post-Civil War period, but the increasing severity of Jim Crow and the movement toward the

one-drop rule3 worked to politically and socially align light and dark blacks, groups that were

often at odds prior to the Civil War. Nevertheless, color-based differences persisted and by 1920,

colorism and complexion-based stratification in the African American community gained the

attention of sociologists, notably E. B. Reuter (1918, 1928). A number of studies conducted

through the 1930s and 1940s, including Myrdal’s (1944) magnum opus, found support for

Reuter’s contention that light skin tones and perceptible traces of non-African heritage were

associated with material advantages for African Americans (Hill 2000).                                A rhetoric of

complexion egalitarianism, however, seemingly reigned through the Civil Rights era and into the

1970s, which led to fewer studies of colorism during the 1960s and 1970s (Freeman et al. 1966 is

a notable exception). Since the early 1990s, however, sociologists have become interested in

complexion-based differences in non-white communities. Modern evidence documents the

continuing, perhaps growing, significance of colorism.



3
  In 1787 Virginia defined anyone with one or more black grandparents as mulatto, a definition that was reiterated in
1792 and 1819. In 1833 the Virginia legislature conceded that the one-fourth definition created a class of people that
were neither black nor mulatto nor white. An act defined such people with less than one-fourth black ancestry to
petition the local court for certificates of freedom that would establish their legal “whiteness.” It was not until 1866
that the term mulatto was eliminated from the civil code and replaced with the word colored. In 1910 the statutory
limit was changed so that anyone with one-sixteenth black ancestry was considered colored. Finally, in 1930 the law
was changed so that anyone with any ascertainable amount of black ancestry was colored (Wadlington 1966, pp.
1196, 1201). Mississippi’s state constitution in 1911 classified individuals with one-fourth black ancestry as legally
colored (Anonymous 1911). By 1948, the constitution had been amended so that individuals with one-eighth black
ancestry were colored (Bynum 1998). Legal definitions in other southern states followed similar trajectories.


                                                          -6-
       Using data from the National Survey of Black Americans conducted in 1980, Hughes and

Hertel (1990), Keith and Herring (1991), and Seltzer and Smith (1991) find that dark-skinned

blacks acquire less education, work in less prestigious occupations, and earn lower incomes than

lighter complected blacks, even after controlling for other factors believed to be correlated with

achievement. Using longitudinal analysis, Hill (2000) finds that biracial men enjoyed modestly

advantaged backgrounds compared to blacks, but multivariate analysis reveals that family

background variables account for only a small portion of complexion-based differences in

outcomes. Color is the decisive factor. Light-complected men are more than twice as likely as

dark men to find high-prestige employment. Research has also documented skin-tone differences

among Latinos, which suggests that colorism characterizes a host of minority communities

(Murguia and Telles 1996; Telles and Murguia 1990; Mason 2004; Darity and Boza 2003).

Gullickson’s (2003) interpretation that the significance of skin tone differentials are declining

stands in sharp contrast to an emergent literature that finds complexion differences still loom

large in the life experiences of mixed-race youth (Russell, Wilson and Hall (1992), Root (1996),

Daniel (2002), Tizard and Phoenix (2002), Herman (2002), and Doyle (undated)).

       Despite the attention that colorism has garnered among sociologists, economists have not

accounted for intraracial differences in economic outcomes that may result from colorism. One

recent exception that uses nationally representative samples of African Americans from 1979 and

1992 finds that the wages of light-complected blacks exceed those of dark-complected blacks by

about eight to ten percent (Goldsmith, Hamilton, and Darity 2004). By comparison, their

regression decompositions suggest color-based wage differentials (treatment effects) between

whites and light-complected blacks of about five percent. Thus, colorism accounts for about

twice the income gap between light- and dark-complected blacks as between whites and light-




                                               -7-
complected blacks. Thus, subtle distinctions in skin tone seemingly translate into significant

outcome differences, including educational attainment, occupational achievement and earnings,

among others. We now turn to a description of the data source that allows us to contribute to this

emergent and important discussion.



3. Data

This study uses a large, regionally representative sample of free African Americans residing in

the urban South, constructed from information in the original population manuscripts of the 1860

census. In discussing the outcomes of free African Americans we are, by definition, excluding

the experience of slaves, who represented the majority of blacks in the antebellum South and

held little or no wealth.4 The cities that are included in the sample are listed along with their

relative frequencies in the lower part of Table 1’s summary statistics. Williamson (1980) notes

that the border states of the Old South formed a sort of mulatto belt, which contained a high

proportion of mulattoes relative to blacks. The Lower South cities of Charleston, Mobile, and

New Orleans also had substantial populations of gens de couleur libre. The size or proportions of

their respective mulatto and black populations did not drive the choice of cities for this study.

Rather, cities were selected to provide a representative sample of all southern, urban free African

Americans in 1860.

        Every household headed by an African American (black or mulatto) from these cities was

recorded while collecting data, along with an equal number of randomly selected white

households. Some non-white households were later dropped because the census failed to report

information on one or more of the variables of interest or because the values reported were


4
 Kenzer (1997) provides a discussion of wealth accumulation among free blacks, slaves and former slaves for
North Carolina.


                                                      -8-
clearly erroneous. The resulting sample includes information on 15,861 households. Of these,

5,774 households were headed by white males, 2,121 were headed by mulatto males, and 3,697

by black males. The sample of 4,269 female-headed households includes 842 headed by whites,

1,451 headed by mulattoes, and 1,976 headed by blacks.

           The 1860 census is a particularly valuable source for the study of the economic

consequences of colorism because census marshals were instructed to classify individuals as

white, black or mulatto. Specifically, marshals were directed to leave the “Color” column blank

if the individual was white, to insert the letter “B” if the person was black without admixture,

and to insert the letter “M” if the person was a mulatto or of mixed heritage. It is unclear whether

marshals inquired into a person’s racial heritage or classified him or her based on physical

appearance, but Gross (1998) contends that local residents, including census takers, used locally-

accepted notions of race and admixture to draw conclusions about one’s racial heritage. Most

southerners believed the differences between blacks and mulattoes were obvious and involved

complexion and physiology, as well as the complexion and physiology of those with whom one

associated.5 There is no reason to believe that a census taker’s assignations of color would have

deviated from accepted community standards of racial classification. A second concern is

whether a person classified as a mulatto in Baltimore would have been similarly classified in

New Orleans. Even if there were inter-city differences in classification standard, to the extent


5
    Of tangential concern to us is the possibility (in fact, the likelihood) that the identity of one’s associates also played

a part in the census taker’s determination of color. This connection between an individual’s choices and his or her

identity is important but outside the scope of this paper. It is an active area of research (see Bodenhorn and Ruebeck

(2003) for references), but here we seek to document the effects of colorism, with less concern for questions of its

source and its links to individuals’ identity.




                                                              -9-
that they existed at all, they do not vitiate the results presented here. What ultimately determined

whether an individual received differential treatment was whether he or she met the local

physiological or heritage standards, because that individual interacted with members of the local

community. Inclusion of city dummy variables in the regressions reported below also controls, in

part, for local differences in the relationship between treatment and racial categorizations.

       In addition to the valuable information on complexion, federal census takers from the

mid-nineteenth century collected and recorded information on a number of demographic and

economic variables. Household structure is easily inferred from the manuscripts because the

head of each household is listed first, identified by both given name and surname. Only first

names are recorded for spouses and children. Members of the extended family were listed next,

followed by unrelated members of the household (typically servants or apprentices), both

identified by given name and surname. The ages and genders of all household members were

recorded, along with their state or nation of birth, and whether the individuals were literate or

had attended school in the past year. The census marshals also recorded economic data, including

the occupations of household heads. In a few instances, marshals recorded the occupations of the

wives of male-headed households, but no use is made of this information because it was

inconsistently reported.

       Finally, census marshals were asked to provide estimates of the dollar value of each

household’s real and personal property. The value of household real estate was to be obtained by

asking the householder for his or her valuation of the real property owned by the household

ignoring any lien or encumbrance on the property. Thus, the reported figure is gross, not net, real

estate wealth and does not include the value of rental property. Marshals were also instructed to

obtain the householder’s valuation of all other property (personal estate), including financial




                                                -10-
assets, slaves, livestock, jewelry, fixtures and furniture. The instructions recognized that an

accurate valuation may not be possible, but marshals were encouraged to obtain as “near and

prompt” an estimate as they could. The Census Bureau anticipated the reluctance of many

householders to divulge information about their wealth and instructed marshals to cajole and

reassure respondents that the information was confidential and would not be used for private gain

or any other public (i.e., tax) purposes.

       It is clear that some marshals were better at cajoling and reassuring householders than

others. It was not uncommon for marshals to return a blank (nonresponse) when reporting real

and personal estate in the manuscripts. An empty cell in the real estate column is generally taken

to represent zero wealth, reflecting that the family rented rather than owned its current habitation,

but historians have long debated the meaning of nonresponses for personal wealth, and the

debate is far from resolved. Some contend that marshals left the cell blank rather than recording

zeroes. Others contend that marshals failed to report modest or hard-to-value property holdings,

so that nonresponses likely represent small but nonzero personal wealth. Conley and Galenson

(1998) and Bodenhorn (2003) review the debate and the data and conclude that marshals had

idiosyncratic, nonzero censoring points for personal wealth below which they returned a blank.

       Just as there is no consensus concerning the interpretation of unreported personal wealth

for a household, there is no consensus among economic historians concerning a preferred

empirical technique. Conley and Galenson, and Bodenhorn, estimate quantile or median

regressions; others estimate Tobit models. Given the common assertion that nonresponses are

typically indicative of small, but nonzero personal property values, we attribute to each

nonresponse one-half the minimum value recorded by any marshal in each city ward, and then

correct the standard errors for ward-level clustering. We conducted a number of robustness




                                                -11-
checks (available by request): we estimated models that excluded households with unreported

wealth; we excluded wards if nonresponses exceeded 10, or 25, or 45 percent of sampled

households; we replaced the natural log of wealth as the dependent variable with the inverse

hyperbolic sine, among other procedures. In every instance, the basic results reported below

hold. We prefer our procedure because estimating the models using Ordinary Least Squares

allows us to report the full results of standard Oaxaca-Blinder regression decompositions. Thus,

although the wealth data drawn from the 1860 U.S. census are imperfect, they are rich enough to

generate meaningful comparisons of wealth accumulation among white, black, and mulatto

households.

        In addition to age and complexion, we employ a number of variables expected to explain

differences in household wealth. We label household heads Migrants if they migrated across

state lines.6 We also label as Immigrants any head of household born outside the United States.

Migrants and immigrants are often thought to be self-selected, highly motivated individuals,

suggesting that, all else equal, movers will accumulate more wealth than nonmovers (Borjas

1994). On the other hand, movers may have financed their migration by consuming previously

accumulated wealth, which may imply lower current wealth. There is no reason to expect, a

priori, one effect to dominate. Summary statistics reported in Table 1 show that while a little

over 10 percent of all male heads of households migrated across state lines, another 25 percent

immigrated from outside the United States. Women were as likely as their male counterparts to

have migrated across state lines, but a much smaller proportion of female heads of household

were immigrants. Given the restrictions on black in-migration in most southern states, it is not

surprising that blacks and mulattoes were less likely than whites to migrate across state lines

6
 Given the proximity of Baltimore and Washington, D.C., individuals who moved from Washington to Baltimore
were not considered interstate migrants.



                                                    -12-
(Guild, 1969). Despite such restrictions, about 7 percent of African-American male household

heads and nearly 9 percent of African-American female heads had migrated across state lines.

Further, 1.5 percent of African-American male heads of households had emigrated from foreign,

mostly Caribbean, countries, as had 2.7 percent of African-American female heads of

households.

       Another set of variables is included to control for the household’s human capital. We

include a dummy variable equal to one if the head of the household was literate, a variable equal

to the number of literate males 20 years of age or older (including the head of the household),

and a variable equal to the number of literate females 20 years of age or older in the household.

Table 1 shows that about 82 percent of male heads of household and 74 percent of female heads

were literate. Both male- and female-headed households on average had more than one literate

female (1.109 and 1.280, respectively), but female-headed households generally had far less than

one literate adult male while the mean male-headed household had more than one. Given the

absence of publicly funded education for African Americans in the antebellum South, it is not

surprising that African American households had fewer literate adults than white households.

Indeed, the level of literacy among African Americans is notable given the outright animosity

among many whites toward the education of blacks and mulattoes (Woodson 1919).

       Two additional variables are constructed to capture possible education or training effects.

The first (SEI) is a Duncan-style socioeconomic index (Reiss 1961), intended to indicate

occupational prestige. It is based on wages and educational levels associated with several

hundred occupations in the 1950s. For occupations recorded in the 1860 census with the same

title (e.g., barber, blacksmith, carpenter, bricklayer, etc.) the occupational prestige index value

was taken directly from the 1950s index. For some occupations recorded in the 1860 census,




                                               -13-
assigning a corresponding Duncan occupational prestige score required some ingenuity.

Duncan‘s index has no entry for carriage drivers (ignoring only those few still found in Central

Park and other tourist locations), but fortunately Duncan did list a prestige score for the modern

counterpart of the carriage driver, namely the taxi driver. Similarly, modern bus drivers are

roughly the equivalent of stagecoach drivers. Because Duncan’s classification includes several

hundred occupations—from bootblacks (SEI = 8) and charwoman (SEI = 10) to lawyers (93) and

dentists (96)—and nearly every major industrial category, it is possible to assign a reasonable

occupational prestige value to every occupation listed in the 1860 census.7 When a specific

occupation listed in the 1860 census had no reasonable corresponding Duncan value, that

occupation was given Duncan’s general prestige score for job class (foreman, operative, or

laborer) and industry (textiles, metals, machinery, services, etc.). Finally, just as marshals failed

to report wealth holdings for some households, they also failed to report occupations for every

household head. These observations are also not deleted from the sample. We attribute to each

of these households the average occupational prestige value by the gender of the household head

(15 for males, 14 for females), and we include a dummy variable to indicate these observations.

The dummy variable should capture any fundamental differences between reporting and non-

reporting households, but we can see from Table 1 that there may be much less concern for this

issue in the men (6% of the male sample) than females (46% of the female sample, with

representation decreasing significantly from white to mulatto to black women).

           It is likely that the labor supply decisions of women and men could be very different, as

they often can be today, and as a result the determinants of wealth accumulation may have been

quite different across gender as well. This leads us, as is the usual practice, to present separate

results for male- and female-headed households. Historians and labor economists have noted
7
    A detailed appendix of occupational classifications is available from the authors on request.


                                                           -14-
differential economic and occupational opportunities for women, and have discussed the

negative consequences of single parenthood (Moehling 2004). We also report our full model

regressions both with and without the occupational variables because occupations may be

endogenous: to the extent that family wealth persists across generations, greater wealth in

previous generations may imply both greater wealth and a more prestigious occupation for the

current head of household. Because we cannot account for intergenerational transfers and

because we lack any reasonable instruments to perform two-stage least squares, we ask the

reader to interpret those regressions including the occupational variables with care.

       Before moving on to the regressions, we call attention to the substantial differences in

means across same-gender subpopulations (comparing among white, mulatto, and black as well

as comparing white to African-Americans as a whole). Nearly all these differences were highly

statistically significant (see the comments below Table 1 for exceptions). Note especially the

significant differences in characteristics between blacks and mulattoes.              In every category

mulatto-headed households were better endowed than their black counterparts, but mulattoes

were still not as well endowed as heads of white households.



4. The determinants of household wealth

Our empirical strategy in this section is to estimate household-level wealth regressions that

include several explanatory economic and demographic characteristics as well as the complexion

of the household head, Black and Mulatto (omitting White). The parameter vectors β and γ in

the equation

(1)     ln(w j ) = β 0 + β1 X j + β 2Y j + β 3 Z j + γ1Black j + γ 2Mulatto j + ε j




                                                        -15-
are estimated using ordinary least squares regression. The dependent variable ln(w j ) is the

natural logarithm of the jth household’s wealth (following the usual semi-log regression form due

to the skewed nature of the distribution of wealth in levels), Xj is a vector of individual

characteristics of the household head (age and its square, immigrant and interstate migrant status,

literacy, and occupational prestige score), Yj is a vector of household characteristics (the number

of literate males, the number of literate females, and the size of the household), and Zj is a vector

of city dummy variables (excluding Baltimore) to capture any systematic regional differences in

the ability of households to accumulate wealth. ε j is the error term associated with the jth

household. We also estimated the equation

(2)      ln(w j ) = β 0 + β1 X j + β 2Y j + β 3 Z j + γAfAm j + ε j ,

where both subpopulations with African-American heritage are grouped into the same category,

AfAm. We only present the value of this shift variable’s coefficient in our results because the

other parameters did not differ substantively from those estimated using (1).

        Table 2 reports the regressions. Probability weights are applied to account for the

sampling method described in the Section 3.8 The columns labeled (3) and (4) are our preferred

specifications because they offer the largest number of exogenous controls. A mentioned above,

we include regression (4) to account for occupational differences but recognize that occupations

may be endogenous to wealth. Before turning to the issue of colorism, we summarize and

interpret the other individual and household-level correlates and the overall performance of the

regressions.




8
 These weights take into account the undersampling of white-headed households. We took the assertion that the
census included all free households at face value and used the probability weights to adjust for the relative
probability of sampling from each household subpopulation.


                                                         -16-
         Household wealth for both male- and female-headed households increased with age at a

decreasing rate. The maximum for men occurs at about 65 years, an age which little more than

five percent of our sample exceeded, although a handful of ages in the 100’s were recorded for

both genders.

         Households headed by male immigrants had about half (e-0.56 = 0.57) of the wealth of

households headed by native-born men, indicating that the benefits of initiative were outweighed

by the costs of moving (at least for the current generation), although the results in column (4)

indicate that immigrants’ advantage may be explained by their occupations. The results in

columns (1)-(3) are consistent with the economic studies of immigration that show that first-

generation immigrants are slow to assimilate often because immigrants tend to congregate in

ethnic enclaves (Borjas 1994; Borjas 2000). We have no evidence on the ethnic or racial

compositions of the neighborhoods in which southern urban African Americans resided, but

relying on crude data at the level of census wards Curry (1981) found that blacks were

considerably less likely to be crowded into proto-ghettoes in southern than in northern cities in

the antebellum era. It may also be the case that these free blacks’ forebears had not passed

significant wealth on to them. Female-headed household wealth did not have a significant

relationship with immigrant status. Unlike international immigration, internal migration has no

statistically or economically meaningful effect on household wealth once the city controls are

added.

         Household size was significantly related to household wealth. The addition of one person

to a male-headed household was associated with more than a 10 percent increase in male-headed

household wealth, while the increase was somewhat smaller in a female-headed household. The

results are consistent with the hypothesis that larger extended households, which were relatively




                                               -17-
common in 1860, brought together larger agglomerations of wealth than smaller nuclear

households.

           Literacy, as expected, had an economically meaningful association with household

wealth. Households in which the male head was literate had more than double (e0.83 = 2.3) the

wealth of households with an illiterate male head (about 50% more if we control for occupational

status). There was little relationship between wealth and female heads’ literacy. Interestingly,

the addition of a literate female was associated with an increase in male-headed household

wealth of about 20 percent, and an increase in female-headed household wealth by about 25

percent, but the addition of a literate adult male did not add significantly to household wealth.

We do not have an explanation for this phenomenon.

           Turning now to the issue of colorism, we consider the estimated coefficients on the Black

and Mulatto variables, as well as that on the AfAm variable in the incompletely reported

companion regressions. (See the first row of coefficients in Table 2 for the latter, and the second

and third rows for the former pair of variables.) It is immediately apparent that standard

specifications of a single race identifier do not fully capture the subtleties of race and racial

wealth differences. Simply comparing the means of the white, mulatto, and black sub-

populations implies that a household headed by an African-American male had just 30 to 50

percent (e-1.26 to e-0.76)—or less—of the wealth of the average household headed by a white male.

But when we separate African-American households into those with mulatto and black heads of

household, there are significant and meaningful differences between them. Households headed

by a black male had on average less than 40 percent (e-0.95)—probably less than 25 percent (e-
1.46
       )—of the wealth of households headed by white males, while the mean household with male

mulatto head had at least 40 percent – and perhaps as much as 63 percent (e-0.46) -- of white male




                                                 -18-
wealth.     Even more distinct bounds can be placed on female-headed households’ wealth

differentials by racial ancestry. The fact that the separate male and female regressions generate

such similar results increases our confidence that we are identifying a real phenomenon. Further

evidence is provided in the following section by estimates of separate wealth equations for each

subpopulation where we decompose the differences into characteristics and treatment effects.

          We recognize that, if colorism was as powerful a social force as we contend, ancestry and

skin shade may have influenced wealth accumulation because lighter-complected individuals

received preferential treatment at younger ages that created occupational opportunities not

available to those with darker complexions. Dark individuals may have been discriminated

against through the apprenticeship system or through other types of occupational training.

Columns (4) in Table 2 address this concern by including the Occupational Prestige (SEI) and

No Occupation variables. As we recognize above, the coefficients on the colorism variables are

smaller than in columns (3), but the colorism effect does not disappear. It remains a powerful

force even after controlling for occupation. In every specification, we reject the null hypothesis

of Black and Mulatto coefficient equality at confidence level p 0.001.

          The shortcoming of the analysis in Table 2 is that it imposes equality restrictions on the

non-race (non-colorism) coefficients across the subpopulations. Thus the analysis above ignores

the possibility that, in controlling for the household’s characteristics, we have missed the

differing return to characteristics across subpopulations. In the next section, we report the results

of standard Oaxaca-Blinder regression decompositions to investigate the extent to which the

colorism effect was attributable to differences in characteristics across groups versus arising

from the treatment afforded those of different complexions.




                                                 -19-
       Before moving on to the decompositions, we should also note that the regressions’

adjusted-R2 values indicate that there is much variation in household wealth remaining to be

explained. Because the decomposition techniques we use below rely on an analysis of residuals,

the results must still be considered only imperfect insights into the treatment effects that follow

from colorism.



5. Did light-complected households receive preferential treatment? Evidence from

regression decompositions

Wealth differences between any two groups may be due to differences in the average features of

that group’s members (characteristic effects), or to systematic differences in how each group is

rewarded for those features by the marketplace (treatment effects). The premise of this article is

that colorism influences economic outcomes, generating greater household wealth in light-

complected households for a given set of observable characteristics.           In order to better

understand the contributions of these two effects of colorism, we use the following methodology.

       For each gender, separate coefficients are estimated for the white, mulatto, and black

subpopulations. Because there are some concerns that the occupational prestige variable may be

endogenous, regressions and decompositions are reported with and without the occupational

variables, as in columns 3 and 4 of Table 2. We omit the regression results themselves to

conserve space and because they do not meaningfully differ from those in Table 2. We then use

these regressions to further investigate the differences between subpopulations’ wealth using the

decomposition method of Oaxaca (1973) and Blinder (1973), in addition to Cotton’s (1988)

modified form.




                                               -20-
         The goal of the decomposition is to consider the counterfactual implied by the assertion

that different groups have different wealth levels, due perhaps to colorism: what wealth would

the members of each group expect to have in the absence of their identification as a member of

their group? Although we will construct a decomposition for all four pairs of sub-populations,

consider for concreteness the pair of subpopulations whose wealth differences may illustrate

colorism:       mulattoes         and       blacks.       Label        the      associated         pair      of      regressions

ln w Mulatto = α Mulatto + X Mulattoβ Mulatto + ε and ln w Black = α Black + X Blackβ Black + ε .         To decompose the

advantages accrued by those with lighter skin, we consider the difference in predicted log wealth

evaluated at the explanatory variables’ means (indicated by “ ” notation) and parameter

estimates (indicated by “ ˆ ” notation)

(3)                                   [                                                   ][                                  ]
         ln w Mulatto − ln w Black = αˆ Mulatto − αˆ Black + X Black (βˆ Mulatto − βˆ Black ) + (X Mulatto − X Black )βˆ Mulatto ,

where the first bracketed term is the unexplained, or treatment, effect and is presumed to be due,

at least in part, to colorism. The second term is the characteristic effect, the effect on mean log

wealth due to differences between the two groups. With the structure of (3) we are taking the

perspective that in the absence of colorism the advantaged group’s wealth structure would

prevail. The opposite assumption is to presume that all groups would receive the disadvantaged

group’s wealth structure in the absence of colorism, or

(4)                                   [                                                     ][                                ]
         ln w Mulatto − ln w Black = αˆ Mulatto − αˆ Black + X Mulatto (βˆ Mulatto − βˆ Black ) + (X Mulatto − X Black )βˆ Black .

These two decompositions provide a range within which we expect the actual effect of colorism

to lie. Many alternative decompositions have been proposed to predict a particular value inside

this range. Because we feel, along with other authors, that the counterfactual wealth is likely to

lie closer to the larger group’s prevailing wealth, we calculate Cotton’s (1988) decomposition as

well. That is,


                                                              -21-
         ln w Mulatto − ln w Black

(5)
            [                                           ][                                         ]
         = αˆ Mulatto − α * + X Mulatto (βˆ Mulatto − β*) + α * −αˆ Black + X Black (β * −βˆ Black )
             + [( X Mulatto − X Black )β *]



The vector of parameters (α *, β *) generalizes the previous two cases: (α*, β *) = (α Light , β Light ) in

(3), while (α *, β *) = (α Dark , β Dark ) in (4). The parameter vector that we actually use for (α *, β *)

is a weighted sum of the previous parameters, where the weights are the relative frequencies of

the two populations9. This decomposition has the added feature that it apportions the treatment

effect into components that indicate the gain of the advantaged subpopulation and the loss of the

disadvantaged population (respectively the first and second bracketed terms above), but we do

not report these separately because our focus is instead on the total treatment effect, the addition

of those first two bracketed terms. It is also worth noting that, because the weights are the

subpopulations’ relative frequencies, when comparing the treatment of people of color (blacks,

mulattoes, or African-Americans as a whole) to the white subpopulation this decomposition

weights the advantaged population (the majority whites) more heavily, but when considering the

existence of colorism it is the disadvantaged population (the majority blacks) that receives the

higher weight.

        The two panels of Table 3 first provide estimates of the subpopulation pairs’ relative

predicted wealth and the resulting raw wealth differentials, as well as the subpopulations’

predicted geometric mean wealth (the exponential of the arithmetic log mean). Note that our

discussion of the raw wealth ratios compared across subgroups from the previous section’s

results with pooled regression is similar to the results presented here from separate regressions.

Households headed by black men hold on average 13% of white wealth, while mulatto-headed
9
  Due to our sampling method, the relative frequencies are actually calculated as the sum of each subpopulation’s
probability weights.


                                                           -22-
households’ average wealth is 35% of white-headed households. The results for female-headed

households are quite similar to those for male-headed households.

       Next in Table 3’s two panels, the raw differential is decomposed into two parts using the

method described above and estimation of the model from either column 3 (no occupation

variables) or column 4 (with occupation variables) of Table 2. The raw differential is

decomposed into both the treatment and characteristic effects, but to save space Table 3 presents

only the treatment effect. This effect is the (imperfect) estimate of discrimination or colorism.

As well, the characteristic effect (to which we return later in the table) need not be listed

explicitly because it is simply the remainder of the raw differential. Our discussion focuses on

the third set of treatment effect estimates, those typeset in boldface and listing the characteristic
          −
effect as C = β * ( X H − X L ), using Cotton’s (1988) decomposition. For example, on the right

side of Table 3 where the results of pairing the white and African-American subpopulations are

presented, we see that for male-headed households the treatment effect is estimated at 69% of the

raw differential with model (3) and 42% with model (4). Thus the characteristic effect is 31%

and 58%, respectively, for the two models’ application to this pair of subpopulations. These

percentages are the focus of this portion of the table: how much of the raw wealth differential is

explained by treatment effects?

       For the moment, compare the boldface treatment effects to those presented in the rows

above them for each gender. We see—as should have been expected—that Cotton’s estimate is

always between those of the traditional Oaxaca and Blinder decompositions. Its counterfactual

assumption is a weighting of the two groups’ returns to characteristics, while the Blinder-Oaxaca

decompositions take two possible extreme counterfactual assumptions: that either the advantaged




                                                -23-
or the disadvantaged group’s returns to characteristics would obtain in the absence of differential

treatment across groups.

       Our first evidence of colorism in Table 3 is simply to note the large estimate of the

treatment effect in the first column’s decomposition of the Mulatto and Black subpopulation pair

of regressions. This treatment effect is about 40 percent of the raw wealth differential, with little

difference dependent on including occupational status. Considering all sub-population pairs, the

differences between models 3 and 4 illustrate another result we should expect: controlling for

occupation dampens the treatment effect; more of the raw wealth differential can be explained by

including this characteristic of the household head to in the regressions. Duncan’s SEI is one

way in which all subpopulations are different from each other, it has a positive relationship with

wealth, and the more advantaged subpopulations have higher SEI.

       On the other hand the larger white-mulatto treatment effect (85%) as compared to the

white-black treatment effect (66%), without controlling for occupation (model 3), can be

explained by mulattoes’ characteristics having greater similarity to whites’ characteristics than

blacks’ characteristics have to whites’ characteristics. Even with a higher return to mulattoes’

characteristics as compared to blacks’, more of the raw wealth differential is left unexplained by

any difference in mulattoes’ characteristics as compared to whites precisely because their

characteristics are less different. The resulting smaller characteristics effect leads to a larger

treatment effect. Once occupation is included (model 4), the difference in treatment effects is

small (41% and 43%, for males).           The treatment effect for the mulatto-black pair of

subpopulations shows little change whether we include occupation or not (38% versus 42%).

       The final portion of each of Table 3’s panels then uses the boldface estimate of the

treatment effect (Cotton’s method) to estimate two more comparisons of the results for the




                                                -24-
subpopulation pairs. First is the estimated return to characteristics, the wealth ratio. It is the

ratio of the advantaged group’s wealth to the disadvantaged group’s wealth. The values are all

greater than 1, reflecting the inherent advantage in characteristics that the lighter-skinned group

has, regardless of differential treatment. Loury (1998) focuses on this as an issue that remains

even after dealing with discriminatory practices: the fact that a subpopulation has a disadvantage

in characteristics should still be of concern even if there is no treatment effect due to

discrimination. First note that including another explanatory variable (in particular, occupation)

in the regression will always increase the return to characteristics. These comparisons confirm

our earlier observation that whites had a much greater advantage in characteristics over blacks (a

factor of 2 to 3) than they did over mulattoes (always less than 2). Likewise, the advantage of

mulattoes in characteristics as compared to blacks (remarkably similar for males and females) is

about a factor of 1.8. The final comparison in each panel is Oaxaca’s (1973) adaptation of

Becker’s (1971) discrimination coefficient, the relative benefit to the advantaged group from

discrimination, assuming that the entire treatment residual can be attributed to discrimination (as

measured by Cotton’s residual). It is measured as the percentage gain in the wealth ratio as

compared to what it would be without differential treatment. Similar patterns are seen in these

comparisons as those above. The gains from treatment are large, and the differences within

African-Americans are also large.

       So we see that, although differences in underlying characteristics were a driving force

behind the mulatto-black wealth gap, treatment disadvantages were substantial. The magnitude

of the treatment disadvantage estimates supports the colorism hypothesis, and reflecting on the

characteristic effect further strengthens that hypothesis. Further research needs to uncover the

extent to which pre-market discrimination led to differences in observable wealth-generating




                                               -25-
characteristics. It is well known that light-complected slaves were more likely to receive skill

training (Margo 1992), for example. It may have been that mixed-race free African Americans,

too, received more or better education and job skills than monoracial blacks. Uncovering

whether and why this conjecture was true represents a potentially fruitful line of further inquiry.



6. Concluding Remarks

Does black always signify Black? In matters of race economists have assumed it does. Nearly

every economic investigation into the consequences of race uncritically and without pause

separates Whites and Blacks into distinct and mutually exclusive categories. For the purposes of

empirical work done during the past 50 years such a dichotomous racial classification scheme

was probably appropriate, an intellectual and academic recognition of a broad social acceptance

of Jim Crow’s “one-drop” rule. In the future, however, dichotomous racial categories may not

capture the increasing subtleties of race as race mixing spreads and becomes increasingly

socially acceptable. Empirical economics cannot continue to model race as a binary variable and

expect the resulting coefficient to meaningfully capture the subtleties of race.

       Our paper shows that mulattoes were treated differently than blacks in the mid-nineteenth

century. As a percentage of white households’ log wealth, the predicted log wealth of black-

headed households was 20 percentage points lower than that of mulatto-headed households.

Regression decompositions reveal that treatment effects played a large role in explaining the

white-mulatto wealth gap, even after including a measure of occupation; treatment effects played

a comparable role for other subpopulation pairs as well. Our results are consistent with those

from a sociological literature dating to Reuter (1917) and an emergent economics literature that

finds that colorism remains a powerful social phenomenon in minority communities. An




                                                -26-
important line of further inquiry will be to understand how color-based identities are established

and reinforced in historical and modern populations. We intend to contribute to that developing

literature as well.



References

Anonymous. “The Negro Defined.” Yale Law Journal 20:3 (January 1911): 224-25.

Becker, Gary S. The Economics of Discrimination (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1957).

Becker, Gary S. “A Theory of Marriage, Part I.” Journal of Political Economy 81:4 (July 1973),

        813-46.

Becker, Gary S. “A Theory of Marriage, Part II.” Journal of Political Economy 82:2 (March

        1974), S11-S26.

Blau, Francine D. and John W. Graham. “Black-White Differences in Wealth and Asset

        Composition.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 105:2 (May 1990), 321-39.

Blinder, Alan S. “Wage Discrimination: Reduced Form and Structural Estimates.” Journal of

        Human Resources 8 (Fall 1973): 436-455.

Bodenhorn, Howard. “The Complexion Gap: The Economic Consequences of Color among Free

        African Americans in the Rural Antebellum South.” Advances in Agricultural Economic History

        2 (2003), pp. 41-73.

Bodenhorn, Howard and Christopher S. Ruebeck. “The Economics of Identity and the

        Endogeneity of Race.” NBER working paper #9962 (September 2003).

Borjas, George. “Economics of Immigration.” Journal of Economic Literature 32:4 (December

        1994), 1667-1717.

Borjas, George. “Ethnic Enclaves and Assimilation.” Swedish Economic Policy Review 7:2 (Fall

        2000), 89-122.


                                               -27-
Bynum, Victoria E. “‘White Negroes’ in Segregated Mississippi: Miscegenation, Racial Identity,

       and the Law.” Journal of Southern History 64:2 (May 1998): 247-76.

Conley, Dalton. Being Black, Living in the Red. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1999.

Cotton, Jeremiah “On the Decomposition of Wage Differentials.” The Review of Economics and

       Statistics 70:2 (May 1988): 236-243.

Curry, Leonard P. The Free Black in Urban America, 1800-1850: The Shadow of a Dream.

       Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press, 1981.

Daniel, G. Reginald. More Than Black?: Multiracial Identity and the New Racial Order.

       Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 2002.

Darity, William A., Jr. and Tanya Golash Boza. “Choosing Race: Evidence from the Latino

       National Political Survey.” Unpublished working paper, University of North Carolina at

       Chapel Hill, 2003.

Darity, William A., Jr., Jason Dietrich, and Darrick Hamilton. “Bleach in the Rainbow: Latin

       Ethnicity and Preference for Whiteness.” Transforming Anthropology, Forthcoming.

Darity, William A., Jr., Patrick L. Mason, and James B. Stewart. “The Economics of Identity:

       The Origin and Persistence of Racial Identity Norms.” Journal of Economic Behavior

       and Organization, Forthcoming.

Doyle, Jamie Mihoko. “Self-Identified Multiracials and Sexual Debut: A Move Toward

       Explanations.” Unpublished working paper, University of Pennsylvania Population

       Studies Center, undated.

Freeman, Howard E.; David Armor; J. Michael Ross; and Thomas F. Pettigrew. “Color

       Gradation and Attitudes among Middle-Income Negroes.” American Sociological Review

       31:3 (June 1966): 365-374.




                                              -28-
Gatewood, Willard B. Aristocrats of Color: The Black Elite, 1880-1920. Fayetteville, Ark.:

       University of Arkansas Press, 2000.

Goldsmith, Arthur H.; Darrick Hamilton; and William Darity, Jr. “From Dark to Light: Skin

       Color and Wages among African-Americans.” Unpublished working paper, University of

       North Carolina at Chapel Hill, August 2004.

Gross, Ariela J. “Litigating Whiteness: Trials of Racial Determination in the Nineteenth-Century

       South.” Yale Law Journal 108:1 (October 1998): 109-88.

Guild, Jane Purcell. Black Laws of Virginia; A Summary of the Legislative Acts of Virginia

       concerning Negroes from the Earliest Times to the Present. New York: Negro

       Universities Press, 1969.

Gullickson, Aaron. “The Significance of Color Declines: A Re-Analysis of Skin Tone

       Differentials in Post-Civil Rights America.” Unpublished working paper, University of

       California-Berkeley, September 2003.

Harris, David R. and Jeremiah Joseph Sim. “Who is Multiracial?: Assessing the Complexity of

       Lived Race.” American Sociological Review 67:x (August 2002), 614-27.

Herman, Melissa. “The Black-White-Other Test Score Gap: Academic Achievement among

       Mixed Race Adolescents.” Unpublished working paper, Northwestern University

       Institute for Policy Research, 2002.

Hill, Mark E. “Color Differences in the Socioeconomic Status of African American Men: Results

       of a Longitudinal Study.” Social Forces 78:4 (June 2000): 1437-60.

Hughes, Michael and Bradley E. Hertel. “The Significance of Color Remains: A Study of Life

       Chances, Mate Selection, and Ethnic Consciousness among Black Americans.” Social

       Forces 68:4 (June 1990): 1105-20.




                                              -29-
Johnson, Whittington B. Black Savannah, 1788-1864. Fayetteville, Ark.: University of Arkansas

       Press, 1996.

Keith, Verna M. and Cedric Herring. “Skin Tone and Stratification in the Black Community.”

       American Journal of Sociology 97:3 (November 1991), 760-778.

Kemble, Frances A. Journal of a Residence on a Georgian Plantation in 1838-1839. New York:

       Harper Bros., 1863.

Kenzer, Robert C. Enterprising Southerners: Black Economic Success in North Carolina, 1865-

       1915. Charlottesville and London: University Press of Virginia, 1997.

Loury, Glenn C. “Discrimination in the Post-Civil Rights Era: Beyond Market Interactions.” The

       Journal of Economic Perspectives 12:2 (Spring 1998): 117-126.

Margo, Robert A. “Civilian Occupations of Ex-Slaves in the Union Army, 1862-1865.” In

       Without Consent or Contract: Markets and Production: Technical Papers (Volume I), pp.

       170-185. Edited by Robert W. Fogel and Stanley E. Engerman. New York: W. W. Norton

       & Co., 1992.

Mason, Patrick L. “Annual Income, Hourly Wages, and Identity Formation among Mexican

       Americans and Other Latinos.” Industrial Relations 43:4 (October 2004), 817-34.

Moehling, Carolyn A. “Family Structure, School Attendance, and Child Labor in the American

       South in 1900 and 1910.” Explorations in Economic History 41:1 (February 2004), 73-

       100.

Mumford, Kevin. “After Hugh: Statutory Race Segregation in Colonial America, 1630-1725.”

       American Journal of Legal History 43:3 (July 1999): 280-305.

Murguia, Edward and Edward E. Telles. “Phenotype and Schooling among Mexican

       Americans.” Sociology of Education 69:4 (October 1996): 276-89.




                                             -30-
Myrdal, Gunnar, with the assistance of Richard Sterner and Arnold Rose. An American

       Dilemma: The Negro Problem and Modern Democracy. New York: Harper & Row,

       1944.

Oaxaca “Male-Female Wage Differentials in Urban Labor Markets.” International Economic

       Review 14 (October 1973), 693-709.

Oliver, Melvin L. and Thomas M. Shapiro. Black Wealth / White Wealth: A New Perspective on

       Racial Inequality. New York and London: Routledge, 1995.

Reiss, Albert J. Occupations and Social Status. New York: The Free Press, 1961.

Reuter, Edward B. “The Superiority of the Mulatto.” American Journal of Sociology 23:1 (July

       1917), 83-106.

Reuter, Edward B. “The American Mulatto.” Annals of the American Academy of Political and

       Social Science 140 (November 1928), 36-43.

Russell, Kathy, Midge Wilson, and Ronald Hall. The Color Complex: The Politics of Skin Color

       among African Americans. New York: Anchor Books, 1992.

Seltzer, Richard and Robert C. Smith. “Color Differences in the Afro-American Community and

       the Differences They Make.” Journal of Black Studies 21:3 (March 1991), 279-86.

Shapiro, Thomas M. The Hidden Cost of Being African American: How Wealth Perpetuates

       Inequality. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 2004.

Snipp, C. Matthew. “Racial Measurement in the American Census: Past Practices and

       Implications for the Future.” Annual Review of Sociology 29 (2003): 563-88.

Telles, Edward E. and Edward Murguia. “Phenotypic Discrimination and Income Differences

       among Mexican Americans.” Social Science Quarterly 71: (1990): 682-96.




                                             -31-
Williamson, Joel. New People: Miscegenation and Mulattoes in the United States. New York:

      The Free Press, 1980.

Woodson, Carter G. The Education of the Negro prior to 1861. Washington, D.C.: Associated

      Publishers, Inc., 1919.




                                          -32-
Table 1: Summary statistics
                                 Male-headed households                                Female-headed households


                   Full sample    White    Af-Am     Black     Mulatto   Full sample    White     AfAm      Black     Mulatto
Af-Am                0.502                                                 0.803
Black                0.319                                                 0.463
Mulatto              0.183                                                 0.340


Wealth               3,380        6,328     455       231       846         1,023        3,707      363      177        617
                    (18839)      (26285)   (2079)    (1009)    (3138)      (6130)       (13111)   (1556)    (842)     (2154)
ln(Wealth)            5.074       5.924     4.230     3.876     4.846       4.176        5.424     3.869     3.450     4.439
                     (2.280)     (2.440)   (1.738)   (1.565)   (1.849)     (1.971)      (2.415)   (1.711)   (1.519)   (1.793)
Age                  40.354       40.089 40.617 40.951 40.034              42.923       45.008 42.411 43.174 41.371
                    (11.817)     (11.358) (12.250) (12.409) (11.948)      (14.054)     (13.440) (14.155) (14.212) (14.016)
Immigrant            0.252        0.490    0.015     0.008      0.029      0.080         0.296    0.027     0.014      0.044
Migrant              0.105        0.139    0.072     0.058      0.096      0.098         0.147    0.086     0.070      0.108
SEI                  22.320       29.756 14.940 13.446 17.545              14.892       18.487 14.008       12.895    15.524
                    (17.907)     (20.495) (10.617) (9.377) (12.054)        (8.524)     (12.154) (7.093)     (6.521)   (7.548)
No occupation        0.058        0.050    0.065     0.057      0.079      0.456         0.684    0.400     0.332      0.492
Literate head        0.821        0.971    0.672     0.606      0.788      0.736         0.944    0.684     0.626      0.764
Literate males        1.209       1.506     0.914     0.796     1.119       0.485        0.787     0.411     0.361     0.478
                     (0.961)     (1.009)   (0.810)   (0.749)   (0.869)     (0.879)      (1.094)   (0.800)   (0.700)   (0.914)
Literate females      1.109       1.383     0.837     0.723     1.034       1.280        1.776     1.158     1.039     1.320
                     (0.950)     (0.954)   (0.864)   (0.805)   (0.926)     (1.076)      (1.125)   (1.028)   (0.980)   (1.070)
Adults in hhold       5.381       5.965     4.801     4.608     5.137       4.174        5.001     3.971     3.799     4.205
                     (2.662)     (2.706)   (2.485)   (2.398)   (2.597)     (2.436)      (2.539)   (2.366)   (2.265)   (2.479)
Baltimore, Md        0.454        0.331    0.576     0.722      0.321      0.319         0.232    0.340     0.461      0.175
Baton Rouge, La      0.009        0.012    0.007     0.001      0.017      0.012         0.021    0.009     0.004      0.017
Charleston, SC       0.077        0.105    0.049     0.022      0.097      0.121         0.138    0.117     0.069      0.182
Frederick, Md        0.030        0.032    0.028     0.025      0.033      0.027         0.050    0.021     0.019      0.024
Louisville, Ky       0.046        0.055    0.037     0.037      0.038      0.039         0.049    0.037     0.042      0.030
Mobile, Al           0.025        0.032    0.018     0.004      0.044      0.024         0.038    0.020     0.008      0.037
Nashville, Ky        0.019        0.027    0.012     0.011      0.013      0.024         0.036    0.021     0.016      0.027
New Orleans, La      0.203        0.238    0.169     0.063      0.355      0.223         0.238    0.220     0.119      0.357
Petersburg, Va       0.085        0.101    0.069     0.089      0.034      0.132         0.121    0.135     0.186      0.064
Richmond, Va         0.051        0.068    0.035     0.027      0.049      0.080         0.078    0.081     0.076      0.087


Observations         11,592       5,774    2,121     3,697      5,818      4,269         842      1,451     1,976      3,427

Means, with standard deviations (except for dichotomous variables) in parentheses.
As discussed in Section 3, we have imputed wealth values at the ward level.
All same-gender subpopulation pairs of variables have means significantly different at p 0.01 (p 0.001 in almost all
cases), except men’s age and the no-occupation indicator for white versus black men. Due to undersampling of
whites, the city indicators can only be compared for black and mulatto subsamples; those other than Fredericksburg,
Louisville, and Richmond consistently differ across African-American classification with p 0.001.
Sources: U.S. Bureau of the Census, Eighth Census (1860), population census manuscripts.




                                                             -33-
Table 2: Determinants of ln (household wealth) in the urban south: ordinary least squares regression

Dependent variable                        Male-headed households                            Female-headed households
   is ln(wealth)                 (1)          (2)        (3)            (4)         (1)          (2)        (3)          (4)


AfAm†                         -1.731*** -1.553*** -1.257*** -0.759***            -1.481*** -1.335*** -1.187*** -1.092***
                               (0.247)      (0.250)    (0.186)        (0.169)     (0.240)      (0.233)    (0.193)      (0.199)


Black                         -2.052*** -1.842*** -1.456*** -0.949***            -1.908*** -1.738*** -1.452*** -1.344***
                               (0.271)      (0.278)    (0.220)        (0.202)     (0.247)      (0.239)    (0.199)      (0.213)
Mulatto                       -1.215*** -1.091*** -0.945*** -0.462***            -0.958*** -0.855*** -0.875*** -0.814***
                               (0.213)      (0.215)    (0.152)        (0.131)     (0.219)      (0.218)    (0.198)      (0.200)
Age                           0.159***     0.133***   0.136***        0.124***   0.090**       0.081**   0.078**       0.077**
                               (0.023)      (0.020)    (0.019)        (0.019)     (0.027)      (0.027)    (0.026)      (0.027)
Age squared                   -0.001*** -0.001*** -0.001*** -0.001***            -0.001**      -0.001*   -0.001*       -0.001*
                               (0.000)      (0.000)    (0.000)        (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.000)
Immigrant                     -0.714***    -0.618** -0.559***         -0.228^     -0.239        -0.18    -0.503*       -0.480^
                               (0.181)      (0.184)    (0.138)        (0.119)     (0.318)      (0.321)    (0.245)      (0.250)
Migrant                        0.313        0.374^     0.172           0.091      0.282         0.346     -0.059       -0.088
                               (0.199)      (0.193)    (0.142)        (0.123)     (0.236)      (0.232)    (0.249)      (0.262)
Literate                      0.991***      0.838**   0.830***         0.501*    0.584***      0.344^     0.322         0.278
                               (0.240)      (0.253)    (0.223)        (0.215)     (0.149)      (0.201)    (0.224)      (0.232)
Adults in hhold                            0.105***   0.135***        0.123***                 0.104*     0.088*       0.086*
                                            (0.028)    (0.024)        (0.023)                  (0.040)    (0.036)      (0.036)
Literate males                              -0.011     -0.047          -0.059                   -0.09     -0.094       -0.105
                                            (0.048)    (0.042)        (0.039)                  (0.094)    (0.078)      (0.077)
Literate females                            0.162*    0.197***         0.115*                  0.205*     0.251*       0.254**
                                            (0.066)    (0.052)        (0.053)                  (0.102)    (0.099)      (0.091)
SEI                                                                   0.038***                                          0.007
                                                                      (0.002)                                          (0.012)
No Occupation                                                           0.15                                            0.306
                                                                      (0.182)                                          (0.185)
City controls                    No           No        Yes             Yes         No           No        Yes          Yes


Constant                       0.980^       0.958^     0.184            -0.2     2.627***      2.290**    1.863*       1.653*
                               (0.564)      (0.526)    (0.432)        (0.405)     (0.734)      (0.765)    (0.733)      (0.812)


Adj. R-squared                 0.163         0.185     0.226           0.310      0.156         0.180     0.228         0.231
N                              11592        11592      11592           11592       4269         4269       4269         4269
prob F>0 for Mulatto==Black    0.000         0.000     0.001           0.001      0.000         0.000     0.000         0.000

†The first row (italicized) reports only the African-American indicator variable estimated in equations that also
included the variables in the associated columns but did not include the Black and Mulatto variables.
Other notes: Robust standard errors (allowing for correlation within wards, Stata®’s cluster option) are in
parentheses. Probability weighting was used to adjust for undersampling of white-headed households. Significance
is indicated by ^ p 0.1, * p 0.05, ** p 0.01, *** p 0.001.




                                                               -34-
Table 3: Complexion-based wealth decompositions’ treatment (T) and characteristics (C) effects

                                       Male-headed     Advantaged group (H):        Mulatto               White                    White               White
                                                          Disadvantaged (L):        Black                 Mulatto                  Black         African-American


                                             mean log wealth: ln(wH), ln(wL)      4.846, 3.876          5.888, 4.846         5.888, 3.876          5.888, 4.230
                                          geometric mean wealth ($): wH, wL        127.2, 48.2          360.7, 127.2          360.7, 48.2           360.7, 68.7
                                         raw differential: R = ln(wH) - ln(wL)          0.970                 1.042                2.012                 1.658
                                                                            -R
                                                  raw ratio (%): wL/wH = e               38%                  35%                  13%                   19%


                                                        Model From Table 2:       (3)           (4)     (3)           (4)    (3)           (4)     (3)           (4)
                                                                                  treatment: T = R – C, (as % of R)          treatment: T = R – C, (as % of R)
Assumed return to characteristics in




                                          Advantaged group, C = bH(xH - xL)      0.444      0.402      0.888      0.431     1.354      0.900      1.184      0.729
    absence of discrimination




                                                                                 (46%)     (41%)       (85%)      (41%)     (67%)     (45%)       (71%)     (44%)
                                       Disadvantaged group, C = bL(xH - xL)      0.391      0.344      0.686      0.404     0.664      0.308      0.701      0.378
                                                                                 (40%)     (35%)       (66%)      (39%)     (33%)     (15%)       (42%)     (23%)
                                        Population-weighted, C = b*(xH - xL)      0.411 0.365           0.882 0.431          1.321 0.873          1.149 0.704
                                                                                 (42%) (38%)           (85%) (41%)          (66%) (43%)          (69%) (42%)
                                             Frequency of advantaged group              0.365                 0.972                0.953                 0.928
                                            WH/WL, estimated wealth due to
                                             characteristics ratio = eC = eR-T    1.75         1.83     1.17        1.84     2.00       3.13       1.66       2.60
                                                     D = eT - 1 — see notes       51%          44%     142%         54%     275%       139%       215%       102%


                                       Female-headed        Advantaged (H):         Mulatto               White                    White               White
                                                          Disadvantaged (L):        Black                 Mulatto                  Black         African-American


                                             mean log wealth: ln(wH), ln(wL)      4.439, 3.450          5.538, 4.439         5.538, 3.450          5.538, 3.869
                                          geometric mean wealth ($): wH, wL        84.7, 31.5           254.2, 84.7           254.2, 31.5           254.2, 47.9
                                         raw differential: R = ln(wH) - ln(wL)          0.989                 1.099                2.088                 1.669
                                                                            -R
                                                  raw ratio (%): wL/wH = e               37%                  33%                  12%                   19%


                                                         Model from Table 2:      (3)           (4)     (3)           (4)    (3)           (4)     (3)           (4)
                                                                                  treatment: T = R – C, (as % of R)          treatment: T = R – C, (as % of R)
Assumed return to characteristics in




                                          Advantaged group, C = bH(xH - xL)      0.422      0.380      0.761      0.716     1.325      1.245      1.086      1.021
    absence of discrimination




                                                                                 (43%)     (38%)       (69%)      (65%)     (63%)     (60%)       (65%)     (61%)
                                       Disadvantaged group, C = bL(xH - xL)      0.421      0.387      0.587      0.475     1.122      1.043      0.833      0.729
                                                                                 (43%)     (39%)       (53%)      (43%)     (54%)     (50%)       (50%)     (44%)
                                        Population-weighted, C = b*(xH - xL)      0.421 0.384           0.739 0.686          1.291 1.212          1.022 0.947
                                                                                 (43%) (39%)           (67%) (62%)          (62%) (58%)          (61%) (57%)
                                             Frequency of advantaged group              0.423                 0.874                0.836                 0.746
                                            WH/WL, estimated wealth due to
                                             characteristics ratio = eC = eR-T    1.76         1.83     1.43        1.51     2.22       2.40       1.91       2.06
                                                     D = eT - 1 — see notes       52%          47%     109%         99%     264%       236%       178%       158%

Notes: Calculated from regressions specified as those reported in columns 3 and 4 of Table 2, but run separately for
each color and gender subpopulation. Oaxaca’s (1973) adaptation of Becker’s (1971) discrimination coefficient, D
= ((wH/wL)-(wH/wL)) / (wH/wL) = eT – 1, is the increase in wealth due to unmeasured differences, using the boldface
(population-weighted) counterfactual estimate of the treatment residual, C = b*(xH – xL).



                                                                                                -35-
