                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 DEBIASING THROUGH LAW

                                          Christine Jolls
                                         Cass R. Sunstein

                                       Working Paper 11738
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w11738


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2005




For helpful comments on this project, we are very grateful to Bruce Ackerman, Ian Ayres, Oren Bar-
Gill, Lucian Bebchuk, Cary Coglianese, Richard Craswell, Richard Fallon, Neal Feigenson, Merritt
Fox, Barbara Fried, Howell Jackson, Louis Kaplow, Daryl Levinson, John Manning, Jerry Mashaw,
Alison Morantz, Paul Oyer, Eric Posner, Jeffrey Rachlinski, Diane Ring, Roberta Romano, Frederick
Schauer, Reva Siegel, Peter Siegelman, Matthew Stephenson, Adrian Vermeule, and participants in
workshops at Boston University Law School, Columbia Law School, Fordham Law School, Harvard
Law School, the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University, Stanford Law
School, and Yale Law School. For outstanding research assistance, we thank John DeLong, Michael
Fertik, Mindy Klenoff, Audrey Lee, Pat Robertson, Daniel Schwarcz and Mike Simkovic. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Christine Jolls and Cass R. Sunstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Debiasing through Law
Christine Jolls and Cass R. Sunstein
NBER Working Paper No. 11738
November 2005
JEL No. K00, K11, K13, K22

                                           ABSTRACT

In many settings, human beings are boundedly rational. A distinctive and insufficiently explored
legal response to bounded rationality is to attempt to "debias through law," by steering people in
more rational directions. In many important domains, existing legal analyses emphasize the
alternative approach of insulating outcomes from the effects of boundedly rational behavior, often
through blocking private choices. In fact, however, a large number of actual and imaginable legal
strategies are efforts to engage in the very different approach of debiasing through law by reducing
or even eliminating people's boundedly rational behavior. In important contexts, these efforts to
debias through law can avoid the costs and inefficiencies associated with regulatory approaches that
take bounded rationality as a given and respond by attempting to insulate outcomes from its effects.
This paper offers a general account of how debiasing through law does or could work to address
legal questions across a range of areas, from consumer safety law to corporate law to property law.
Discussion is also devoted to the risks of government manipulation and overshooting that are
sometimes raised when debiasing through law is employed.

Christine Jolls
Harvard Law School
Griswold 504
Cambridge, MA
and NBER
cjolls@nber.org

Cass R. Sunstein
University of Chicago Law School
Chicago, IL 60637
csunstei@uchicago.edu
                                  Introduction

        A growing body of legal analysis focuses on how human behavior
deviates systematically from what would be predicted by the traditional
economic assumption of unbounded rationality.1 To the extent that legal rules
are designed on the basis of their anticipated effects on behavior, bounded
rationality is obviously relevant to the formulation of legal policy. But an
important and under-addressed question is precisely how it is relevant to the
formulation of legal policy. The most obvious possibility is that, given a
demonstration of the existence and importance of a particular aspect of
bounded rationality, the law should be structured to presume the persistence
of that particular feature of human behavior.

        Much existing work in behavioral law and economics is of this
character. Consider, for instance, the large literature suggesting that
boundedly rational consumers believe potentially risky products to be
substantially safer than they in fact are. If such beliefs exist, then the law
might – and to some degree does – respond by adopting heightened standards
of manufacturer liability for consumer products (e.g., Latin 1994). Or
consider the argument that “Monday morning quarter-backing” by judges or
juries adversely affects judgments reached by these decision makers on
matters of corporate law, so that corporations are held liable for bad events
even if preventing those events would have been extremely difficult (e.g.,
Rachlinski 1998). If so, then the law could respond, as indeed it has with the
“business judgment rule,” by largely vitiating the liability of corporate law
actors, who would otherwise be vulnerable to such second-guessing on the
part of adjudicators. More generally, rules and institutions might be, and
frequently are, designed to curtail or even entirely block choice in the hope
that legal outcomes will not fall prey to problems of bounded rationality. In
the existing behavioral law and economics literature, bounded rationality
“has been used to support the restriction of individual choice, almost without
exception” (Rachlinski 2003, p. 1168). Boundedly rational behavior might
be, and often is, taken to justify a strategy of insulation, attempting to protect
legal outcomes from people’s bounded rationality.



1
  See, for example, Jolls, Sunstein and Thaler (1998a), Korobkin and Ulen
(2000), Parisi and Smith (2004), Sunstein (2000), and law review symposia
in Vanderbilt Law Review (1998) and Northwestern University Law Review
(2003).



                                        1
        A quite different possibility – one that has received much less
attention in the existing literature – is that legal policy may respond best to
problems of bounded rationality not by insulating legal outcomes from its
effects, but instead by operating directly on the boundedly rational behavior
and attempting to help people either to reduce or to eliminate it. We describe
legal policy in this category as “debiasing through law.” Such strategies are
analytically distinct in important ways from the approach of insulation and,
we claim below, often represent a less intrusive, more direct, and more
democratic response to the problem of bounded rationality.

        In fact there exists a substantial, empirically-oriented social science
literature on prospects for debiasing of individuals after a demonstration of a
given form of bounded rationality.2 But empirical findings about these forms
of debiasing have made only limited appearances in the legal literature,3 and
equally important, social scientists interested in such forms of debiasing have
generally not investigated the possibility of achieving them through law. In
many important settings, empirical evidence suggests the substantial potential
of these sorts of debiasing strategies, and from a legal policy perspective it is
obviously important to ask about the role that law can play in facilitating such
debiasing. That is our major focus in this paper.

         When debiasing of individuals after a demonstration of a given form
of bounded rationality has been discussed in the legal literature, the treatment
has focused on existing or proposed steps taken in procedural rules governing
adjudication by judges or juries. Such work complements a longstanding
literature examining and responding in a range of ways to bounded rationality
in the adjudicative process (see, e.g., Rachlinski 2000, pp. 753-56). A well-
known example of debiasing through procedural rules governing the
adjudicative process stems from the work by Linda Babcock, George
Loewenstein, Samuel Issacharoff and Colin Camerer (1995) on the tendency
of litigants to evaluate likely outcomes at trial in light of their own
perspectives and interests. Thus, for instance, these authors find that
individuals assigned to the role of the plaintiff and presented with exactly the
same information as is presented to individuals assigned to the role of the

2
  See, for example, Fischhoff (1982) and Weinstein and Klein (2002). Many
other illustrations appear in the body of the paper.
3
  As noted in the text just below, where debiasing of boundedly rational
actors through law has been examined in the existing literature, the focus has
been on achieving debiasing through procedural rules governing adjudication
by judges or juries. We discuss several examples below.



                                       2
defendant offer far higher estimates of the likelihood of a plaintiff victory in a
lawsuit. Babcock, Loewenstein and Issacharoff (1997) find, however, that
this bias may be eradicated by requiring litigants to consider the weaknesses
in their case or reasons that the judge might rule against them. In these
circumstances, individuals in the plaintiff’s and defendant’s roles have
similar views on likely trial outcomes.4 The present paper, by contrast, gives
primary emphasis to a different and broader form of debiasing through law –
a category we call “debiasing through substantive law.”

        The central idea of debiasing through substantive law is that in some
cases it may be desirable to understand or to reform the substance of law –
not merely the procedures by which the law is applied in an adjudicative
setting – with an eye toward debiasing those who suffer from bounded
rationality. Through a series of examples from areas of law outside of the
rules of adjudicative procedure, we hope to demonstrate that the project of
debiasing through substantive law holds previously unrecognized promise for
both understanding and improving the legal system.

        Section 1 begins by offering background for our project. Section 2
focuses on debiasing through substantive law. It illustrates the general scope
and power of this form of debiasing by describing the role it does or could
play in addressing central questions across a range of legal domains, from
consumer safety law to corporate law to property law. Our analysis of
debiasing through substantive law contrasts with the more usual focus in the
existing legal literature on insulating outcomes from the effects of people’s
bounded rationality.

        Section 3 explores some of the important normative questions raised
by debiasing through law (whether achieved through substantive law or
through procedural rules governing the adjudicative process). Compared to
the more common approach of insulating legal outcomes from the effects of
bounded rationality, an important advantage of strategies for debiasing
through law is that they aim to correct errors while still preserving as much
opportunity as possible for people to make their own choices. Under
Babcock, Loewenstein and Issacharoff’s approach of debiasing through
procedural rules in response to litigants’ biased beliefs about trial outcomes,
for instance, no decision making power or information is removed from
litigants’ hands; by contrast, an “insulating” approach to litigants’ bias

4
  It is possible that bias by real litigants – outside of an experimental setting –
is more resilient (Farnsworth 2003, pp. 582-85).



                                         3
suggests keeping information out of their hands entirely (Issacharoff and
Loewenstein 1995, pp. 772-78). An important corollary of choice-preserving
strategies is that they help to address boundedly rational behavior while
avoiding the imposition of significant costs on those who do not exhibit
bounded rationality.

         At the same time, debiasing through law in either of its two varieties
(substantive or procedural) raises distinctive normative concerns that require
discussion. Such debiasing involves the government in a self-conscious
process of changing the behavior of at least some people by altering their
perceptions of the world around them. In some respects, such government
action is entirely routine, as government frequently and uncontroversially
regulates in response to individuals’ misinformation, thereby altering
perceptions in at least some instances. In extreme cases, however, debiasing
through law could come to resemble a system of government propaganda in
violation of widely-shared normative commitments. As our examples below
will illustrate, however, many actual and conceivable forms of debiasing
through law do not exhibit this problem.


1.     Bounded Rationality

        If debiasing through law is a response to bounded rationality, then an
obvious first step is to understand the basic idea of bounded rationality. As is
now well known in the legal literature and beyond, researchers in psychology
and behavioral economics have uncovered a wide range of departures from
unboundedly rational behavior. (They have also discovered other departures
from traditional economic assumptions – such as the assumption that people
generally exhibit narrowly self-interested rather than fairness-oriented
behavior – but we focus on departures from unbounded rationality because in
many cases such departures are clear mistakes that warrant correction,
whereas the case of fairness-oriented behavior hardly presents a strong case
for correction.)

         Departures from unbounded rationality take one of two general forms.
First, individuals may make judgment errors. Second, human behavior may
deviate from the precepts of expected utility theory. We briefly describe these
two basic categories; we hope that many readers will find them familiar, but
the following description should provide a helpful background for the
discussion of debiasing through law.




                                       4
1.1    Judgment Errors

        Many judgment errors stem from “heuristics” that often shape human
decision making. Begin with a familiar example of a heuristic. Asked how
many words in a 2,000-word section of a novel end in “ing,” people give
much larger estimates than those asked how many words have “n” as the
second-to-last letter in the same material, notwithstanding the obvious fact
that more words must satisfy the latter criterion than the former (Tversky and
Kahneman 1983, p. 295). According to the “availability heuristic” at work in
cases of this sort, the probability of an event is estimated after an assessment
of how easily examples of the event can be called to mind. The availability
heuristic often produces sensible judgments and behavior for people who lack
detailed statistical information, but it also can lead to significant and severe
errors. Heuristics, then, can produce important biases. Thus “availability
bias” might be said to arise when the availability heuristic leads people to
make predictable errors in assessing probabilities. The prospect of errors in
some cases does not suggest that the behavior in question is “irrational” in the
sense of being arbitrary or lacking plausible justification. The point instead is
that the behavior, even if sensible in many cases, leads to systematic error in
some of them. Bounded rationality is hardly the same as “irrationality” (Jolls,
Sunstein and Thaler 1998b, p. 1594).

        A related set of findings emphasizes not mental short-cuts, but more
direct biases that lead to inaccurate judgments. An illustration is hindsight
bias, in which decision makers attach excessively high probabilities to events
that ended up occurring; we referred to this bias above in discussing
corporate law’s business judgment rule.

        An important bias that has received significant attention in the legal
literature on bounded rationality – and that we suggest in section 2 creates
important opportunities for debiasing through substantive law – is optimism
bias. Optimism bias refers to the tendency of people to believe that their own
probability of facing a bad outcome is lower than it actually is. Viscusi and
Magat (1987, pp. 93-95), for instance, report that roughly half of consumers
they surveyed considered their own household to be below average in risk,
while the other half considered their household to be average in risk – yet
obviously in aggregate these perceptions cannot be correct. As summarized in
Jolls (1998, p. 1659), people typically think that their chances of a range of
bad outcomes, from having an auto accident to contracting a particular
disease to getting fired from a job, are significantly lower than the average




                                       5
person’s chances of suffering these misfortunes – although, again, this cannot
be true for everyone.

         While the “above average” effect just described is well established, it
does not by itself establish that people optimistically underestimate their
statistical risk (Viscusi and Magat 1987, pp. 95-96). For instance, people
might believe that they are less likely than most people to contract cancer,
while also having an accurate sense of the actual probability that they will
contract cancer. But substantial evidence suggests that people sometimes
exhibit optimism bias in the estimation of actual probabilities, not simply
relative risk. For example, Armour and Taylor (2002, pp. 334-35) describe
studies reporting that professional financial experts consistently overestimate
likely corporate earnings, while business school students overestimate their
likely starting salary and the number of offers that they will receive. People
also underestimate their own likelihood of being involved in an automobile
accident, and their frequent failure to buy insurance for floods and
earthquakes is consistent with the view that people are excessively
optimistic.5 It is noteworthy that these data pointing to optimism bias come
from individuals making judgments that they make regularly in their
everyday lives, rather than judgments far removed from those they would
ordinarily make.


1.2       Departures from Expected Utility Theory

        Along with the category of judgment errors, the idea of bounded
rationality includes ways in which actual choices depart from the predictions
of expected utility theory – a foundational feature of traditional economic
analysis. While departures from expected utility theory have received only
modest attention in the existing social science literature on debiasing of
boundedly rational actors (for reasons we shall explain), below we suggest
their relevance to debiasing through law.

       A leading alternative to expected utility theory is Daniel Kahneman
and Amos Tversky’s (1979) prospect theory. According to this theory, people
evaluate outcomes based on the change they represent from an initial
reference point, rather than based on the nature of the outcome itself.
Prospect theory also posits that people weigh losses more heavily than gains,
thus showing “loss aversion.”

5
    See Jolls (1998, pp. 1660-61) for a discussion of the relevant studies.



                                          6
        Related to loss aversion is the “endowment effect,” according to
which an individual’s valuation of an entitlement depends on whether the
individual is given initial ownership of that entitlement (Kahneman, Knetsch
and Thaler 1990). Thus, for example, individuals endowed with university
mugs demand substantially more to sell these mugs than unendowed
individuals are willing to pay to buy them – although recent evidence points
to the influence of context-specific features of the environment on the
occurrence of the endowment effect (Plott and Zeiler 2005).

        Also related to loss aversion are framing effects. Because losses
matter more than gains, framing outcomes as losses rather than gains will
generally affect how people respond.6 As one example, consider the vigorous
dispute over the content of a recent government advertising campaign in the
United States (Peterson 2003). The advertising campaign in question
involved the effects of breastfeeding of newborns. In the approach favored by
breastfeeding advocates, the advertisements would refer to the risks to the
child of leukemia and other diseases from not consuming breast milk – and
this was the approach taken in the original version of the advertisements.
Showing an intuitive understanding of prospect theory, those opposed to the
original advertisements fought to have the government emphasize the
advantages of breastfeeding rather than the affirmative harms (losses) of not
breastfeeding. Below we discuss how the legal system might employ framing
effects to engage in debiasing of boundedly rational actors.


2.     Debiasing Through Substantive Law

        This section develops a set of organizing examples of debiasing
through substantive law. (The introduction and the appendix refer to existing
examples of debiasing through procedural rules governing the adjudicative
process.) We suggest how the idea of debiasing through substantive law can
or does address important choices the legal system must make across a range
of legal domains. Our discussion follows the division in section 1 above
between bounded rationality in the form of judgment errors and bounded
rationality in the form of departures from expected utility theory. Our goal is
not to reach final conclusions about each of the legal questions we explore,


6
 Druckman (2001), however, shows that framing effects are less important
when one of the options is endorsed by a trusted intermediary.



                                       7
but rather to show the potential value of debiasing through law across a
number of distinct domains.

        In examining debiasing through substantive law, this section focuses
on forms of bounded rationality that the existing social science literature has
shown to be responsive to strategies for debiasing of boundedly rational
actors. This point is important because not all types of bounded rationality
may respond to such strategies (see, e.g., Fischhoff 1982, pp. 427-31). We
focus below on cases in which the existing social science literature has
identified successful strategies for debiasing of boundedly rational actors.

        As the discussion in the preceding paragraph suggests, the analysis
below draws on existing empirical evidence rather than offering new
evidence of ways of debiasing boundedly rational actors. There is a rich
literature on prospects for debiasing of individuals after a demonstration of a
given form of bounded rationality, and the next step from the perspective of
legal analysis – the step we take in this paper – is to show how substantive
law does or should play a role in achieving such debiasing.


2.1     Debiasing Through Substantive Law in Response to Judgment Errors


2.1.1   Debiasing Through Consumer Safety Law

        A central impetus for the large body of existing law regulating
consumer safety is the belief that consumers do not adequately understand the
potential risks of the products they use. Consumers may not adequately
understand such risks because they lack factual information, because they
suffer from bounded rationality – most familiarly because of the phenomenon
of optimism bias described in section 1.1 above – or both.

        If the problem of limited consumer understanding (assuming there is
such a problem) merely reflects a lack of information, then the traditional
corrective is the straightforward provision of additional information (e.g.,
Stiglitz 1986, pp. 90-91). In fact in a wide range of important contexts the
law requires firms to provide consumers with various types of factual
information (often in specific, understandable forms), as under the Truth in
Lending Act’s requirement that lenders provide a range of disclosures to




                                       8
prospective borrowers.7 However, as the discussion above of optimism bias
suggested and as various commentators (e.g., Latin 1994, pp. 1243-44) have
emphasized, optimism bias may lead many consumers to underestimate their
personal risks even if they receive accurate information about average risks –
a problem that may arise whenever the key piece of information to be
disclosed to individuals is a probability estimate (such as the risk of harm
from a product) rather than a certain outcome.

         Many observers have thus concluded that optimism bias (perhaps in
conjunction with other factors) justifies heightened standards of products
liability as an alternative to the provision of additional statistical facts about
the product in question (e.g., Prentice and Roszkowski 1991-1992). But such
an approach – seeking to insulate legal outcomes from the effects of
boundedly rational behavior – imposes large costs of its own, as Schwartz
(1988) and others have suggested. A still more aggressive “insulating”
approach, available under existing law in the case of some products, is an
across-the-board ban on the product’s use. A number of federal statutes give
agencies a choice among disclosure requirements and partial or complete
bans.8 In response to evidence of inadequate information, optimism bias, and
other consumer errors, some regulators might well be tempted to impose a
ban even if the statute reflects a preference for less restrictive alternatives,
such as disclosure, where those alternatives are feasible.9

        An alternative to these strategies for insulating legal outcomes from
the effects of bounded rationality is to use the law to reduce the occurrence of
boundedly rational behavior in the first instance. At the broadest level,
strategies for debiasing through consumer safety law provide a sort of middle
ground between inaction or the earlier prescription (in response to a simple
lack of factual information) of “more information,” on the one hand, and the
aggressive “insulating” strategies of heightened products liability standards
or outright bans, on the other. Strategies for debiasing through consumer
safety law may be far more successful than the mere provision of statistical
facts about average risks, and simultaneously far more protective of
consumer prerogatives than the strategy of an across-the-board ban. Some
strategies for debiasing through consumer protection law (including in the

7
  Truth in Lending Act, 15 U.S.C. §§1601-1667f.
8
  See, for example, Consumer Product Safety Act, 15 U.S.C. §§2051-2085;
Toxic Substances Control Act, 15 U.S.C. §§2601-2692.
9
  See, for example, Corrosion Proof Fittings v. EPA, 947 F.2d 1201 (5th Cir.
1991).



                                        9
consumer safety area) may be found in existing case law under the Federal
Trade Commission Act; below we develop new and broader examples of
such debiasing.10

         In the discussion below of debiasing through consumer safety law, we
will focus on scenarios in which optimism bias is thought to produce an
overall underestimation by consumers of the risk associated with a given
product. As Schwartz and Wilde (1983, pp. 1431-46), among others, have
emphasized, not all settings will be characterized by significant consumer
risk underestimation as a result of optimism bias. In general, optimism bias is
context-dependent (Armour and Taylor 2002, pp. 338-41). Moreover, in
some circumstances, a competing form of bounded rationality could lead
consumers to overestimate rather than underestimate the risk associated with
a product. For instance, highly available instances of accident or injury can
lead to excessive pessimism – a distortion opposite the one produced by
optimism bias (Schwartz and Wilde 1983, pp. 1437-38). Another possibility
is that overoptimistic consumers may underestimate base-level risk but
overestimate the decrease in risk from safety measures – potentially creating
a positive incentive for firms to undertake such measures (Schwartz 1988, pp.
376-77). Still another possibility is that likelihoods of very low probability
events will be overestimated, although the empirical evidence here is mixed,
with some authors suggesting overestimation of the likelihood of very low
probability events (e.g., Viscusi and Magat 1987, pp. 90-93) and other
authors suggesting underestimation of the likelihood of such events (e.g.,
Kunreuther 1982, p. 209). Our focus in this section is on cases in which
optimism bias is thought to lead to underestimation of the risks associated
with a given product.11




10
   For discussion of existing approaches under the Federal Trade Commission
Act, see Beales, Craswell and Salop (1981, pp. 495-501, 516-21); Craswell
(1981); infra notes 21-22 and accompanying text.
11
   In addition, our focus is this specific aspect of consumer understanding
rather than more general “affect-related” features of consumer understanding.
For discussion of the distinction between “propositional” knowledge about
products – such as the probability of harm from a product – and broader
features such as “affect,” see Craswell (1985, pp. 661-63). For a recent
comprehensive discussion of the “affect heuristic,” see Slovic et al. (2002).



                                      10
2.1.1.1 Evidence on Debiasing in Response to Optimism Bias

        In the social science literature, straightforward strategies for debiasing
in response to optimism bias include considering risk factors related to
negative outcomes and suggesting reasons that negative outcomes might
occur. In a series of studies, however, Weinstein and Klein (2002) find that
such approaches fail to reduce optimism bias.12 Their findings suggest that
successful debiasing strategies in response to optimism bias must take other
forms. Consider two possibilities, both of which involve harnessing separate
aspects of bounded rationality in response to optimism bias.

        Debiasing through the availability heuristic. Building on Schwartz
and Wilde’s (1983, pp. 1437-38) observation about the role of availability,
one response to the risk that optimistically biased individuals believe “it
won’t happen to them” is the availability heuristic described above. Recall
our earlier example of this heuristic: individuals asked how many words in a
2,000-word section of a novel end in “ing” give much larger estimates than
individuals asked how many words have “n” as the second-to-last letter
(Tversky and Kahneman 1983, p. 295). As described in section 1.1, use of the
availability heuristic often produces a form of judgment error; as with
optimism bias, availability can lead to systematic mistakes in the assessment
of probabilities. (Thus “availability bias,” in the form of excessively high
estimates, and “unavailability bias,” in the form of excessively low estimates,
involve complementary errors.) But because making an occurrence
“available” or readily accessible to individuals will increase their estimates of
the likelihood of the occurrence, availability is a promising strategy for
debiasing those who suffer from excessive optimism.

        One prominent method for making an occurrence available to
individuals is exposing them to a concrete instance of the occurrence. Thus,
for instance, a recent series of studies of smoking behavior finds that smokers

12
   Weinstein and Klein note that individualized information about risk factors
was found in other studies to reduce optimism bias, but we do not pursue this
finding here because it is difficult to imagine incorporating such
individualized information into a general legal standard. A similar point
applies to the one successful debiasing mechanism reported in Weinstein
(1980) in response to optimism bias; that mechanism – in which individuals
were exposed to lists made by other individuals of factors improving the
other individuals’ chances of positive outcomes – again seems hard to
translate into a recognizable legal standard.



                                       11
are more likely to believe that smoking will harm their health if they are
aware of specific instances of such harm (Sloan, Taylor and Smith 2003, pp.
157-79). More generally, people tend to respond to concrete, narrative
information even when they do not respond, or respond far less, to general
statistical information (Nisbett et al. 1982, pp. 107-16). Concrete information
appears to render the incident in question available in a way that can
successfully counteract optimism bias.

         As an illustration of the basic idea of debiasing through the
availability heuristic in response to optimism bias, consider the finding of
Neil Weinstein (1980, p. 810) that many people substantially underestimate
their risk of cancer. Imagine that women asked to estimate their risk of breast
cancer are told, before giving their estimates, a poignant and detailed story
about a woman their age with similar family and other circumstances who
was diagnosed with breast cancer. If so, then the empirical results described
above suggest that the women’s estimated probabilities will typically be
higher. (Of course, they may be too much higher or not enough higher –
points we discuss at some length in our normative analysis in section 3
below).

        Debiasing through framing. A second form of debiasing in response
to optimism bias involves framing effects of the sort discussed in section 1.2
above. As we noted, people tend to weigh losses more heavily than gains in
evaluating potential outcomes. This evidence suggests that framing the
presentation of information to exploit the extra weight attached to losses may
counteract bounded rationality in the form of optimism bias.

        Consider one well-known illustration of the effects of framing. In a
study involving breast cancer risk and breast self-examination, material that
describes the positive effects of self-examination – such as a higher chance of
discovering a tumor at an earlier stage – produces significantly less
behavioral change than material that stresses the negative consequences of
failing to undertake self-examination – such as a decreased chance of
discovering a tumor when it remains treatable (Meyerowitz and Chaiken
1987, p. 505). Suppose that women are optimistically biased about the
prospects that they will suffer from breast cancer and hence underestimate the
value of engaging in recommended self-examinations. If so, then framing the
recommendation to self-examine in terms of losses rather than gains should
increase the probability they attach to benefiting from a self-examination, and
thus should counteract optimism bias.




                                      12
        Debiasing versus incentives. The examples just discussed illustrate a
general point about debiasing of boundedly rational actors. Such debiasing, in
our conception, does not involve providing people with improved incentives
in the hope of reducing their bounded rationality. In some cases providing
incentives may in fact diminish people’s bounded rationality. For instance,
many people are markedly prone to social influence and will ignore even the
clear evidence of their own senses, and hence provide incorrect answers, if
they are confronted with the unanimous views of others (Asch 1955); but this
tendency turns out to be significantly reduced when people stand to gain
financially from giving correct answers, as long as task difficulty is not too
high (Baron, Vandello and Brunsman 1996).

        A broad definition of debiasing of boundedly rational actors might
embrace the use of incentives to reduce bounded rationality (Fischhoff 1982,
p. 424). A more conservative view, however, is that if an apparent departure
from unbounded rationality is eliminated with the provision of financial
incentives, then the apparent departure was not a departure from unbounded
rationality at all, but instead a mere result of lazy or careless decision making
by an actor who had no reason to be other than lazy or careless.

        In the analysis above and below, we emphasize this more
conservative definition and focus on cases in which behavior changes not
from the provision of financial incentives, but rather from intervening in and
altering the situation that produces the boundedly rational behavior. Under
this conception of debiasing of boundedly rational actors, individuals are not
asked to repeat the very same task with the very same structure, with the sole
difference that they now have greater reason to take care in making their
choices; instead the environment is restructured in a way that alters not
individuals’ motivation but the actual process by which they perceive the
world around them.


2.1.1.2 Legal Implications

       We now apply the two forms of debiasing in response to optimism
bias developed above to the context of consumer safety law.

         Debiasing through the availability heuristic. In the consumer safety
context, debiasing through the availability heuristic would focus on putting at
consumers’ cognitive disposal the prospect of negative outcomes from use, or
at least unsafe use, of a particular product. Specifically, the law could require




                                       13
firms – on pain of administrative penalties or tort liability – to provide a
truthful account of consequences that resulted from a particular harm-
producing use of the product, rather than simply providing a generalized
warning or statement that fails to harness availability. (Recall the example
from above of an account of a specific woman’s experience suffering from
breast cancer.)

        Familiar in existing consumer safety law are generalized warnings,
such as the statement on every package of cigarettes sold in the United States
that smoking may be hazardous to one’s health; but the evidence suggests
that the approach of requiring the specific account as opposed to the
generalized statement would help to reduce optimism bias (Nisbett et al.
1982). Ideally the specific account of harm described here would change
occasionally to avoid the phenomenon of “wear-out,” in which consumers
learn to tune out messages that are repeated too often (e.g., Craig, Sternthal
and Leavitt 1976).13

        Our general point here is similar in spirit (although we do not suggest
a specific requirement of vividness, as emphasized below) to Chris Guthrie’s
suggestion that legal policy makers should bring “vivid information about
plaintiff losses in frivolous litigation” to bear in reducing plaintiffs’
overestimation of the probability of success in such litigation – an illustration
of debiasing through procedural rules governing the adjudicative process
(Guthrie 2000, p. 210). The emphasis on specific narratives also avoids the
difficulty of coming up with an accurate numerical probability estimate
(Schwartz and Wilde 1983, pp. 1459-60). Analogies to the approach
proposed here for the consumer safety context could be imagined as well for
the important domain of securities disclosure – a domain in which the
Securities and Exchange Commission has for long struggled with the issue of
effective communication of risks to prospective investors.14

13
   It is possible that, as Douglas Kysar (2003, pp. 1785-1786 and n364) has
noted, consumer safety strategies for insulating legal outcomes from the
effects of bounded rationality – as opposed to the strategies discussed here
for debiasing through law – would give some firms indirect incentives to
provide the sorts of truthful accounts (emphasizing “people or anecdotes”
rather than “statistics,” to use Kysar’s phrasing) that we advocate here. Our
emphasis, however, is on these more direct strategies for debiasing through
substantive law.
14
   See, for example, Securities and Exchange Commission, “Concept Release
on Improving Descriptions of Risk by Mutual Funds and Other Investment



                                       14
        Of course, for information – of whatever sort – to matter to decision
makers, it must come to their attention. Thus, in the consumer safety context
the law might require that the real-life story of accident or injury be printed in
large type and displayed prominently, so that consumers would be reasonably
likely to see and read it before using the product. Still, for some of the
reasons developed most prominently by Howard Latin (1994) – for instance,
the simple fact of illiteracy among a nontrivial fraction of consumers – no
warning or statement will be guaranteed to reach each and every product
user. A further important note concerns the prospects for manufacturers’
influence over consumer perceptions; as Edward Glaeser (2004, p. 410)
writes, “One should expect to see a proliferation of misleading signals and
other cues when incorrect beliefs are complements to buying sellers’
commodities.” In our context, this influence suggests the importance of
maintaining some legal control over the nature and format of the accounts
manufacturers are required to provide. It is possible that manufacturers,
influenced by market pressures, would manage to subvert attempts to achieve
debiasing through the availability heuristic. At the same time, with such
debiasing as with any informationally-oriented strategy, there are important
countervailing benefits to limiting the degree of “overspecification” of
messages (Beales, Craswell and Salop 1981, pp. 535-36), and the ultimate
question of the optimal form of debiasing through the availability heuristic is
an empirical one.15

       Debiasing through the availability heuristic–limits. The effort to
achieve debiasing through the availability heuristic in consumer safety law
should be modest along two separate dimensions. First, a successful strategy


Companies,” 60 Fed. Reg. 17,172 (Apr. 4, 1995); see also Securities and
Exchange Commission Form S–1, Pt. I, Item 3 (requiring disclosure of
information required by Item 503 of Regulation S–K); Securities and
Exchange Commission Regulation S–K, §503(c) (requiring disclosure of risk
factors).
15
   A further important benefit of using availability to counteract optimism
bias in the consumer safety context is that such an approach would improve
not only the decision making of consumers suffering from optimism bias but
also that of consumers suffering from a simple lack of information. A
conspicuous, prominent account of injury from a product should help to
correct the estimated probability of harm attached to the product by an
optimistically biased consumer but is also likely to improve the behavior of
consumers suffering from a simple lack of information.



                                       15
would need to target a limited number of discrete products for which the
problem of consumer optimism bias was most clear and important. (As noted
above, in some contexts there may not be a problem of consumer optimism
bias at all.) Consumers would begin to suffer from “information overload” if
every time they went to buy any product – from a lawnmower to a candy bar
to a fast food hamburger – they were hit with a real-life story of an individual
harmed by use or consumption of the product. Their natural response might
be to tune out all of the accounts provided by firms, even assuming these
accounts were prominently displayed (e.g., Magat and Viscusi 1992, pp. 185-
86).16

         Second, the law would need to avoid overreaching with respect to the
severity of the featured outcomes; this is especially important in light of the
fact, noted above, that optimism bias is adaptive in many contexts, and, thus,
there is certainly little to be gained from transforming consumers into
thoroughgoing pessimists. Firms should not be required to provide anecdotes
reflecting highly unusual consequences of using their products, as an
emphasis on worst-case scenarios could produce excessive responses
(Sunstein 2002). If requirements of anecdote-based warnings sweep in
extremely unusual or unlikely scenarios, consumers might overreact – or
alternatively they might lose faith and fail to attach any weight at all to the
accounts. Of course there are line-drawing problems here, but the basic point
is straightforward.

        Note in addition that worst-case scenarios are likely to be much more
easily avoided with our suggestion of a legal requirement that firms provide
truthful anecdotes about genuine harms than with the alternative strategy –
frequently used by government – of public information campaigns
concerning risky consumer products. Such campaigns have often resulted in
the use of extremely vivid and salient images, to the point of seriously risking
overreaction or even backlash as a result of citizens’ perceptions of
government “manipulation.” In the smoking context, for instance, the
European Union has experimented with requirements that a percentage of
cigarette packages sold have their fronts covered with vivid pictures of



16
   Elsewhere Viscusi (1988, pp.298-301) discusses ways of implementing
multi-tiered warning systems, where high-risk products contain warnings on
their labels while stores offer reference books with risk information for low-
risk products.



                                       16
rotting lungs.17 We think the approach suggested here is sounder because it is
more restrained. Like the European Union, the Canadian Health Ministry has
required not only clear warnings (“Cigarettes cause strokes,” “Tobacco
smoke hurts babies,” and “Tobacco use can make you impotent”) but also
graphic pictures such as highly disfigured gums and lungs with cancerous
tumors.18 Likewise, in the United States a well-known anti-drug
advertisement from the 1980s featured a picture of an egg frying in a pan
with the voiceover, “This is your brain on drugs” (Dewan 2004). Again, we
think it is often valuable to avoid such extreme messages.

       Overall, our suggestion of requiring, on pain of administrative
sanctions or tort liability, truthful narratives of harm is a more modest and
measured response to optimism bias than the approaches just described –
approaches that harness availability by aggressively exploiting highly salient,
gripping images and that for this very reason may run an especially high risk
of manipulation, overshooting, and other problems.

        Debiasing through the availability heuristic–analogies to existing
practice. The idea of requiring firms to provide truthful accounts of harm has
analogies in current practice. The American Legacy Foundation, an
organization founded out of the 1998 settlement agreement between the
United States tobacco industry and state attorneys general,19 has launched an
information campaign employing a close parallel to the strategy outlined here
of debiasing through the availability heuristic. The Foundation has
publicized, in leading national magazines and on the internet, parting letters
to children and other loved ones from mothers dying of smoking-related
diseases. For instance, one letter reads, “Dearest Jon, I am so sorry my
smoking will cheat us out of 20 or 30 more years together. Remember the fun
we had every year at the lake. I will ALWAYS love and treasure you.
Linda.”20 Our suggested approach reflects much the same spirit – although, as


17
   See http://lists.essential.org/pipermail/intl-tobacco/2001q1/000426.html
(visited 6/16/2005).
18
   See
http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/hecs-sesc/tobacco/legislation/warnings/warnings.html
(visited 7/5/2005).
19
   See http://www.adcouncil.org/orgs/american_legacy_foundation/ (visited
8/18/2005).
20
   See http://women.americanlegacy.org/includes/pdfs/ad2.pdf (visited
8/19/2005).



                                      17
already indicated, firms required to provide truthful accounts would almost
certainly choose ones less vivid and heart rending than this one.

        Our suggested approach also has a kindred spirit in the existing law of
deceptive advertising under the Federal Trade Commission Act.21 This Act
generally prohibits firms from conveying information to consumers in ways
that risk consumer misperception.22 Under this law, the Federal Trade
Commission has restricted advertisements that profile one or two specific
accounts of success or benefit, based on the concern that consumers will
overestimate the probability of having a similar experience (Craswell 1985,
pp. 704-05). In a very real sense, the law of deceptive advertising is thus a
form of debiasing through substantive law; like our proposed approach here,
it adopts a middle ground between inaction or naive informational strategies,
on the one hand, and the “insulating” strategies of heightened liability
standards or outright bans, on the other. Of course, the law of deceptive
advertising concerns limits on affirmative statements (advertisements) firms
choose to undertake, while the proposal here concerns requirements that
firms affirmatively provide information in particular ways; but in both cases
the underlying attempt is to use law to reduce the severity of consumer error.

        Debiasing through framing. Framing effects also point toward
potentially effective methods of debiasing through substantive law in the
consumer safety context. Suppose that firms are affirmatively opting to
provide information or are providing information in response to a legal
requirement that does not specifically set forth the form of the information. If
so, firms’ interest will often be in framing the information in a way that
minimizes the risks perceived by consumers. (Recall the shrewd actors
described in section 1.2, who showed an intuitive appreciation of loss
aversion in objecting to advertisements emphasizing the losses from not
breastfeeding rather than the gains from breastfeeding.) A strategy of
debiasing through substantive law in response to consumers’ optimism bias is
to require that firms identify the potential negative consequences associated
with their product or a particular use of their product, rather than the positive
consequences associated with (for instance) an alternative usage.

       Such a requirement would, like the law of deceptive advertising
discussed above, concern statements that firms affirmatively choose to make;

21
  15 U.S.C. §§41-58.
22
  See Beales, Craswell and Salop (1981, pp. 495-501) for a useful summary
and discussion.



                                       18
it could also be applied to statements they are legally required to make under
independent legal provisions. The strategy noted here for debiasing through
substantive law could make significant progress toward ensuring that
consumers have a more accurate understanding of the risks associated with
particular products. It could also reduce the need for either a complete ban on
some of the products in question or other approaches that insulate legal
outcomes from the effects of bounded rationality by curtailing consumer
choice.


2.1.2   Debiasing Through Corporate Law

        A basic question in corporate law concerns the optimal breakdown in
the composition of corporate boards of directors between so-called “inside”
and “outside” directors. Inside directors are those who are primarily
employed by or otherwise closely connected with the corporation; outside
directors, by contrast, have no such close links to the firm.

        Several arguments support the inclusion of at least some outside
directors on the board (e.g., Brudney 1982, pp. 598-99 and n3). Of particular
relevance for our purposes is the idea that such directors may help to
overcome various biased judgments on the part of inside directors
(Langevoort 2001, p. 803). For instance, inside directors may fall prey to
optimism bias in predicting corporate outcomes (e.g., Langevoort 2001, p.
809). To be sure, there are settings in which inside directors may not exhibit
boundedly rational behavior on balance – for instance because optimism bias
is counteracted by an excessive level of managerial reluctance to take risks –
just as we suggested in section 2.1.1 above that in some settings consumers
might not, on balance, underestimate product risks.

        In settings in which inside directors do exhibit optimistically biased
decision making, one possible response is to insulate outcomes from the
effects of the optimism bias by removing certain board decisions from the
inside directors’ hands. By contrast, an approach of debiasing through
substantive law would, following Langevoort’s argument above,23 take the
form of increasing the number of outside directors on the board. Existing law



23
  Langevoort himself, however, does not ultimately join those pressing for
increases in outside directors on corporate boards.



                                      19
has gone in just this direction in the time since Langevoort wrote.24 Might
this new approach constitute an effective form of debiasing through
substantive law?


2.1.2.1 Evidence on Debiasing in Response to Optimism Bias (Again)

        For outside directors on corporate boards to serve as agents for
debiasing of optimistically biased inside directors, two things would have to
be true. First, outside directors would have to be less subject to optimism bias
than inside directors. Second, the involvement of outside directors would
have to alter the judgments of inside directors – perhaps even through the
use, by outside directors, of some of the forms of debiasing discussed in
section 2.1.1 above. What do we know about each of these two empirical
propositions?

        The degree of optimism bias exhibited by inside versus outside
directors has not been rigorously explored, but the corporate law literature
suggests two reasons for believing that outside directors will show a lesser
degree of such bias than inside directors (Langevoort 1998, pp. 139-41;
Langevoort 2001, pp. 803, 809). The first is that, relative to inside directors,
outside directors’ self-conception and esteem are less closely bundled up with
the firm’s fortunes. The second reason is that, relative to the selection of
inside directors, the selection of outside directors is less likely to be heavily
influenced by whether candidates have highly optimistic views of the firm’s
prospects.

        But will some minimum number of outside directors improve the
judgments reached by inside directors? A large body of empirical evidence
shows that erroneous judgments often result when deliberations are
undertaken by like-minded people; those who agree with one another
typically end up at a more extreme point in line with their predeliberation
tendencies.25 In the context of corporate boards, the prediction is that
optimistic members will lead one another in the direction of further optimism
and excessive risk-taking – what has been termed the “risky shift” (Brown
1985, p. 204). As a result, boards might well end up more optimistic than the

24
   See Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, Pub. L. No. 107-204, § 301; infra note 26
and accompanying text.
25
   See Sunstein (2003, pp. 111-18, 128-35) for a discussion of this body of
evidence.



                                       20
median board member before deliberation began. Therefore, the mandated
inclusion of outside directors might well serve to check deliberative
processes that fuel unrealistically optimistic decisions. But the strength of the
case for an effect of outside directors on inside directors’ – or corporate
boards’ ultimate – judgments should not be overstated, as corporate law
scholars have often noted evidence of the general limits on outside directors’
effectiveness (e.g., Romano 1996, pp. 286-90; Bhagat and Black 1999, pp.
923-50).


2.1.2.2 Legal Implications

        A requirement of the recently-enacted Sarbanes-Oxley Act is that a
threshold number of outside directors must be named to the corporate boards
of covered firms. Specifically, the Act requires that such firms use outside
directors to perform all auditing functions26; this requirement guarantees a
minimum number of outside directors on the board. The requirement of
independent directors – reflected as well in various exchange-listing rules
(e.g., Bhagat and Black 1999, p. 933) – can be understood, in its legal
incarnation in the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, as a form of debiasing through
substantive law. The reason is that the presence of the outside directors
responds to the risk of optimism bias on the part of boards stacked with
inside directors. Note that our suggestion is not that the Sarbanes-Oxley Act’s
requirement of outside directors was actually motivated by a desire to engage
in such debiasing; the corporate governance provisions of the Act, including
the outside director requirement, appear to have been the product of entirely
different forces (Romano 2005, pp. 1543-94).

        Corporate law rules governing the structure of the board of directors
may be a reasonable way to reduce the degree of optimism bias exhibited by
inside directors. Of course, it is possible that market pressures will impose
meaningful constraints on optimism bias on the part of inside directors.27 But
at the same time, other forces may increase the degree of optimism bias such
actors exhibit; these include the link between inside directors’ optimistic
judgments and their self-esteem and the process by which such directors are
selected (Langevoort 1998, pp. 139-41; Langevoort 2001, p. 809). Of course,

26
  Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, Pub. L. No. 107-204, § 301.
27
  Tor (2002) provides analysis of the effects and limits of market pressures
as a constraining force on various biases in the context of firm entry into new
industry.



                                       21
wholly apart from the requirements of Sarbanes-Oxley, many boards do
contain some or even a majority of outside directors, and this may represent a
self-conscious effort by firms interested in (among other things) combating
the problem of optimism bias on the part of inside directors; indeed, some
firms might wish to go even further and appoint a “chief naysayer” to combat
such optimism bias (Paredes 2004). A legal requirement such as Sarbanes-
Oxley, however, is likely to facilitate such debiasing for a broader range of
firms, although at a cost of requiring outside directors on all covered boards
notwithstanding the likelihood of firm- and industry-specific variation in
ideal board structure. We return to this last point in section 3.4 below.


2.2    Debiasing Through Substantive Law in Response to Departures from
       Expected Utility Theory

        Social scientists have paid little attention to debiasing in response to
departures from expected utility theory (in contrast to debiasing in response
to judgment errors). The reason may be that such departures are not
unambiguous “errors,” and thus it is controversial to say (for example) that
the endowment effect, or loss aversion, is a kind of mistake that requires
correction. Perhaps for the same reason, strategies for insulating outcomes
from the effects of bounded rationality – familiar in the contexts discussed in
section 2.1 above – are less prominent where departures from expected utility
theory are in play.

        Our emphasis in this section is on the endowment effect, which (as
discussed in section 1.2 above) says that individuals’ willingness to accept –
the amount at which they would sell an entitlement – differs from their
willingness to pay – the amount they would pay to purchase the same
entitlement. As suggested by our comment just above, the endowment effect
generally cannot be said to be an “error” in the sense of the judgment errors
discussed in section 1.1, where individuals are making objective mistakes in
estimating probabilities; instead the endowment effect may be a reflection of
potentially valid reasons for the difference between willingness to accept and
willingness to pay. In some contexts, however, a decision maker may
determine that either willingness to accept or willingness to pay is the
“correct” measure of value. Such settings are our focus in this section; we
consider the role of debiasing through substantive law in moving toward the
chosen measure of value, which itself is taken as a given rather than
independently justified in our analysis. We refer briefly to the question of a
chosen measure of value in section 3.3 below.




                                       22
2.2.1   Debiasing Through Property Law

         With the ever-growing importance of intellectual property, the legal
protection awarded to creators of such property is a central question of
property law. For any property law entitlement, an important aspect of its
legal protection is whether the entitlement is protected by a “property rule” or
a “liability rule” (Calabresi and Melamed 1972). Under a property rule,
entitlement holders are not required to part with their entitlements unless they
voluntarily agree (typically in a bargained-for exchange) to do so. Under a
liability rule, by contrast, entitlement holders may be forced to give up their
entitlements as long as they are paid a legally-specified amount in damages.

         The American and European intellectual property systems differ
significantly in their reliance on property rules versus liability rules. Where,
for instance, an entitlement holder wishes to make use of related intellectual
property owned by another entity, in the United States the entitlement holder
generally faces a property rule regime, whereas in many European countries
the entitlement holder faces a liability rule regime (Merges 1996, p. 1316). In
the analysis just below, we assume that a decision maker has determined that
lowering willingness to accept to the level of willingness to pay for an
intellectual property entitlement (in cases in which these two measures differ)
is desirable, and we then explore how the choice between property and
liability rules might play a role in achieving this effect. Our basic conclusion
is that the European systems, in the domains in which they adopt liability rule
protection, may achieve a form of debiasing through substantive law given
the assumed desirability of lowering willingness to accept to the level of
willingness to pay.


2.2.1.1 Evidence on Lowering Willingness to Accept to the Level of
        Willingness to Pay Through the Use of Liability Rules

        A preliminary empirical study by Jeffrey Rachlinski and Forest
Jourden (1998) points to a potential relationship between the divergence
between willingness to accept and willingness to pay and the way in which
the entitlement being valued is protected from violation. Rachlinski and
Jourden’s study finds a marked reduction in the disparity between willingness
to accept and willingness to pay when liability rules rather than property rules
protect the entitlement in question. In the standard endowment effect pattern,




                                      23
willingness to accept is well above willingness to pay when the entitlement is
protected by a property rule. But Rachlinski and Jourden find that when it is
protected by a liability rule, willingness to accept falls to the level of
willingness to pay, consistent with the hypothesis offered in earlier work by
Ian Ayres and Eric Talley (1995, pp. 1101-02).

        Rachlinski and Jourden explain their results by suggesting that “[a]
right that is protected by a damages remedy might convey less of a sense of
ownership than does a right that is protected by an injunctive remedy”
(Rachlinski and Jourden 1998, p. 1560). Such incomplete ownership may
prevent a perfection of the emotional attachment that is harbinger of the
endowment effect. Subjective value, in short, may well be lower when a right
is protected by a liability rule. Rachlinski and Jourden’s empirical findings
suggest that in domains in which lowering willingness to accept to the level
of willingness to pay is desirable, liability rules may be preferable to property
rules – although of course a complete analysis of the choice between property
and liability rules involves many additional considerations (Kaplow and
Shavell 1996).


2.2.1.2 Legal Implications

        Under Rachlinski and Jourden’s findings, the European system of
intellectual property protection, in the domains in which it adopts a liability-
rule approach, achieves a form of debiasing through substantive law (again
given our background assumption that bringing willingness to accept down to
the level of willingness to pay in the context in question is desirable). The
European approach in these domains eliminates the endowment effect by
moving individuals’ willingness to accept into line with their willingness to
pay.

        It remains to be seen whether the device of choosing liability rules
over property rules in protecting intellectual property entitlements would
generally have the effect of reducing willingness to accept to the level of
willingness to pay for these entitlements. Holders of intellectual property
entitlements might be unaware of how, exactly, their entitlements are
protected; if intellectual property law uses liability rules rather than property
rules, perhaps many entitlement holders will not be aware of it. Note also that
in Rachlinski and Jourden’s study, the entitlements at issue involved
environmental amenities, not intellectual property. In the distinctive context
of environmental amenities, the occurrence of the endowment effect under a




                                       24
property rule may have been “motivated by subjects’ belief that it is improper
to sell an environmental resource that one can protect,” while this belief was
not triggered under a liability rule “because the law permitted the destruction
of the resource for a price” (Korobkin 2003, p. 1285). Absent the societal
commitment to environmental amenities, for which people often demand a
great deal and may even refuse to sell at any price at all, it remains possible
that the choice between property and liability rules would not have the same
impact on willingness to accept versus willingness to pay. Further empirical
work could help to shed light on this question.28

        It should also be emphasized that one can question whether the
willingness to pay measure is in fact the correct value in the context of
intellectual property entitlements; as noted above, we have not sought to
provide an independent defense of that position here. On one view, there is
no correct value; when a person owns some entitlement X, the person simply
values it more than when the person must purchase it. Whether it is right to
say there is no correct value depends on the reason for the endowment effect.
Suppose, as is sometimes hypothesized, that the high value placed on things
that one owns is a product of a failure to appreciate opportunity costs – an
undervaluation of the costs of refusing to sell such items. If so, the
willingness to pay measure is to be preferred because it does not reflect this
distortion in judgment.


2.2.2   Debiasing Through Agency Law

       In the context of merchants, a strong endowment effect will make
merchants reluctant to sell their goods. If the excess of willingness to accept
over willingness to pay in this context is undesirable, then might debiasing
through substantive law be possible in this domain? We describe below how
the law of agency may constitute a form of such debiasing.




28
  Lewinsohn-Zamir (2001, pp.253-55) argues, but without presenting any
direct empirical evidence, that property rules may be preferable to liability
rules for reducing the endowment effect in some contexts.



                                       25
2.2.2.1 Evidence on Lowering Willingness to Accept to the Level of
        Willingness to Pay Through the Use of the Agency
        Relationship

        An empirical paper by Jennifer Arlen, Matthew Spitzer, and Eric
Talley (2002) demonstrates the prospects for debiasing of boundedly rational
actors exhibiting the endowment effect (again assuming it is desirable to
eliminate the excess of willingness to accept over willingness to pay). Arlen,
Spitzer and Talley find that actors exhibit the standard excess of willingness
to accept over willingness to pay when they are acting in their ordinary
individual capacities – but not when they are acting in the role of corporate
managers in a business agency context. Individuals who are instructed that
they are acting as agents for the corporation that employs them “manifest[]
virtually no endowment effect whatsoever” (Arlen, Spitzer and Talley 2002,
p. 5).

        What explains these findings? Two likely explanations involve the
business context and the manager’s agency relationship with the firm.29
Someone working in business – even if acting not as the agent of a
corporation but as a sole proprietor – will probably exhibit less of an
endowment effect than someone acting in an ordinary individual capacity.
One might think, for instance, that transactions conducted by a shoe store –
whether or not the store is run by a manager – would not exhibit a large
endowment effect. Such a store would be unlikely to stay in business long if a
strong endowment effect led it – whether acting through a manager or a
proprietor – to price shoes at an amount well above people’s willingness to
pay.

        It seems likely, however, that the agency relationship further dampens
the tendency toward exhibiting an excess of willingness to accept over
willingness to pay. This is so because the endowment effect is often linked to
a desire by entitlement holders to avoid regretting a bad decision to engage in
a transaction (sale of the entitlement).30 By contrast, agents will tend to be
less likely than ordinary individuals to experience regret because their
personal stake in the outcomes that occur is lower (Korobkin 2003, p. 1255).

29
   Korobkin (2003, p. 1279) emphasizes that a third explanation may be the
certainty of the entitlement value in Arlen, Spitzer and Talley’s agency
relationship.
30
   For recent discussions, see Camerer, Issacharoff, Loewenstein,
O’Donoghue and Rabin (2003, pp.1224-25); Korobkin (2003, pp.1254-55).



                                      26
Thus, it is reasonable to conjecture that the agency relationship itself helps to
account for the finding of an absence of an excess of willingness to accept
over willingness to pay in a business agency relationship – although of course
a definitive empirical study separately testing the two explanations could help
put the conclusion on firmer ground.


2.2.2.2 Legal Implications

        An implication of Arlen, Spitzer and Talley’s empirical findings is
that existing rules of agency law, in structuring the relationship between
corporations and their managers, may achieve a form of debiasing through
substantive law for managerial actors (assuming, again, that it is desirable to
eliminate the excess of willingness to accept over willingness to pay). Acting
in the context of the relationship specified by the default rules of agency law,
individuals may not display the endowment effect that has proven robust in
other settings. Note that our focus here, as in our discussion above of the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act, is on the (perhaps unanticipated) effects of the law
rather than the particular motives of legislators or other actors in enacting it.

        In theory, the obligations associated with a business agency
relationship could be specified by privately negotiated arrangements rather
than by the default rules of agency law. Such arrangements could ensure that
much of business is done by agents acting on behalf of firms under a
specified set of duties. Indeed, this may be what Arlen, Spitzer and Talley
(2002, p. 33) have in mind when they suggest that “the nexus of relationships
often identified with ‘the firm’ may operate (at least in part) as a debiasing
mechanism, thereby representing an underappreciated consequence of
organizing trade within firms.” However, as Frank Easterbrook and Daniel
Fischel (1982, p. 702) have suggested, arrangements negotiated within firms
may impose extremely high costs, particularly given “the difficulty that
contracting parties have in anticipating when and how their interests may
diverge”; therefore our point here, following Easterbrook and Fischel, is to
emphasize the valuable role of law in achieving the debiasing described
above. According to Easterbrook and Fischel, the complexity and nuance of
the requirements to be imposed within the firm point to the important value
of legal rules. Our argument is simply that the basic rules of agency law
provide an illustration of how existing rules may sometimes accomplish
debiasing through substantive law.




                                       27
3.     Normative Issues in Debiasing Through Law

        In many settings, debiasing through law, whether achieved through
substantive law or through procedural rules governing the adjudicative
process, provides a more direct and effective response to problems of
bounded rationality than the more typical approach of insulating legal
outcomes from the effects of boundedly rational behavior that itself is taken
as a given. Below we develop and defend this central claim about the
normative appeal of debiasing through law in its substantive and procedural
law incarnations. We also address possible normative objections to debiasing
through law; some of these apply to “insulating” strategies as well, while
others are distinctive to debiasing through law. Because much of our analysis
below will address comparisons with “insulating” strategies, it is important to
emphasize that our conception of debiasing through law does not embrace
notions of legally-related “debiasing” that encompass various forms of
insulation (e.g., Gulati, Rachlinski and Langevoort 2004).31




31
   Gulati, Rachlinski and Langevoort (2004) use the term “debiasing” to refer
in a broad way to the potential response of the “fraud by hindsight” rule of
securities law to the problem of hindsight bias. Some of the effects they
include in their “debiasing” category – for instance, “insulat[ing] judgments
from the hindsight bias” (p. 781) and requiring courts to use “ex ante
standards, such as generally accepted accounting principles” (p. 792) – fall
into the “insulating” category rather than the “debiasing through law”
category within our framework. Likewise, Langevoort (1998, p. 1510) refers
to proposals for addressing hindsight bias in Jolls, Sunstein and Thaler
(1998a) as “mechanisms for debiasing,” but within our framework these
proposals are “insulating” strategies because they take hindsight bias as a
given and then seek to reduce or eliminate its effects on legal outcomes. Our
use of the term “debiasing” to refer specifically to situations in which
bounded rationality diminishes, as opposed simply to having its effects on
outcomes blunted by a legal rule, seems more consistent with the accepted
meaning of “debiasing” in the social science literature, as in that literature
debiasing refers to reducing people’s manifestation of boundedly rational
behavior in the first instance.



                                      28
3.1    Normative Analysis – In General

        In the areas discussed thus far, and in many imaginable contexts,
social planners might choose among three categories of approaches to
decisions stemming from bounded rationality: “insulating” strategies,
strategies for debiasing through law, and refusing to respond at all. And of
course a range of options might present themselves within the first two
categories. In our view the appropriate choice depends on the consequences
and hence on close engagement with particulars.

        It is easy to imagine situations in which bounded rationality presents a
modest problem, so that any cure is worse than the disease. If some
boundedly rational consumers are purchasing excessively safe cars, because
the availability heuristic has led them to overestimate risks, the argument for
a governmental response does not seem particularly strong, at least if it
assumed that the social costs of the relevant purchases are low. A
governmental response is also likely to be unwarranted where people are able
to correct their own errors (e.g., Rachlinski 2003, pp. 1206-19; Rasmussen
1998, pp. 1697-98). And in some circumstances, “insulating” strategies will
be the best alternative. Suppose, for example, that a particular bias leads most
people to unambiguous and extremely serious error, and also that efforts at
debiasing through law are likely to fail. If so, it might well be best simply to
foreclose certain choices. But in other circumstances, the argument for
debiasing through law will be convincing – as, for example, when a refusal to
respond to bounded rationality will ensure large welfare losses, and when
debiasing through law will be less costly than any alternative.

        We suspect that some of the examples given in section 2 fall in this
category, for several reasons. First, as emphasized especially in the
discussion of consumer safety law in section 2.1.1 above, a special virtue of
debiasing through law is that, relative to many “insulating” strategies, it
maximizes the preservation of people’s opportunity to make choices. Instead
of blocking decisions, it is preferable to attempt to improve decision making
(Rachlinski 2003, p. 1224). It is a familiar point that choice-preserving
remedies of this general nature are valuable because they acknowledge both
that individuals have diverse preferences and that planners may err (e.g.,
Beales, Craswell and Salop 1981, pp. 513-14; Viscusi and Magat 1987, pp.
60-61). If some sort of governmental response to consumer optimism bias is
warranted, then debiasing through law may be the best strategy.




                                      29
         A second virtue of debiasing through law is that it reduces the effects
of legal intervention on those not suffering from bounded rationality in the
first place. In responding to problems of bounded rationality, it is preferable,
when possible, to develop legal approaches that avoid imposing significant
costs on those who do not exhibit boundedly rational behavior (Camerer et al.
2003, p. 1212). As observed by Gregory Mitchell (2002, pp. 132-35),
strategies for debiasing of boundedly rational actors will often make it
possible for government to improve outcomes for individuals who exhibit
bounded rationality while leaving largely or entirely unrestricted the choices
of those who would not otherwise err – a point we elaborate as well as
qualify below..

         It bears emphasis, however, that our goal in this paper is not to offer
final recommendations about, or systematic comparisons for, any particular
problem, including those discussed in section 2. Instead our goal is to
illustrate the potential uses and generality of the approach of debiasing
through law, especially debiasing through substantive law. Additional
examples of debiasing through substantive law are explored in Jolls
(forthcoming) and Sunstein (forthcoming).


3.2    Offsetting Effects

        We noted just above that sometimes neither debiasing through law
nor strategies for insulating legal outcomes from the effects of bounded
rationality may be an appropriate course of action. An important example
here is the case in which a given form of boundedly rational behavior is
offset by another aspect of bounded rationality that tends in the opposite
direction. Simply put, some departures from unbounded rationality can
counteract others; we gave several examples in section 2 above. In such cases
efforts either to engage in debiasing through law in response to a given form
of bounded rationality, or to insulate legal outcomes from the effects of this
form of bounded rationality, might actually make things worse rather than
better.

        Whether a given aspect of bounded rationality is in fact likely to be in
an offsetting relationship with some other feature of bounded rationality will




                                       30
of course depend on the particular context, as noted in section 2 above.32
Obviously, if an offsetting relationship with another feature of bounded
rationality exists, a legal response – whether debiasing through law or an
“insulating” strategy – may well be unwarranted.


3.3    Correcting Factual Errors

        Section 2 above distinguished between debiasing through law in
response to judgment errors (section 2.1) and debiasing through law in
response to departures from expected utility theory (section 2.2). In the latter
context, the government intervention obviously cannot be said to operate
simply by correcting clear factual errors; and thus in section 2.2 we assumed
rather than argued that, in certain contexts, reducing willingness to accept to
the level of willingness to pay was a suitable target of debiasing through law.
But when debiasing through law is a response to a clear factual error, the
normative impetus for the government intervention is far more
straightforward.

        Debiasing through law in response to a clear factual error – for
instance, a consumer’s underestimation of the probability that an accident
will occur – is indistinguishable (in terms of the normative impetus for the
intervention) from a vast array of existing government initiatives. In
countless domains, the government either discloses information on its own or
requires disclosure by those providing goods or services in response to
erroneous factual perceptions people would otherwise hold (e.g., Stiglitz
1986, pp. 90-91). When people have erroneous views about factual matters,
there is broad agreement that government may legitimately concern itself
with correcting their errors. It seems hard to think of a plausible objection to
this ground for government intervention (although of course, as noted
already, intervention may ultimately prove unwarranted if its benefits are not
justified by its costs).

       Note the distinction between our focus here on debiasing through law
and possible strategies of what might be called “biasing through law.” In
some cases, social planners may wish that people’s factual estimates diverged
from the truth; for example, planners may want people to overestimate the

32
  Jolls, Sunstein and Thaler (1998a, pp.1524-25), for instance, discuss the
partially offsetting relationship between hindsight bias and optimism bias in
the tort law context.



                                       31
probability of being caught if they choose to speed or evade taxes. But
strategies directed toward such objectives, even if socially desirable, would
not be forms of debiasing through law within our definition, as they would
not be responding to any identified form of bounded rationality.

        While the government’s ends in our analysis are thus uncomplicated
(either because the ends involve correction of clear factual errors or because,
as in section 2.2, we have simply assumed that eliminating the endowment
effect is a suitable target of government action33), the means employed in
debiasing through law require further discussion. In the example of debiasing
through consumer safety law, for instance, the government action in question
involves harnessing separate departures from unbounded rationality to correct
individuals’ errors. Mechanisms of this type raise important and distinctive
issues, to which we now turn.


3.4    Heterogeneous Actors

        As recent literature has appropriately emphasized, not all individuals
are likely to be boundedly rational, at least not to the same degree (e.g.,
Mitchell 2002, pp. 83-119, 139-67). As noted above, an important virtue of
debiasing through law is that, in contrast to “insulating” strategies, the
approach of debiasing through law can often avoid significant effects on
individuals who do not exhibit bounded rationality. But in some
circumstances, a strategy of debiasing through law could introduce new
distortions through its effect on those who did not previously exhibit bounded
rationality.

        Consider, for instance, the strategic employment of the availability
heuristic in response to optimism bias, discussed in section 2.1.1 above. In
this case, the legal intervention conceivably could distort the behavior of
individuals who did not suffer from optimism bias in the first place. For those
who previously had an accurate understanding of the situation, such strategies
for debiasing through law could produce a kind of unrealistic pessimism. In
such cases, it is no longer possible to say that, even if the legal intervention
does not provide much help, it is unlikely to cause much harm. (Note the
contrast with traditional strategies of providing information to those who
previously lacked it; such strategies should not significantly affect those who

33
  For normative discussion of government intervention in the context of
(among other things) the endowment effect, see Sunstein and Thaler (2003).



                                      32
already possessed the information (e.g., Camerer et al. 2003, pp. 1230-37),
though perhaps such strategies might prompt responsive behavior – for
instance by affected firms through their pricing strategies – that would in turn
affect those who did not initially suffer from information failures.)

        A similar problem arises with respect to debiasing through corporate
law in the form of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. If, among the set of
heterogeneous corporate boards, some do not exhibit optimistically biased
judgments on the part of inside directors, then the legally-mandated presence
of outsiders on the board could introduce distortions (for instance, because
outside directors are less well-informed than inside directors) for boards
whose behavior was previously undistorted. So too, the strategies described
in section 2.2 for debiasing through law in response to the endowment effect
conceivably could alter measures of value for those who did not initially
exhibit an excess of willingness to accept over willingness to pay.

        In some cases, actors who do not suffer from a particular form of
bounded rationality, such as optimism bias, will also be free of other forms of
bounded rationality, such as reliance on the availability heuristic. If those
who are immune from optimism bias also tend to be immune from
availability bias, then the strategies described above for debiasing through the
availability heuristic should not affect those who did not previously suffer
from optimism bias. In such cases, strategies for debiasing through law – like
traditional informational strategies (Camerer et al. 2003, pp. 1230-37) –
should not affect those who did not exhibit bounded rationality prior to the
legal intervention.

        When the absence of one form of bounded rationality correlates in
this way with the absence of others, strategies for debiasing through law fit
well with the broader emerging theme, noted above, of adopting approaches
that respond to bounded rationality but avoid imposing significant costs on
those who do not exhibit this type of behavior. A leading illustration of such
a strategy is “cooling periods” before important decisions are made (e.g.,
Camerer et al. 2003, pp. 1238-47).

        In all of our examples of debiasing through substantive law in section
2 above, the government intervention is unlikely to be entirely cost-free for
those who did not previously show bounded rationality. But even the simple
provision of information by government – often a wholly uncontroversial
strategy – will impose some costs on those who did not err prior to the
intervention, simply because of the burden of processing the information. If




                                       33
the intervention produces important benefits for those who are prone to
bounded rationality, then the intervention may be desirable even if it imposes
modest costs on others. Here, as in other contexts, the only option is to weigh
the effects of the different possible strategies. Of course efforts to debias
people through law should be undertaken, whenever possible, in ways that do
not produce confusion or misperception, as we discuss more fully in the next
subsection.


3.5    Overshooting

         The means employed by government in debiasing through law can
create the risk of overshooting. If, for instance, truthful narratives are used in
the context of consumer safety law, individuals who previously showed
optimism bias might be led to exaggerate the risks of consumer products. The
effort to debias through law would then be producing biases and errors of its
own.

         But this concern is not in any way specific to debiasing through law
as distinguished from conventional “insulating” strategies; overshooting is
always a possible danger. Undoubtedly experimentation would be required to
calibrate the degree to which availability or another form of bounded
rationality would need to be brought to bear in engaging in debiasing through
law; so too, experimentation is necessary under an “insulating” approach to
determine the appropriate level or scope of the legal response. The problem
of the scope of a legal corrective, and the risk of overshooting, are general,
not specific to the means used in debiasing through law – although naturally
if this problem is severe enough then a governmental response of any sort
may be unwarranted.


3.6    Autonomy

        A more fundamental concern with debiasing through law involves
individual autonomy. When government is engaged in (what it considers to
be) “debiasing,” there is a risk that it will manipulate its citizens to serve its
own objectives. If officials “debias,” they might be violating the autonomy of
ordinary people. In some cases of debiasing through law in response to
judgment errors, for instance, government may be correcting bounded
rationality by exploiting it, in a way that might give rise to fears of
manipulation. In the applications discussed in section 2, this occurs perhaps




                                        34
most obviously with respect to harnessing availability and framing in
response to consumers’ optimism bias. The risk of manipulation in the guise
of debiasing through law – a risk that may not be raised by “insulating”
strategies – appears especially disturbing in light of the fact that regulators
are often self-serving or vulnerable to the interests of powerful private
groups.

        It is clear that if bounded rationality is pervasive, then an informed
government is likely to have little trouble in manipulating people in its
preferred directions. Such a government might engage in manipulation on its
own behalf, or in support of its preferred interests. Government should of
course respect its citizen. As emphasized, for instance, by the publicity
condition in John Rawls’s A Theory of Justice (1971, p. 133), regulators
should generally refrain from engaging in acts that could not be defended in
public to those who are subject to those acts. If a public defense could not be
made, the acts are an insult to the autonomy of citizens. (Deontologists will
emphasize the insult to autonomy as such; consequentialists will of course
care about violations of the publicity condition only insofar as such violations
have bad consequences.)

         Is debiasing through law a violation of the publicity condition? Much
of the time, the answer is negative. If, for example, government harnesses
availability and framing in response to consumers’ optimism bias, there is no
reason to think government would have to conceal or make ambiguous its
efforts to correct people’s errors. Citizens need not be disturbed to learn what
government is doing, and there is no reason for regulators to keep their
efforts secret. To be sure, it may be troubling for some people to learn that
government has “framed” a message to produce the desired result, but there is
no violation of the publicity condition.34

        As we have noted, government efforts to correct individuals’ factual
mistakes are widespread and largely uncontroversial. The worry about
government “manipulation,” if there is a worry, arises even with the widely
accepted approach under which the government corrects simple information
failures (where people are mistaken because they lack information entirely,
rather than because they process information in a biased way) among
citizens. As framing effects as well as other departures from unbounded
rationality reveal, there is usually no neutral way to present information.
Whenever the government is presenting even accurate information, it is

34
     See Luban (1996) for further discussion of the publicity condition.



                                        35
making choices about presentation – choices that will inevitably affect how
citizens perceive the reality around them. Thus, it is far too simple, and
behaviorally naive, to draw a sharp line between acceptable “provision of
information” and unacceptable “mind control.” Unless the concern with
government manipulation is strong enough to suggest that the government
should never provide information to its citizens (an implausible suggestion),
there must be at least some willingness to tolerate the prospect of government
influence over citizens’ perceptions of reality and the attendant risk of
government manipulation.

         Suppose, for example, that smokers were found to discount the risks
that accompany smoking, in part because of optimism bias. If so, it is hardly
obvious that government would violate their autonomy by giving a more
accurate sense of those risks, even if the best way of giving that accurate
sense were through concrete accounts of suffering. And it is also far from
clear in such a case that the government could not publicly defend its strategy
to citizens as required by the publicity condition; recall in this connection the
American Legacy Foundation letters campaign described in section 2.1.1
above.

         This is not to say, of course, that no form of debiasing through law
could be objectionable on autonomy grounds. Some forms might resemble
systems of propaganda in clear violation of the publicity condition. If so,
there is not only an insult to autonomy; there is also a real risk that the one-
sidedness and aggressiveness of the government’s effort will be exposed. If
this happens, public trust will unquestionably be reduced. And if trust is
reduced, government strategies are much less likely to succeed. For many
people, these instrumental concerns will seem aggravated by strong moral
ones. At least when minors are not involved, the law should treat citizens
with respect, and extreme marketing strategies (going well beyond what we
have suggested in discussing strategies for debiasing through law) violate that
principle. In addition, debiasing through law in response to the endowment
effect, as discussed in section 2.2 above, may prove ineffective if the
debiasing effort is disclosed; if people know that the government has adopted
a particular legal rule in order to reduce willingness to accept to the level of
willingness to pay, then it is possible that willingness to accept will no longer
drop under that rule.

        With respect to autonomy, no general conclusion is likely to make
sense. The nature and force of the objections discussed above will obviously
depend on the setting and the particular strategy involved. However, these




                                       36
objections seem weakest when government is responding to a form of
bounded rationality that unquestionably qualifies as an “error” and is using
methods that do not distort the facts.


3.7    “Behavioral Bureaucrats”

        Nothing said thus far denies the important fact that legal policymakers
and administrators, including those who seek to engage in debiasing through
law or other corrective strategies, will often suffer from bounded rationality
themselves. (Indeed, existing literature extends the traditional focus on
debiasing of boundedly rational juries or other adjudicative decision makers
by considering debiasing of boundedly rational government bureaucrats (e.g.,
Rachlinski and Farina 2002, pp. 582-90, 596-600, 603-06; Seidenfeld 2002,
pp. 508-26).) No less than ordinary people, bureaucrats use heuristics and are
subject to predictable biases; they are also susceptible to the influence of
powerful private groups with stakes in the outcome. Indeed, the very
accountability of bureaucrats suggests that they will be affected by the
bounded rationality of the citizenry. It is certainly plausible to worry that
efforts at debiasing by behaviorally sophisticated regulators may operate in
practice to reward well-organized private groups, or perhaps to promote the
interests of regulators themselves.

        In this light we do not make the naive and implausible suggestion that
in the real world, strategies for debiasing through law will always be well-
motivated and well-designed. (Nor will strategies designed to insulate legal
outcomes from the effects of bounded rationality.) Our claim is only that if
people exhibit bounded rationality, debiasing through law may often be a
promising response – one that it would be foolish to eliminate from the
government’s repertoire.35


4.     Conclusion

        The central goal of this paper has been to draw attention to the
distinctiveness and the potential value of debiasing through law, especially
debiasing through substantive law. The social science literature has devoted a
great deal of effort to the study of debiasing of boundedly rational actors, but

35
  For a general discussion of “behavioral bureaucrats,” see Jolls, Sunstein
and Thaler (1998a, pp. 1543-44).



                                       37
with little effort to see how law and legal institutions might accomplish that
goal. Those interested in bounded rationality and law have argued mostly that
legal outcomes should be insulated from the effects of boundedly rational
behavior, and in some cases that debiasing of boundedly rational actors
should be pursued through changes in procedural rules governing the
adjudicative process. It is tempting to contend that if most people make
welfare-reducing choices because of bounded rationality, their choices should
be blocked. In our view, debiasing through law – especially debiasing
through substantive law – is a distinctive and sometimes far preferable
alternative to the strategy of insulating legal outcomes from the effects of
bounded rationality. Such debiasing often promises to be both more
successful and less invasive than more conventional alternatives.

        Nothing in our analysis is inconsistent with the claim that in some
contexts, unfettered markets are the best response to bounded rationality.
Such markets might reduce the effects of bounded rationality by raising the
stakes, as suggested in section 2.1.1 above; it is also possible that the costs of
boundedly rational behavior are, in some contexts, lower than the costs of
any effort to counteract it. In some contexts, private actors, alert to the risk of
bounded rationality, will take corrective action on their own. We also do not
disagree with the now-familiar suggestion that in the face of bounded
rationality, aggressive regulation – some form of “insulating” strategy –
might sometimes be justified.36 Instead our aim has been to chart the
possibility of a middle course, one that asks legal institutions not to ignore
people, but instead to reduce their bounded rationality.

        In some contexts, debiasing through law is likely to be effective, cost-
justified, and minimally intrusive. We believe that some areas of the law
reveal an appreciation of these points and hence an implicit behavioral
rationality, using legal strategies as a mechanism for debiasing of boundedly
rational actors. Our principal goal has been to understand those strategies in
these terms and to explore the possibility of building on them to do far more.




36
     Jolls, Sunstein and Thaler (1998a) provide various examples.



                                        38
References

Arlen, Jennifer, Matthew Spitzer, and Eric Talley. 2002. Endowment Effects
Within Corporate Agency Relationships. Journal of Legal Studies 31:1-37.
Armour, David, and Shelley E. Taylor. 2002. When Predictions Fail: The
Dilemma of Unrealistic Optimism. Pp. 334-47 in Heuristics and Biases: The
Psychology of Intuitive Judgment, edited by Thomas Gilovich, Dale Griffin,
and Daniel Kahneman. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Asch, Solomon. 1955. Opinions and Social Pressure. Scientific American
193:31-40.
Ayres, Ian, and Eric Talley. 1995. Solomonic Bargaining: Dividing a Legal
Entitlement to Facilitate Coasean Trade. Yale Law Journal 104:1027-1117.
Babcock, Linda, George Loewenstein, Samuel Issacharoff, and Colin
Camerer. 1995. Biased Judgments of Fairness in Bargaining. American
Economic Review 85:1337-43.
Babcock, Linda, George Loewenstein, and Samuel Issacharoff. 1997.
Creating Convergence: Debiasing Biased Litigants. Law and Social Inquiry
22:913-25.
Baron, Robert S., Joseph A. Vandello, and Bethany Brunsman. 1996. The
Forgotten Variable in Conformity Research: Impact of Task Importance on
Social Influence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 71:915-27.
Beales, Howard, Richard Craswell, and Steven C. Salop. 1981. The Efficient
Regulation of Consumer Information. Journal of Law & Economics 24:491-
539.
Benartzi, Shlomo, and Richard H. Thaler. 1999. Risk Aversion or Myopia?
Choices in Repeated Gambles and Retirement Investments. Management
Science 45:364-81.
Bhagat, Sanjai, and Bernard S. Black. 1999. The Uncertain Relationship
between Board Composition and Firm Performance. Business Lawyer
54:921-63.
Brown, Roger. 1985. Social Psychology, the Second Edition. New York: Free
Press.
Brudney, Victor. 1982. The Independent Director – Heavenly City or
Potemkin Village? Harvard Law Review 95:597-659.
Calabresi, Guido, and A. Douglas Melamed. 1972. Property Rules, Liability
Rules, and Inalienability: One View of the Cathedral. Harvard Law Review
85:1089-1128.




                                    39
Camerer, Colin, Samuel Issacharoff, George Loewenstein, Ted O’Donoghue,
and Matthew Rabin. 2003. Regulation for Conservatives: Behavioral
Economics and the Case for “Asymmetric Paternalism.” University of
Pennsylvania Law Review 151:1211-44.
Craig, Samuel, Brian Sternthal, and Clark Leavitt. 1976. Advertising
Wearout: An Experimental Analysis. Journal of Market Research 13:365-72.
Craswell, Richard. 1985. Interpreting Deceptive Advertising. Boston
University Law Review 65:657-732.
_____. 1981. The Identification of Unfair Acts and Practices by the Federal
Trade Commission. Wisconsin Law Review 1981:107-53.
Dewan, Shaila K. 2004. The New Public Service Ad: Just Say “Deal with
It,” N.Y. Times, January 11.
Druckman, James N. 2001. Using Credible Advice to Overcome Framing
Effects. Journal of Law Economics & Organization 71:62-82.
Easterbrook, Frank H., and Daniel R. Fischel. 1982. Corporate Control
Transactions. Yale Law Journal 91:698-737.
Farnsworth, Ward. 2003. The Legal Regulation of Self-Serving Bias.
University of California Davis Law Review 37:567-603.
Fischhoff, Baruch. 1982. Debiasing. Pp. 422-44 in Judgment under
Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases, edited by Daniel Kahneman, Paul Slovic,
and Amos Tversky. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Glaeser, Edward. 2004. Psychology and the Market. American Economic
Review 94:408-13.
Gulati, G. Mitu, Jeffrey J. Rachlinski, and Donald C Langevoort. 2004. Fraud
By Hindsight. Northwestern University Law Review 98:773-825.
Guthrie, Chris. 2000. Framing Frivolous Litigation: A Psychological Theory.
University of Chicago Law Review 67:163-216.
Jolls, Christine. Forthcoming. Antidiscrimination Law’s Effects on
Unconscious Bias. (Behavioral Economics and Antidiscrimination Law).
_____. 1998. Behavioral Economic Analysis of Redistributive Legal Rules.
In Symposium: The Legal Implications of Psychology: Human Behavior,
Behavioral Economics, and the Law. Vanderbilt Law Review 51:1653-77.
Jolls, Christine, Cass R. Sunstein, and Richard Thaler. 1998a. A Behavioral
Approach to Law and Economics. Stanford Law Review 50:1471-1550.
_____. 1998b. Theories and Tropes: A Reply to Posner and Kelman, Stanford
Law Review 50:1593-1608.




                                     40
Kahneman, Daniel, Jack Knetsch, and Richard Thaler. 1990. Experimental
Tests of the Endowment Effect and the Coase Theorem. Journal of Political
Economy 98:1325-48.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky. 1979. Prospect Theory: An Analysis
of Decision Under Risk. Econometrica 47:263-92.
Kaplow, Louis, and Steven Shavell. 1996. Property Rules Versus Liability
Rules: An Economic Analysis. Harvard Law Review 109:713-90.
Korobkin, Russell. 2003. The Endowment Effect and Legal Analysis. In
Symposium: Empirical Legal Realism: A New Social Scientific Assessment
of Law and Human Behavior. Northwestern University Law Review 97:1227-
93.
Korobkin, Russell and Thomas Ulen. 2000. Law and Behavioral Science:
Removing the Rationality Assumption from Law and Economics. California
Law Review 88:1051-1144.
Kunreuther, Howard. 1982. The Economics of Protection Against Low
Probability Events. Pp. 195-215 in Decision Making: An Interdisciplinary
Inquiry, edited by Gerardo R. Ungson and Daniel Braunstein. Boston: Kent
Publishing Co.
Kysar, Douglas A. 2003. The Expectations of Consumers. Columbia Law
Review 103:1700-90.
Langevoort, Donald C. 2001. The Human Nature of Corporate Boards: Law,
Norms, and the Unintended Consequences of Independence and
Accountability. Georgetown Law Journal 89:797-832.
_____. 1998. Behavioral Theories of Judgment and Decision Making in
Legal Scholarship: A Literature Review. Vanderbilt Law Review 51:1499-
1540.
_____. 1997. Organized Illusions: A Behavioral Theory of Why Corporations
Mislead Stock Market Investors (And Cause Other Social Harms). University
of Pennsylvania Law Review 146:101-72.
Latin, Howard. 1994. “Good” Warnings, Bad Products, and Cognitive
Limitations. UCLA Law Review 41:1193-1295.
Lewinsohn-Zamir, Daphna. 2001. The Choice Between Property Rules and
Liability Rules Revisited: Critical Observations from Behavioral Studies.
Texas Law Review 80:219-60.
Luban, David. 1996. The Publicity Principle. Pp. 154-98 in The Theory of
Institutional Design edited by Robert E. Goodin. New York: Cambridge
University Press.




                                    41
Magat, Wesley A. and W. Kip Viscusi. 1992. Informational Approaches to
Regulation. Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press.
Meyerowitz, Beth E., and Shelly Chaiken. 1987. The Effect of Message
Framing on Breast Self-Examination: Attitudes, Intentions, and Behavior.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 52:500-10.
Mitchell, Gregory. 2002. Why Law and Economics’ Perfect Rationality
Should Not Be Traded for Behavioral Law and Economics’ Equal
Incompetence. Georgetown Law Journal 91:67-167.
Nisbett, Richard E., Eugene Borgida, Rick Crandall, and Harvey Reed. 1982.
Popular Induction: Information Is Not Necessarily Informative. Pp. 101-16
in Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases, edited by Daniel
Kahneman, Paul Slovic, and Amos Tversky. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Paredes, Troy. 2004. Too Much Pay, Too Much Deference: Is CEO
Overconfidence the Product of Corporate Governance? Working Paper No.
04-08-02. Washington University in St. Louise School of Law, MO.
Parisi, Francesco, and Vernon Smith. 2004. The Law and Economics of
Irrational Behavior. Stanford University Press.
Peters, Philip G., Jr. 1999. Hindsight Bias and Tort Liability: Avoiding
Premature Conclusions. Arizona State Law Journal 31:1277-1314.
Petersen, Melody. 2003. Breastfeeding Ads Delayed By a Dispute Over
Content. New York Times, December 4.
Plott, Charles R., and Kathryn Zeiler. 2005. The Willingness to Pay –
Willingness to Accept Gap, the “Endowment Effect,” Subject
Misconceptions, and Experimental Procedures for Eliciting Valuations. The
American Economic Review 95:530-45.
Prentice, Robert A., and Mark E. Roszkowski. 1991-92. “Tort Reform” and
the Liability “Revolution”: Defending Strict Liability in Tort for Defective
Products. Gonzaga Law Review 27:251-302.
Rachlinski, Jeffrey. 2003. The Uncertain Psychological Case for Paternalism.
In Symposium: Empirical Legal Realism: A New Social Scientific
Assessment of Law and Human Behavior. Northwestern University Law
Review 97:1165-1225.
_____. 2000. The New “Law” and Psychology: A Reply to Critics, Skeptics,
and Cautious Supporters. Cornell Law Review 85:739-66.
_____. 1998. A Positive Psychological Theory of Judging in Hindsight.
University of Chicago Law Review 65:571-625.




                                      42
Rachlinski, Jeffrey, and Cynthia R. Farina. 2002. Cognitive Psychology and
Optimal Governmental Design. Cornell Law Review 87:549-615.
Rachlinski, Jeffrey, and Forest Jourden. 1998. Remedies and the Psychology
of Ownership. In Symposium: The Legal Implications of Psychology: Human
Behavior, Behavioral Economics, and the Law. Vanderbilt Law Review
51:1541-82.
Romano, Roberta. 2005. The Sarbanes-Oxley Act and the Making of Quack
Corporate Governance. Yale Law Journal 114:1521-1611.
_____. 1996. Corporate Law and Corporate Governance. Industrial and
Corporate Change 5:277-340.
Rasmussen, Robert K. 1998. Behavioral Economics, the Economic Analysis
of Bankruptcy Law, and the Pricing of Credit. Vanderbilt Law Review
51:1679-1703.
Rawls, John. 1971. A Theory of Justice. Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of
Harvard University Press.
Sale, Hillary. 2004. Delaware’s Good Faith. In Symposium: Enron and the
Future of U.S. Corporate Law. Cornell Law Review 89:456-95.
Schwartz, Alan. 1988. Proposals for Products Liability Reform: A
Theoretical Synthesis. Yale Law Journal 97:353-419.
Schwartz, Alan, and Louis L. Wilde. 1983. Imperfect Information in Markets
for Contract Terms: The Examples of Warranties and Security Interests.
Virginia Law Review 69:1387-1485.
Seidenfeld, Mark. 2002. Cognitive Loafing, Social Conformity, and Judicial
Review of Agency Rulemaking. Cornell Law Review 87:486-548.
Sloan, Frank A., Donald H. Taylor, and V. Kerry Smith. 2003. The Smoking
Puzzle: Information, Risk Perception, and Choice. Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Slovic, Paul, Melissa Finucane, Ellen Peters, and Donald G. MacGregor.
2002. The Affect Heuristic. Pp. 397-420 in Heuristics and Biases: The
Psychology of Intuitive Judgment, edited by Thomas Gilovich, Dale Griffin,
and Daniel Kahneman. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Stallard, Merrie Jo, and Debra L. Worthington. 1998. Reducing the Hindsight
Bias Utilizing Attorney Closing Arguments. Law and Human Behavior
22:671-83.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. 1986. Economics of the Public Sector. New York: W.W.
Norton.




                                    43
Sunstein, Cass R. Forthcoming. Boundedly Rational Borrowing: A
Consumers’ Guide. University of Chicago Law Review.
_____. 2003. Why Societies Need Dissent. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press.
_____. 2002. Probability Neglect: Emotions, Worst Cases, and Law. Yale
Law Journal 112:61-107.
_____. 2000. Behavioral Law and Economics. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Sunstein, Cass R., and Richard H. Thaler. 2003. Libertarian Paternalism Is
Not An Oxymoron. University of Chicago Law Review 70:1159-1202.
Tor, Avishalom. 2002. The Fable of Entry: Bounded Rationality, Market
Discipline and Legal Policy. Michigan Law Review 101:482-568.
Tversky, Amos and Daniel Kahneman. 1983. Extensional Versus Intuitive
Reasoning: The Conjunction Fallacy in Probability Judgment. Psychological
Review 90:293-315.
Viscusi, W. Kip. 1988. Predicting the Effects of Food Cancer Risk Warnings
on Consumers. Food Drug Cosmetic Law Journal 43:283-314.
Viscusi, W. Kip and Wesley A. Magat. 1987. Learning About Risk:
Consumer and Worker Response to Hazard Information. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press.
Weinstein, Neil D., and William M. Klein. 2002. Resistance of Personal Risk
Perceptions to Debiasing Interventions. Pp. 313-23 in Heuristics and Biases:
The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment, edited by Thomas Gilovich, Dale
Griffin, and Daniel Kahneman. New York: Cambridge University Press.




                                     44
             Appendix: Strategies for Debiasing Through Law

        This appendix briefly summarizes some leading empirical research
 on debiasing of boundedly rational actors and its implications for debiasing
 through both substantive law and procedural rules governing the adjudicative
 process.

                  Evidence of      Evidence of      Illustration of   Illustration of
                  unsuccessful     successful       debiasing         debiasing
                  debiasing?       debiasing?       through           through
                                                    procedural        substantive
                                                    rules             law?
                                                    governing the
                                                    adjudicative
                                                    process?
JUDGMENT
ERRORS
 Optimism bias    Most             Giving people                      Consumer
                  approaches       a concrete                         safety law
                  that directly    sense of the                       governing
                  target           relevant harms                     warnings and
                  optimism bias.   Source: Sloan,                     other
                  Source:          Taylor and                         manufacturer
                  Weinstein and    Smith (2003).                      statements
                  Klein (2002).                                       (section
                                                                      2.1.1);
                                                                      corporate law
                                                                      governing
                                                                      board
                                                                      composition
                                                                      (section
                                                                      2.1.2).
 Hindsight bias   Many             Telling people   Requiring
                  approaches       not to be        judges to
                  Source:          “Monday          instruct jurors
                  Fischhoff        morning          not to be
                  (1982).          quarterbacks.”   “Monday
                                   Source:          morning
                                   Stallard and     quarterbacks.”
                                   Worthington      Source: Peters
                                   (1998).          (1999).




                                        45
                 Evidence of      Evidence of      Illustration of   Illustration
                 unsuccessful     successful       debiasing         of debiasing
                 debiasing?       debiasing?       through           through
                                                   procedural        substantive
                                                   rules             law?
                                                   governing the
                                                   adjudicative
                                                   process?
Self-serving     Alerting         Asking people    Requiring
bias in          people to        to make other    litigants to
negotiations37   existence of     side’s           make other
                 the bias         argument.        side’s
                 Source:          Source:          argument.
                 Babcock,         Babcock,         Source:
                 Loewenstein      Loewenstein      Babcock,
                 and              and              Loewenstein
                 Issacharoff      Issacharoff      and
                 (1997).          (1997).          Issacharoff
                                                   (1997).




37
   Self-serving bias overlaps to some degree with optimism bias, discussed at
length in the text. An important distinction between the two categories is that
self-serving bias generally relates to negotiation contexts – such as the
litigation and settlement context – and, because of that fact, a major aspect of
people’s biased judgments within the domain of self-serving bias concerns
the fairness of alternative outcomes. See Babcock et al. (1995, pp. 1337-38);
Jolls, Sunstein and Thaler (1998a, pp. 1501-04). Self-serving conceptions of
fairness are not usually categorized as a form of optimism bias; by contrast,
bias in estimated probabilities of discrete outcomes – such as the result at trial
– could quite readily be characterized as either self-serving bias or optimism
bias.



                                       46
             Evidence of      Evidence of      Illustration of   Illustration
             unsuccessful     successful       debiasing         of debiasing
             debiasing?       debiasing?       through           through
                                               procedural        substantive
                                               rules             law?
                                               governing the
                                               adjudicative
                                               process?
DEPARTURES
FROM
EXPECTED
UTILITY
THEORY
 Endowment   Many             Protecting                         Property law
 effect      approaches.      entitlements                       governing
             Source:          by liability                       protection of
             Kahneman,        rules rather                       intellectual
             Knetsch and      than property                      property
             Thaler (1990).   rules; having                      entitlements
                              agents make                        (section
                              decisions.                         2.2.1);
                              Sources:                           agency law
                              Rachlinski and                     (section
                              Jourden                            2.2.2).
                              (1998); Arlen,
                              Spitzer and
                              Talley (2002).




                                   47
