                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             DEFAULT RISK SHARING BETWEEN BANKS AND MARKETS:
            THE CONTRIBUTION OF COLLATERALIZED DEBT OBLIGATIONS

                                             Günter Franke
                                           Jan Pieter Krahnen

                                          Working Paper 11741
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11741


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2005




We are indebted to Dennis Hänsel, Thomas Weber and Christian Wilde for their excellent computational
assistance and their comments which greatly helped us to improve the paper. Furthermore, we owe a lot to
Mark Carey and René Stulz for their detailed and very helpful comments on earlier versions of this paper.
We also gratefully acknowledge financial support by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft and by the Center
for Financial Studies at Frankfurt’s Goethe University. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Günter Franke and Jan Pieter Krahnen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Default Risk Sharing Between Banks and Markets: The Contribution of Collateralized Debt
Obligations
Günter Franke and Jan Pieter Krahnen
NBER Working Paper No. 11741
November 2005
JEL No. D82, G21, D74

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper contributes to the economics of financial institutions risk management by exploring how

loan securitization affects their default risk, their systematic risk, and their stock prices. In a typical

CDO transaction a bank retains through a first loss piece a very high proportion of the default losses,

and transfers only the extreme losses to other market participants. The size of the first loss piece is

largely driven by the average default probability of the securitized assets. If the bank sells loans in

a true sale transaction, it may use the proceeds to expand its loan business, thereby affecting

systematic risk. For a sample of European CDO issues, we find an increase of the banks’ betas, but

no significant stock price effect around the announcement of a CDO issue.

Günter Franke
Center for Finance and Econometrics
at the University of Konstnaz
guenter.frnake@uni.konstanz.de

Jan Pieter Krahnen
Goethe-University Frankfurt
1     Introduction1
In recent years securitization of loan and bond portfolios became more and
more popular among banks. The volume of collateralized loan obligations
(CLOs) and collateralized bond obligations (CBOs) strongly increased in the
US and in Europe. This development raises several issues at the micro- and
the macro level. This paper will address some issues on the micro level, in
particular the impact of CLO-transactions on the banks’ risk taking.
    In a CLO-transaction the bank transfers default risks of the underlying
loans to other market participants, the investors. Since the bank usually
has inside information about its borrowers, it has to oﬀer some credit en-
hancements in a CLO-transaction to protect the investors against potential
eﬀects of asymmetric information. For that purpose the bank usually takes
a first loss position in the default risks of the underlying loan portfolio. This
raises the question about the eﬀective extent of the risk transfer in a CLO-
transaction. The first purpose of this paper is to look into this issue.
    Our results show, first, that contrary to what many observers believe,
the default losses of the securitized portfolio largely remain on the books of
the issuing bank. Second, in a fully funded transaction, the risk of extreme
unexpected losses, i.e. the bad tail risk, is transferred from the bank to
investors. We argue that the combined eﬀect of retaining the first loss piece
and selling senior tranches to investors achieves an eﬃcient risk allocation,
reducing the bank’s exposure to extreme risks which might endanger the
bank’s solvency. Thus, securitization should have a positive impact on the
bank’s solvency.
    This direct eﬀect of securitization on the bank´s default risk is derived
from simulations of the loss rate distribution of the underlying loan portfolio.
This distribution and the first loss position jointly determine the eventual
risk transfer to investors. The loss rate distribution depends not only on the
average quality of the underlying loans, but also on the correlation of defaults
among these loans. Therefore the correlation impact is also analyzed in the
simulations.
    Banks usually securitize loan portfolios not only for their direct eﬀect,
but also to enlarge their investment opportunity set. In a fully funded trans-
action the bank can use the proceeds from issuing securities in various ways.
The most conservative use would be to reinvest the proceeds in risk-free as-
sets or to repay some of its own debt. In this case, securitization would
reduce the overall risk of the bank. Alternatively, the bank could expand its
loan business by granting new loans to new customers. Then the bank would
retain the default risk of the first loss position and, in addition, take the de-
fault risks of the new loans. Even though the total loan portfolio of the bank

                                       2
is now better diversified, the overall risk of the bank is likely to be higher
than before securitization. We also simulate the eﬀects of this reinvestment
policy, assuming diﬀerent correlations among the loan defaults. The simu-
lation results indicate that the standard deviation of the bank´s loan loss
rate increases after securitization. Thus, it would be naive to assume that
securitization generally reduces the banks´ risks.
    The nature of the bank´s reinvestment policy is an empirical matter.
Therefore, we try to obtain some insight into this question by analyzing the
stock market reaction to securitization. This is the second main purpose of
the paper. The underlying approach is based on the CAPM. In an event
study we look at the abnormal stock returns of a bank around the announce-
ment date of a securitization to find out whether the stockholders consider
securitization as value enhancing. We also look at the bank´s beta change
around the securitization and try to infer from this change the nature of the
bank´s reinvestment policy. Obviously, such an approach is based on several
assumptions. Therefore the conclusions are preliminary, at best. A more
careful analysis needs to look at the details of the bank´s balance sheets.
But this is beyond the scope of this paper.
    We find no significant abnormal stock returns around the announcement
dates. But we find significant increases in the banks´ stock betas. We in-
terpret this as evidence that most banks use securitization to take more
systematic risks. Suppose, for example, that banks use the proceeds from
securitization in a fully funded transaction to grant new loans to new cus-
tomers. Then the granularity of the bank´s total loan portfolio should in-
crease so that also the correlation between the bank´s default losses and the
macrofactor of default losses should increase. Assuming a strong correlation
between the macrofactor of default losses and the stock market return and a
strong correlation between the bank´s default losses and its stock return, the
correlation between the bank´s stock return and the market return should
increase. In addition, this reinvestment policy is likely to raise the standard
deviation of the bank´s default losses and , thus, the standard deviation of
the bank´s stock return so that the bank´s beta should increase.
    The finding that, on average, the banks´ betas increase with securitiza-
tion announcements could be explained not only by taking more systematic
risks, but also by secular increases of banks’ betas over the sampling period.
However, we control for this possibility. Therefore, we regard our finding as
preliminary empirical evidence about the banks´ reinvestment policies.
    These findings on the micro level can have important consequences on
the macro level, in particular, on the stability of financial markets. We will
comment on these potential eﬀects only briefly in the conclusion.
    The paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we first provide some

                                      3
institutional background and then analyze the securitization impact on the
default risk of the bank´s loan book. In section 3, we look at the stock
market reaction to securitization annnouncements including the beta eﬀects.
Section 4 concludes.


2     Tranching and the allocation of risk

In section 2.1, the typical securitization contracts are briefly described. More-
over, based on a European sample of collateralized debt obligations (CDOs),
some evidence on first loss pieces and tranching is presented. In section 2.2,
we describe our method to simulate the default loss distribution for a given
loan portfolio. Section 2.3 presents some European evidence on loss alloca-
tion to tranches in CDO-transactions. Section 2.4 then analyzes the eﬀects
on the bank´s default losses of securitization and reinvestment policies.


2.1    Basics of contract design

There are basically two types of CDO transactions, fully funded asset backed
securities (ABS) and synthetic transactions. For a detailed description of
contract types see [13] (Chapters 24 and 25) and [7] (Part one). In an ABS
transaction the bank sells part of its loan portfolio to a special purpose
vehicle (SPV) which refinances itself through the issue of bonds. Usually the
bank has to take a first loss position, i.e. the bank agrees to absorb default
losses up to a specified limit. To achieve this, the bank can buy the non-
rated tranche (equity tranche) which absorbs all default losses up to its par
value, before other tranches have to bear any further losses. In addition or
alternatively, the SPV can set up a reserve account which builds up over time
from excess interest payments, received from the SPV after it has serviced
other investors. The reserve account absorbs default losses in a similar way.
In these transactions, the bank can use the proceeds from the sale of its loans
to generate new business.
    In a synthetic CLN (credit linked note) transaction, the bank retains
the loans, but buys protection through a credit default swap with a SPV
as the counterparty. Again, the bank usually takes a first loss position by
arranging the swap so that nothing is paid unless losses on the underlying
loan portfolio exceed a threshold. Moreover, the maximum amount paid
by the swap is often much smaller than the face value of the underlying
loan portfolio. The bank thus retains both a first loss position and the

                                       4
risk associated with very large losses. The bank may buy protection for
these risks through a senior credit default swap with a diﬀerent counterparty.
A synthetic CLN arrangement diﬀers from an ordinary credit default swap
arrangement because the SPV’s assets protect the bank against counterparty
risk, may provide more regulatory capital relief, and may permit a wider-
than-usual class of investors to act as protection sellers.
    The first loss position is motivated by information asymmetries. These
asymmetries are a major obstacle to trading debt claims, in particular claims
against small obligors about whom little is known publicly [19]. Adverse
selection and moral hazard of the bank create problems similar to those in
the insurance business. Therefore, suitable mechanisms of protection are also
applied in CDO transactions. The main instruments are first loss positions
(deductibles in the case of insurance contracts) and risk sharing arrangements
(coinsurance in the case of insurance contracts). First loss positions have
been shown to be optimal arrangements in a number of papers, including
[1], [31], [16]. [28] shows that splitting (tranching) the portfolio payoﬀ into
a risk-free security which is not subject to asymmetric information problems
and sold to outside investors, and a risky asset which may be retained by the
bank, is better than having one type of security only which is partially sold
to outside investors. [8] generalizes this idea so that the tranches sold may
also be risky. In a study on US credit card securitizations, [4] argue that even
in the absence of a first loss piece retention, implicit recourse through early
amortization may serve the same economic function, thereby circumventing
minimum capital regulation.
    [18] proposes a partial loan sale to mitigate moral hazard problems. This
is observed in credit card securitizations, for example, but not in CLO trans-
actions. The reason may be that the originator is likely to earn a higher
fraction of expected monitoring benefits if he takes a high first loss position
instead of retaining a moderate fraction of all tranches. Thus, investors may
believe that a FLP provdes stronger monitoring incentives.
    The first loss piece reduces problems of asymmetric information faced by
investors if it is held by the originating bank. In principle, the bank can
transfer the default losses of a first loss piece by buying a credit default
swap or, in the case of an equity tranche, by selling this tranche. Usually
banks do not publish information on this issue. An investigation of the
Deutsche Bundesbank [9] covering the major ten German banks securitizing
loan portfolios revealed that, on average, they retain not only the first loss
piece amounting to 2.1 percent of the transaction volume, but in addition also
the lowest rated tranches amounting to another 4.9 percent of the transaction
volume. Thus, it appears, that the originating banks usually retain the first
loss piece. This would be in line with economic reasoning since we would

                                       5
expect very high credit spreads required by investors for taking the default
losses of the first loss piece due to asymmetric information.
     The optimal size of the first loss position depends not only on problems of
asymmetric information, but also on various other considerations. A larger
first loss piece reduces the default loss transfer and absorbs more regulatory
as well as economic equity capital leaving less room for new activities of the
originating bank. Given the strong skewness of a typical loan portfolio’s
default loss distributions as illustrated in the next section, we would expect
the first loss piece to clearly exceed the mean default loss.
     The importance of default risk for the size of the first loss position (FLP)
can be seen from a sample of 43 European CLO transactions, for which we
could get a standardized measure of portfolio default risk.
     This is done by converting Moody´s weighted average rating factor or, if
it is not available, the weighted average quality of the underlying loans into
a weighted average default probability (wadp). We then regress the nominal
size of the first loss piece on the weighted average default probability, the
issue date, and Moody´s diversity score (ds). The latter statistic captures
the diversification of the underlying asset portfolio. Its score is increasing if
portfolio loans are spread more evenly within and across industries.
     f lp = c + β · wadp + γ · ds + δ · date + ε
     The regression result finds β to be positive and highly significant (p =
0.00), while γ is negative and weakly significant (p = .07); the adjusted R-
squared is 0.73. The issue date is insignificant. Thus, the weighted average
default probability is a strong determinant of the size of the FLP, confirming
our conjecture that the first loss position increases with the expected default
loss of the underlying portfolio. The protective role of the FLP will become
more apparent when, in the next section, we simulate the loss distribution
of the underlying portfolio, and estimate the share of expected default losses
covered by the first loss position.
     The shape of the loss distribution is essential for understanding the rel-
evance of the diversity score for the size of the first loss position. A large
diversity score is indicative of a steep loss distribution, with loss observations
being more heavily concentrated around the mode.
     A common feature of asset securitizations is the allocation of portfolio
risk to several layers of claims. These layered claims, or tranches, obey the
principle of strict subordination. Losses up to the par value of the lowest
tranche are completely absorbed by the holders of this tranche. If accumu-
lated losses of the underlying asset portfolio exceed the par value of the lowest
tranche, which is the detachment point of the tranche and the attachment
point of the next senior tranche, the latter will absorb the remaining losses,
up to its detachment point, and so on for the remaining tranches. In this

                                        6
way, tranches which are more senior will only be aﬀected if default losses
reach their attachment point, after having wiped out all junior tranches2 .
    According to the model in [15], optimal securitization design aims at a
structure that facilitates funding of relationship specific assets by less in-
formed ("remote") investors. Senior tranches are suited for these investors
since, by construction, they are largely free of default risk, see [28] and [8].
Therefore, holders of senior tranches are rarely exposed to the moral haz-
ard component of the underlying lending relationships. Investors need not
spend resources on monitoring the underlying lending relationships, thus low-
ering the required tranche rate of return in equilibrium3 . Issuing mezzanine
tranches to relatively more sophisticated investors supports the reduction in
delegation costs even further. These investors have an expertise in risk as-
sessment and monitoring, providing a buﬀer between the first loss piece held
by the issuer and the senior piece held by remote investors.
    The number of distinct mezzanine tranches should therefore depend on
the shape of the loss rate distribution. How does the number of tranches
of a given transaction relate to the degree of diversification and the default
probability of the underlying loan portfolio? An empirical estimate follows
from regressing the number of tranches on Moody’s diversity score and on
the weighted average default probability:
    #tranches = c + β · wadp + γ · ds + u
    In a simple OLS regression using the same 43 European CLO transac-
tions as before, we find that the diversity score has a positive and significant
coeﬃcient (p = 0.00), while wadp is insignificant. The adjusted R-squared
is 0.2. Thus, after controlling for the default probability, a steeper loss rate
distribution is associated with a higher number of mezzanine layers. Inclu-
sion of the first loss piece and the issue date does not change the regression
results.
    The implications of [15] relate to the risk allocation achieved by tranch-
ing the underlying collateral portfolio. By acquiring the senior tranche, re-
mote investors essentially take on macroeconomic risk. To be more precise,
the payoﬀ from holding a senior tranche is eﬀectively indexed to systemwide
macroeconomic shocks. Define the macrofactor of default risks as the average
default rate on the aggregate portfolio of debt claims. This factor is random
and, by definition, ranges in the (0,1) interval. Then a well-diversified loan
portfolio of average initial quality will only incur average default rates be-
yond, say, ten percent if the macrofactor is in the same range. Hence the
senior tranches will only incur default losses if the macrofactor turns out to
be very bad.
    This is not to say that in a like situation there is no moral hazard of
the bank. It may well be that in a severe downturn situation banks do not

                                       7
care much about their loans anymore. Moral hazard behavior may then be
diﬃcult to detect, so that reputational costs are low. Yet, the senior tranches
are only impaired if the macrofactor turns out to be bad. If the macrofactor
turns out to be good, then even strong moral hazard behavior is very unlikely
to aﬀect the senior tranches at all.
    Thus, the structural aspects characterizing collateralized debt obligations
are devised to solve the inherent tension that exists between the originator
who has private information, and a diversified investor base without this
information. Due to the informational disparity, the originator’s claim is
highly illiquid, and a direct sale of the asset would create a large discount
relative to the going concern value of the asset, see [18] and [11].
    In section 2.3 we will characterize the properties of junior and senior
tranches, building on the information provided in the oﬀering circulars of a
large number of European CDO-transactions. This characterization requires
knowledge of the loss rate distributions of the underlying portfolios, in partic-
ular the allocation of default losses to the various tranches. Whether the size
of the first loss piece appears suﬃcient to mitigate problems of asymmetric
information, depends on the shape of the loss distribution.


2.2    Estimating the loss distribution
To estimate the loss distribution of the underlying portfolio and the implied
loss allocation to the various tranches, we proceed as follows. First, we use
the information in the oﬀering circular4 on the quality of the underlying
loans and their initial portfolio weights, as indicated by a rating agency.
If this information is not available, we use the average initial loan quality
as indicated by a rating agency. Then we use S&P´s transition matrix for
diﬀerent loan qualities to estimate the default probabilities for particular
loans over the lifetime of the transaction: we use Monte Carlo simulation to
generate a distribution of rating migration paths assuming a 47.5% recovery
rate throughout. Absent better data on loss given default, these assumptions
are standard in the literature.
    Multi-year asset value migration tables are derived from the one-year ta-
ble through repeated multiplication. The migration matrix is then mapped
into a matrix of standard normal threshold values. For each asset, a ran-
dom draw from the standard normal distribution yields a migration from the
beginning of the year to the end of the year rating notch. To arrive at a
portfolio return, the correlations between loan migrations need to be taken
into account. This is done by a Cholesky transformation.
    For assets in the same industry (in diﬀerent industries), the correlation


                                       8
coeﬃcient is initially set at 0.3 (0.0), following common practice [29]. Al-
terations of the assumptions on asset correlations will later on be used to
analyze the impact of systematic risk on loss correlations between tranches.
    The generation of final portfolio cash flows and their allocation to the
tranches that constitute the issue is achieved in a last step. The cash flows
of each period t are transformed in a realized final (compound) value, RF Vt ,
using a flat term structure of interest rates (4%). If a credit event is recorded
(default), then the assumed recovery is accounted for, and all further cash
flows from this asset are set equal to zero. All final cash flows are allocated
to tranches according to the cashflow waterfall-principle, as defined in the
oﬀering circular. Finally, for each tranche, the nominal claims of each period,
NVt , are transformed into a final value as well, NF Vt . The sum of these final
values over all tranches defines the final value of all claims. TheSratio of these
                                                                      RF V
two final values defines the portfolio loss rate, P LRT = 1 − S t NF Vtt . Using
                                                                    t
50,000 observations, a loss distribution is generated that reflects the loss
cascading inherent in the tranche structure 5 .

    Figure 1 about here
    Figure 1 shows the loss rate distribution of the London Wall 2002-2 trans-
action, issued by Deutsche Bank in 2002, which appears to be a typical ex-
ample of a CDO transaction. Here we assume an intra-industry correlation
of 0.3, and a zero interindustry correlation. The graph shows a pronounced
skewness. The expected loss is 150 bp (1.5%)   / with a first loss position of
246 bp. By retaining the FLP, the originator bears all losses within the 91%-
quantile of the loss rate distribution. Hence, a large fraction of losses is not
transfered to investors, which serves as a strong barrier to adverse selection
and moral hazard.


2.3    Loss allocation in CDO transactions
How is the risk of an underlying portfolio allocated to tranches? In particular,
to what extent are losses, given the estimated probability distribution of loss
rates, absorbed by the various tranches? In a typical issue, the first loss piece
comprises between 2% and 10 % of the issue volume, while the senior AAA-
rated tranche comprises as much as 80-95%. Further evidence is derived
from looking at a sample of 40 European CDO-transactions with close to
150 tranches, see the list in Table 6. This sample has some overlap with the
CLO-sample used for the regressions in section 2.1.
    In calculating the loss distributions for this European CDO sample, we
rely on our own loss estimator, introduced in the last section. Given the loss
distribution, we then take the ratings of the tranches from the oﬀering circular

                                        9
and determine their attachment points. For this exercise we use S&P´s table
indicating the estimated default probability of a claim for a given rating and
a given maturity. This exercise starts with the most senior tranche, and ends
with the lowest rated tranche. An AAA-claim with maturity of ten years,
for example, has an estimated default probability of about 1 percent. Then
the attachment point of this tranche is the (100 - 1)-percent quantile of the
loss distribution. By the same procedure, the attachment points of the other
rated tranches are derived. The unrated first loss piece is thus determined
by the attachment point of the lowest rated tranche.
    Table 1 summarizes the results of this mapping exercise6 . The table
presents average values by type of asset. We consider three asset classes,
collateralized loan obligations (CLO) with large loans and bonds, CLOs with
small corporate loans (SME-CLO), and the rest (other, including CBOs and
portfolios of CDO tranches). These asset classes diﬀer with respect to di-
versification and relationship intensity. First, the degree of diversification is
low for CBOs and high for SME-CLO issues, while CLOs are somewhat in
between, as evidenced by the average diversity scores. Second, the relation-
ship character of the underlying lending relationship is probably highest in
the case of the SME loans, and lowest in the case of CBOs, which typically
comprise bonds issued by large caps.

    Table 1 about here
    Table 1 uses a broad classification of 40 European transactions issued be-
tween January 1999 and July 20027 . It is instructive to compare the second
and the fourth column, SME-CLOs and CBOs, because the underlying assets
diﬀer. The former consists of bank loans extended to small and mid sized
companies, while the latter refers to bonds issued by large corporates. The
average quality of the loans is below that of the bonds. Not only is the aver-
age issue size of SME portfolios about 80% higher than that of the average
CBO portfolio, but also the number of loans by far exceeds the number of
bonds, suggesting that SME-CLOs are more granular, i.e. more diversified
than CBOs. The table also shows that while the average size of the first loss
piece is similar for both issue types8 , it covers a much wider portion of the
loss rate distribution in case of CBOs. The size of their FLPs is on average
3.36 times the expected loss of the underlying portfolio, and it is 1.34 times
in case of SME-CLOs, although the diﬀerence in rating quality of the un-
derlying portfolios is small. Due to the diﬀerence in first loss positions, the
median rating of the most junior rated tranche of the CBO transactions is
several notches higher than its counterpart among SME-CLO transactions.
CBO-first loss pieces cover 0.96 of the cumulative density of the underly-
ing portfolio’s loss rate distribution, on average. The remaining risk to be

                                       10
allocated to investors is relatively small, allowing for only 2.85 additional
tranches to be issued for CBOs. This number is significantly lower than in
case of SME-CLOs where it reaches 4.57.
    In all asset classes, the first loss piece covers more than 100% of the mean
loss. Variations are sizeable, but there is no clear picture across asset classes.
The average size of the first loss piece is 7.1%, with a significant variation
between non-SME-CLOs and CBOs. As a consequence, FLPs take over most
of the losses, and the losses allocated to the senior tranche are restricted to
extreme, systematic events. Their expected value is very low, 0.01% of the
senior tranche volume on average, as is their default probability (0.5%).


2.4    Securitization eﬀects on the bank’s overall default
       risk
While the previous section analyzes the allocation of default losses to diﬀer-
ent tranches, this section looks at the impact of securitizations on the bank´s
overall default risk. This is also essential for the stock return analysis in sec-
tion 3. Assuming a true sale with all tranches being sold to outside investors,
except the first loss piece, what are the consequences for the risk exposure of
the bank? The answer depends on several aspects: first, what other assets
does the bank have on its book and how are their cash flows and default risks
correlated with those of the securitized loans? Second, what would be the
eﬀect of securitizing all default risks? Third, how does securitization change
the bank’s loan policy?
    So far, there is little evidence on the impact of securitization on bank
policy. Cebenoyan and Strahan [5] find mixed evidence on whether banks’
risks increase with securitization. Regressing the banks’ return volatility
on securitization, they find positive (insignificant) and negative (significant)
coeﬃcients, depending on which other variables are included in the regression.
    In order to improve our understanding, we consider a bank with a portfo-
lio of 50 identical loans extended equally to obligors in 5 diﬀerent industries,
one year to maturity, and the same quality. The latter is set equal to a B
rating, implying a 8.5 % default rate [25]. The bank can either keep the
loans in its books, or securitize them. For the securitized portfolio, the bank
retains a non-rated tranche of 10.11 percent, i.e. a first loss position. The
bank then reinvests the proceeds amounting to (100 − 10.11) percent in new
loans to obligors with the same quality characteristics as those in the initial
loan book. Hence the on-balance sheet loan book of the bank, including the
retained first loss piece, has the same size as before securitization. But the
new loans are not perfect substitutes for the old loans because the new loans

                                       11
are granted to new obligors so that the granularity of the total loan portfolio
increases.
    This assumption of reinvestment represents a polar case of bank policy.
The other polar case would be that the bank reinvests the proceeds from
securitization in risk-free assets. In this case the bank would retain the risks
of the first loss piece, but not incur new risks. For a highly rated bank the
eﬀects would be very similar to those of an early repayment of debt. In reality
banks are likely to follow some route between these polar cases so that some
new risks are added to the bank’s portfolio.
    Table 2 shows the first four moments of the distribution of loss rates (1) for
the original loan portfolio without securitization and (2) for the new portfolio
whose default losses are composed of those from the FLP of the securitized
portfolio plus all default losses from the newly granted loans. The moments
depend on the assumed intra- and interindustry correlations, therefore we re-
port diﬀerent correlation scenarios. In the first, the base case, intra-industry
dependence is set at 0.3, while inter-industry correlation is zero. The other
scenarios assume a stronger dependency, suggesting the existence of a com-
mon systematic factor. Higher correlations reflect a stronger macrofactor of
default risks.


                              Table 2 about here

    First, consider the eﬀect of securitization and reinvestment in the cor-
relation base case. Figure 2 plots the diﬀerence between the default rate
distribution of the new and that of the original portfolio. The graph indi-
cates that securitization and reinvestment lower the default probabilities in
the range 0 to 18 %, and raise them in the range 18 to 46 %. Therefore, the
mean loss rate of the new portfolio is higher than the respective rate of the
original portfolio. The ratio of the mean of the new portfolio over that of the
original portfolio is not just (1 + (1 − 0.1011)) = 1.8989, but clearly lower.
The reason is that in the new portfolio the loss of the securitized portfolio is
restricted to the FLP.
    More diﬃcult to grasp are the eﬀects on the second, third and fourth
moments of the loss rate distribution. First, consider the standard deviation.
In Table 2 the standard deviation of the new portfolio exceeds that of the
original portfolio. Intuitively, this is explained by scaling up losses through
securitization and reinvestment. But this is not true in general. Let the par
value of the original portfolio be 1 $. If the bank securitizes this portfolio
taking a FLP of 0.1 $, it grants new loans for 0.9 $. Let σop denote the
standard deviation of the loss of the original portfolio, σ f lp the standard

                                       12
deviation of the loss on the FLP, and ρ the correlation coeﬃcient between
losses. Then the variance of the new portfolio equals

    σ 2f lp + 2 · 1 · 0.9 · ρ · σ op · σ f lp + 0.92 · σ 2op
    while the variance of the original portfolio equals σ 2op . Obviously, the
variance of the new portfolio is smaller than that of the original portfolio
if the FLP is small relative to expected loss so that it will be exhausted by
losses with high probability. In the limit, σ f lp tends to zero, implying the
variance of the new portfolio roughly to equal 81% of the variance of the
original portfolio. Therefore it is not obvious whether the bank’s standard
deviation of default losses will increase or decline through securitization and
reinvestment.
    In Table 2, skewness and kurtosis of the new portfolio decrease relative
to the original portfolio. From Figure 2, this is not surprising given a shift
of the probability mass from the lower tail to the center. This eﬀect is more
dramatic for the kurtosis than for the skewness since the kurtosis raises the
diﬀerences to the mean to the fourth instead of the third power.

    Figure 2 about here
    These eﬀects can also be seen by looking at the cumulative loss distribu-
tions in Figure 3. These distributions show that the change in the loss rate
distribution caused by securitization and reinvestment is not merely a shift,
but also a spreading out of the distribution.

    Figure 3 about here
    Second, we look at the eﬀects of correlations on these results. Of course,
correlations have no eﬀect on the average default rate of the original port-
folio. This is always the same (around 5,67%) even though the simulation
produces slight diﬀerences. Figure 4 displays the diﬀerence between two fre-
quency distributions of default losses of the original portfolio, the first being
determined by correlations(0.7; 0.3) , the second by (0.3; 0.0), with the first
number being the intraindustry correlation and the second the interindustry
correlation. Raising the correlations shifts probability mass from the range
( 6 — 24 %) to both tails. Therefore, the standard deviation, the skewness
and the kurtosis of the default rate of the original portfolio increase with
correlations.

    Figure 4 about here
    More complex is the eﬀect of correlations on the default rate distribution
of the new portfolio. Figure 4 indicates that a FLP of about 10 percent has to
bear small losses (1—5 %) with higher probabilities, and high losses (6-10 %)
with lower probabilities. Hence, in this example, higher correlations imply a

                                       13
lower average loss for the FLP. This also explains in Table 2 why the ratio
of average losses of the new over the original portfolio declines with higher
correlations.
    Table 2 also indicates for our example that standard deviation and skew-
ness of the new portfolio increase with correlations, while this is not always
true of the kurtosis. The relative increase in standard deviation (new over
original portfolio) tends to slightly decline with higher correlations. The rel-
ative changes in skewness and kurtosis do not display such regular patterns.

The simulation exercise begs the question whether securitization and rein-
vestment will have an impact on the systematic risk of the bank measured by
the sensitivity of the bank´s default losses to a macrofactor of default losses.
If the bank retains the first loss piece and reinvests the proceeds from securi-
tization in loans to new obligors, then tranching and reinvestment raise the
granularity of the total loan book, which in turn raises the bank´s systematic
cash flow risk. As a result, the bank´s stock market beta might be aﬀected
as well. We will look into this matter in the next section.


3     Share price reactions to the issue of Collat-
      eralized Debt Obligations
In this section we want to analyze how the securitization of loan assets aﬀects
the equity valuation of the bank. In accordance with the last section, em-
phasis will be on eﬀects that are due to tranching and reinvestment. Earlier
studies, including the event studies [22] and [30], have neglected the impor-
tant risk repackaging aspect of loan securitization.


3.1    Hypotheses and test design
Our main hypothesis relates the eﬀects of securitization to the systematic
stock market risk of the bank measured by its beta. The change in beta
depends on the change in the standard deviation of the bank´s stock return
and the change in the correlation between the bank´s stock return and the
market return. In order to derive hypotheses about these changes, we assume,
first, that a higher standard deviation of the default losses incurred by the
bank translates into a higher standard deviation of its stock return. Second,
we assume that an increase in the granularity of the bank´s loan portfolio
translates into a higher correlation between the bank´s stock return and the
market return. This is motivated by the empirical observation that the credit

                                      14
spread of a corporate bond is negatively related to the corporation´s stock
return (see, for example, [3] and [6]). Hence the market value of a loan
portfolio should be positively correlated with the market value of a portfolio
of the stocks of the underlying corporations which, in turn, are positively
correlated with the market return. The more granular the loan portfolio, the
better diversified it will be, and the stronger should be the correlation of its
market value with the market return. Given the immediate impact of the
market value of the bank´s loan portfolio on its own market value, a more
granular loan portfolio should translate into a higher correlation between the
bank´s stock return and the market return.
    In the following we consider a bank which in a securitization retains the
first loss piece and sells or swaps the other tranches to investors. As shown
before, the securitization impact on the bank´s risk depends strongly on the
bank´s reinvestment policy. We consider again the two polar cases discussed
before.
    If the bank securitizes the loan portfolio in a true sale transaction, but
takes no new risks, then the standard deviation of the bank´s default losses
should decline because the bad tail risks of the loss distribution are trans-
ferred to investors. This is likely to reduce the standard deviation of the
bank´s stock return, holding the liability side of its balance sheet constant.
Similarly, if the bank repays some of its debt, holding the equity capital
constant, then this should also reduce the standard deviation of the bank´s
stock return. Regarding the correlation between the bank´s stock return and
the market return, we expect a slight decline because the transfer of the bad
tail risks to investors immunizes the bank to very bad outcomes of macro
factors. Hence, overall we expect a slight decline of the bank´s beta after a
securitization given a risk-free reinvestment policy.
    Now consider the other polar case in which the bank reinvests the proceeds
from securitization in new loans of comparable quality. As shown before, the
standard deviation of the bank´s default losses is likely to increase which
should also raise the standard deviation of the bank´s stock return. Since
the reinvestment raises the granularity of the bank´s loan portfolio, this
should raise the correlation between the bank´s stock return and the market
return. Therefore, given this reinvestment policy, the bank´s beta should
increase. This eﬀect should be stronger for banks that engage in repeated
securitizations and, thus, over time, increase the share of equity tranches
among its assets. This motivates our first hypothesis.
Hypothesis 1 CDO-transactions will raise (reduce) the bank´s beta if the
proceeds of the securitization are reinvested in new loans to new obligors
(risk-free assets). The eﬀect will be stronger for repeated CDO-transactions.

                                      15
     Hypothesis 1 addresses the two polar cases. Banks may well choose poli-
cies in between. Since we do not have detailed data on the banks´ behavior,
we cannot find out what the banks actually do. We can only try to find
out whether the banks´ betas increase or not. This is, at best, indirect ev-
idence of the banks´ policies. A more rigorous test would use figures from
the quarterly reports of banks. Even using such figures it would be diﬃ-
cult to separate investment and capital structure decisions associated with
securitizations from other decisions.
     Similarly, one might argue that we should look at the banks´ unlevered
betas, i.e. the beta defined by the joint stock and bond return of the bank
and that of the market. This would require daily data on the bank´s debt
a large part of which is not securitized. Since we do not have these data,
we look at conventional betas. Given the small size of issues, 1.3% of the
balance sheet on average (see Table 3), the relative eﬀects on equity beta and
on asset beta are likely to be quite similar.
     Hypothesis 1 refers to beta changes at the time securitizations are an-
nounced, presuming that such announcements are a surprise. In some coun-
tries, especially the United States, some banks engage in securitization pro-
grams. Although the timing of individual securitizations in a program may
not be perfectly anticipated by the market, the long-run eﬀects on bank
cash flows may be anticipated rather well, in which case we would expect
little eﬀect of announcements of individual securitizations. But at least dur-
ing our sample period, European banks did not announce programs apart
from mortgage-backed master trust securitizations, which are absent from
our data. Thus, the number, size and timing of securitizations by European
banks are diﬃcult to predict. To the extent the market is nevertheless able
to make predictions, it would tend to weaken our ability to find any impact
of securitization on returns and betas.
     We now turn to the stock price reaction triggered by the announcement
of the securitization, as captured by the abnormal return in a typical event
study. The abnormal return is determined by the expectation of investors,
given the information contained in the issue announcement9 . If stockholders
interpret the securitization as a pure change in the bank‘s financing strat-
egy, then in a perfect market there should be no stock price eﬀect unless the
change in the financing strategy redistributes wealth from the stockholders to
the bondholders, or vice versa. Since the stockholders hold the equity piece
and the bondholders hold the senior tranche of the bank‘s assets, securitiza-
tion without risky reinvestment should typically reduce the expected default
losses of the bank‘s bondholders and, thus, enrich them at the expense of the
stockholders. This would argue in favor of a negative stock price reaction.
Securitization with risky reinvestment might have the opposite eﬀect.

                                     16
    Similarly, if the bank uses a true sale transaction to obtain new funding,
then stockholders may interpret the transaction as unfavorable information
about the bank‘s funding needs and react by a stock price decline. This,
however, would not be true for a synthetic transaction because then the
bank does not receive funding. Finally, the transaction cost of securitization
is nonnegligible, adding to a negative stock price impact.
    On the other side, securitization enables the bank to expand its loan or
other business. This may be considered by the stockholders as a valuable
real option of the bank so that the stock price should increase. Similarly, to
the extent that securitization protects the bank against major default losses,
it may reduce the costs of financial distress. This would also be good news
for the stockholders.
    Summarizing, the net impact of securitization on the bank‘s stock price
is hard to predict. It is an empirical matter as to which eﬀects dominate.
Across the entire sample, we do not expect to find significant stock price
reactions to the announcement of securitizations.
    We will provide evidence, first, by looking at all transactions, and sec-
ond, by looking at diﬀerent subsets of transactions to find out whether the
hypothesis holds equally well for all these subsets.
    There are a number of characteristics that may be relevant cross-sectionally.
Among these characteristics is the synthetic nature of a deal, because syn-
thetic deals eliminate the funding component in an issue and, therefore, syn-
thetic issues should have a smaller impact on the bank’s asset composition,
relative to a fully funded transaction.
    A second characteristic of securitization transactions that may be relevant
for cross sectional diﬀerences is the nature of the issue as static or dynamic.
Static issues maintain the original asset composition of the collateral port-
folio throughout the life of the transaction. This typically implies a gradual
redemption of the outstanding issue, in accordance with repayment of the
underlying loans. Dynamic issues, in contrast, tend to maintain their origi-
nal volume throughout the entire term of the issue. If loans in the collateral
portfolio are redeemed, the issuer replaces them by new loans, safeguarding
certain quality standards. While replenishment standards vary between is-
sues, a general implication is that banks are required to assign new loans to
the collateral portfolio in a systematic, non-random way.
    Since both properties - synthetic/true-sale and static/dynamic- exert an
influence on the asset composition of the bank, we expect both characteristics
to be consequential for the value eﬀect of the issue announcement.




                                      17
3.2     Data and results of the event study
In compiling our data set we initially looked at all transactions in Moody’s
European Securitization list of June 2003. The number of issues is 254, of
which 185 have a Moody’s "New Issue Report". It is this New Issue Report
that contains the information required for conducting the study, including a
description of the underlying assets as well as the covenants relevant for the
issue. Among the many other features of the issue, the Report also contains
the pricing of the tranches at the issue date and the name of the originator.
Not every issue has a single originator10 .
    For 112 transactions we were able to identify the originator. We imposed
the additional restriction that the originator is a listed company (else no stock
price is available), and arrive at a sample of 92 transactions from 31 banks.
We excluded the non-European banks and finally have 73 transactions issued
by 27 banks. These issues are used for the event study and, later on, for the
cross sectional analysis.
    Table 3 presents the descriptives of our final data set. In the upper panel
of Table 3 one can see that the average size of transactions is small relative
to the entire balance sheet, up to 2 % of total assets. For repeat issuers
this share of balance sheet assets adds up to 5-10 % of total assets, and in
some cases an even larger share of the total loan book. The average number
of tranches over all transactions is about 6. The lower panel refers to a
subsample of the 73 issues, comprising 51 issues. It excludes repeat issues,
i.e. all transactions whose issue date is less than 5 months (100 days) after
another issue by the same bank. This subsample will also be used later in the
regression analysis. The basic model is an augmented event study estimation.

                                                                        af ter
   Ri,t = αi + β i Rm,t + γ 1,i Dievent + γ 2,i Diother   event
                                                                  + β∆
                                                                     i Di      Rm,t + εi,t   ;
t = −20, ..., +20.

    The dependent variable Ri,t as well as the independent variable Rm,t , are
daily log returns, the latter being defined as the DJ EuroSTOXX index11 .
The dummy Devent captures the abnormal return over the event window. The
window extends from day -20 to day +20 around the announcement date.
Announcement dates were assumed to be the first public notification that
could be identified in Lexis-Nexis, or in pre-sale reports of the three major
agencies.
    The estimation uses a 200-days window, symmetrically around the event
window. Thus, for each event the time series extends over 240 trading days,
approximately one year. Since we are interested in a possible change of
systematic risk, the regression has a second variable capturing systematic

                                            18
risk, delta-beta(β ∆ ), which is multiplied by a dummy, Daf ter , which equals
one for the 100 days following the event window (-20, +20). The coeﬃcient
β ∆ measures the extent to which the after-event beta diverges from its pre-
event value. The null hypothesis sets β ∆ at zero.
    The estimation is complicated by the fact that for many cases in our
sample, there are repeat issuers, and the interval between two consecutive
announcement dates by the same issuer frequently is less than 100 days. Since
a separate regression is run for every transaction, there is overlap among
the estimation windows. In order to disentangle the eﬀect of the original
event from the eﬀects of other events, we include a dummy "other event",
Dother event , whose coeﬃcient captures abnormal returns in a -20/+20 days
window around each other event.
    To deal with β ∆ in these frequent issue-cases, we set the dummy Daf ter
equal to two (three) for the second (third) subsequent overlapping event.
Thus, we force β ∆ to be of the same order of magnitude for all successive
and overlapping events.
    In order to account for contemporaneous correlations between the regres-
sors, we employ the Seemingly Unrelated Regression (SUR) methodology.
Contemporaneous correlation between regressors is to be expected, since we
observe some clustering of the event dates (see Figure 5). The regression
system is run in calendar time rather than in event time, so that contempo-
raneous correlations are properly accounted for12 . To check the robustness
of our results, the regressions were also run in event time, and as OLS re-
gressions. All estimations yield qualitatively the same results.


    Figure 5 and Table 4 about here
    The regression results are presented in table 4. While regression A.1
covers all 73 events, regression A.2 uses only the 51 events without overlap.
Clearly, the announcement of a securitization does not generate abnormal
stock returns. In regression A.1 the average values of the coeﬃcients γ̄ 1
and γ̄ 2 are very close to zero and insignificant. In regression A.2, γ̄ 1 is
higher, but still insignificant. Thus, our conjecture that the announcement
of securitizations does not yield significant abnormal returns is confirmed.
    Securitization has, however, a rather impressive eﬀect on the banks’ av-
erage beta. Even though the the relative increase in beta is rather modest,
this is to be expected, given the small size of most securitizations relative
to bank size. In regression A.1, beta increases in the post-securitization pe-
riod by 0.05, as shown by the coeﬃcient of β ∆ . The coeﬃcient is highly
significant. This finding suggests that many banks engaged in securitizations
increase their exposure vis-à-vis the market return. Our data, however, do

                                     19
not allow us to infer the sources of this increase in systematic risk.
    In regression A.2 we look at the subsample of securitization events without
overlap. Now the coeﬃcient of β ∆ turns out to be much lower, also the
significance level is much lower. This sample underrepresents repeat issuers,
i.e. the large issuers. Thus, the beta increase after securitizations is much
stronger for repeat issuers. These are more likely to systematically increase
their risk after securitization.
    The surprisingly strong increase in beta raises the question whether this
finding may be biased. In particular, it is possible that the beta of the
banking industry increased over the sampling period and this eﬀect accounted
for the observed securitization impact on beta. In order to check for this
possibility, we also estimated an augmented model


    Ri,t = αi + β i Rm,t + γ 1,i Dievent + γ 2,i Diother event
             af ter                                  af ter
    +β ∆i Di        Rm,t + δi (Rb,t − Rm,t ) + δ∆i Di       (Rb,t − Rm,t ) + εi,t
    t = −20, ..., +20.
    This regression includes as an additional regressor the excess bank index
return Rb − Rm , defined as the log return of the European bank stock index
minus the log market return.
    In the augmented model, as shown in regression A.3 in table 4, the sensi-
tivity of the single bank stock return with respect to the market return over
the whole event window, the traditional beta, is now 0.82, while it is 0.68
for the excess bank index return13 . Looking at the changes of these sensitiv-
ities after securitization, the traditional beta increases by a significant 0.062,
essentially unchanged from regression A.1, while the sensitivity with respect
to the excess bank index return increases by 0.14, which is highly significant.
Hence, taking both increases together, they are even more impressive than
in in the one index model A.1. This indicates again, that on average the
banks engaging in securitizations expand their risk taking 14 . Therefore, the
increase in the traditional beta shown in regression A.1 does not appear to
be driven by changes in the beta of the bank index return.
    Given the increase of the traditional beta after securitization (regression
A.1), we next ask whether this increase diﬀers across types of transactions.
For that purpose, we regress the bank specific increases of β ∆        i , as estimated in
regression A.1, on a set of transaction-specific characteristics. The estimated
model is:
                         dynamic
    β∆i = α + λ1 Di              + λ2 Disynthetic + λ3 DiCLO + λ4 DiCBO + λ5 Diother +
        year
λ6−8 Di + εi

    The explanatory variables generate partitions of the sample. In par-

                                           20
ticular, Ddynamic is a dummy variable that equals one for managed issues,
i.e. collateral portfolios that are being replenished over the life of the issue.
Dsynthetic separates between synthetic and fully funded true sale issues, where
the dummy equals one for synthetic issues. DCLO , DCBO , and Dother subdi-
vides the sample into four categories according to the type of the underlying
asset portfolio, as loans, bonds, mortgages (the reference group), and all oth-
ers (e.g. credit card or leasing claims). The Dyear -dummies stands for the
issue years, with 2002 as the reference year.
    The cross section analysis of β ∆ reported in Table 5 oﬀers additional in-
sight in what drives the increase in beta after securitizations. Among the
structural characteristics, the dummy for managed issues, λ1 , is the only one
that turns out significant. Since its sign is negative, it signifies that managed
issues have a lower increase in systematic risk, i.e. the bank may be less
motivated to increase granularity in the aftermath of a securitization, or the
bank may be more concerned to restrict the new risks to avoid early termina-
tion of the transaction, relative to static deals. The variables representing the
type of underlying asset, like CLOs, CBOs remain insignificant altogether.
    Clearly, these findings are explorative in nature, and they will have to
be followed up by an integration of structural data concerning the collateral
assets as well as balance sheet details of the bank.


4     Conclusions

In this paper we have analyzed the design of CDO transactions and its impact
on the default risk exposure of the originating bank. These risk eﬀects are
measured in two diﬀerent ways, the impact on the bank´s default losses and
on its stock beta. The latter reflects the impact on the systematic risk in
the stock market. Adverse selection and moral hazard problems which are
considered strong barriers to trading default risks, are largely eliminated in
a CDO-transaction by a substantial first loss position of the originator. The
size of this position increases with the average default probability of the
underlying portfolio. Typically, only a small portion of default losses of the
underlying portfolio is transferred in a CDO-transaction. In addition to the
first loss piece, tranching typically leads to a large senior tranche which in
the case of a fully funded transaction may be sold to investors so that the
originator is protected against high default losses that otherwise might lead
to financial distress.
    The bank can adjust its policy to securitization in diﬀerent ways. In
one polar case it does not take new risks, in the other polar case it strongly

                                       21
expands its risk taking. The impact of securitization and reinvestment on the
banks’ default risk is illustrated in a simulation exercise which also illustrates
the impact of default correlations on the bank´s risk exposure. If the bank
uses the securitization proceeds to expand its loan business, then its default
risk tends to increase. This tends to translate also into an increase in its stock
beta. On average, a beta increase is confirmed by our empirical findings. Our
evidence suggests that many banks use the risk reduction achieved through
securitization to take new risks. However, this finding has to be interpreted
with care, given the size of the data set and the length of the observation
period.
    Finally, we tentatively draw some conclusions about consequences of secu-
ritizations for financial markets. The risk transfer achieved by securitization
depends as much on the way the issue is tranched as on the allocation of these
tranches to diﬀerent groups of investors. The tranching technique allows to
largely separate idiosyncratic risks from macro default risks. Assuming that
the default risk of corporate loans depends on the relationship between the
bank and its customers, tranching allows to allocate information-sensitive
risks predominantly to the first loss piece, and to a lesser extent to the mez-
zanine pieces, while the large senior tranches are largely free of these risks.
In turn, extreme macro risks are borne predominantly by the senior tranches.
The return on these tranches is eﬀectively indexed to systemwide economic
shocks. To the extent that loan securitizations replace the traditional “risk-
free” deposit-financing of banks, one may conclude that both, bank lending
and funding are indexed to macro risks making the banks less vulnerable.
    To what extent these eﬀects exist, depends upon the allocation of tranches
to diﬀerent types of investors. To realize an optimal risk sharing, the first loss
piece should be retained by the originating bank because then its incentives
as a lender are kept intact. In contrast, senior tranches should be allocated to
remote investors in order to improve stability of financial markets. Remote
investors are defined as investors who are in a better position to withstand
macro shocks so that their solvency is not endangered. In contrast, highly lev-
ered financial intermediaries without any hedge against macro shocks would
be endangered and the domino eﬀects of insolvencies might destabilize the
financial system. Figures published by banks and bank regulators indicate
that financial intermediaries themselves buy the bulk of CDO-tranches. It
appears that originating banks often retain the non-securitized senior portion
in synthetic deals. This indicates that the banking system as a whole is not
eﬀectively hedged against macro shocks. Financial stability would be im-
proved if banks would neither invest in the senior tranches nor retain them,
but sell them to more remote investors.
    These tentative conclusions suggest a demand for more research along the

                                       22
lines we have presented in this paper. On the modelling side, the correlation
structure between tranches of diﬀerent seniority is relevant for CDO-bond
portfolio management and for assessing financial system stability. For ex-
ample, a change in the correlation between asset classes not only alters the
default probabilities of tranches, but also the joint default probabilities of dif-
ferent tranches. The latter statistic is relevant for the analysis of contagion
eﬀects, as pointed out by [17] and [2]. On the empirical side, more research
is needed to find out how banks change their business policy in response to
securitization. In addition, more evidence is required on the eﬀective alloca-
tion of tranches to investor groups, and on the expanded role of commercial
banks as intermediaries between capital markets and the corporate sector, as
discussed in [18]. It appears that the securitization of bank loans provides
an eﬃcient new tool to combine the advantages of bank- and market-based
financial systems.


References
 [1] Arrow, K. (1971). Essays in the theory of risk bearing, Markham.

 [2] Bae, K.-H., Karolyi, G. A., R. M. Stulz (2003). A new approach to
     measuring financial contagion, Review of Financial Studies 16, 717-764.

 [3] Blanco, R., Brennan, S., and I.W. Marsh (2003). An empirical analysis
     of the dynamic relationship between investment-grade bonds and credit
     default swaps. Working paper no. 211, Bank of England.

 [4] Calomiris, C. W. and J. R. Mason (2004). Credit card securitization and
     regulatory arbitrage, Journal of Financial Services Research 26, 5-27

 [5] Cebenoyan, A.S. and P.E. Strahan (2004). Risk management, capital
     structure and lending at banks, Journal of Banking and Finance 28,
     19-43..

 [6] Collin-Dufresne, P., Goldstein, R.S. and J.S. Martin (2001). The deter-
     minants of credit spread changes, Journal of Finance 56, 2177-2207.

 [7] Das, S. (2000). Credit derivatives and credit linked notes, 2nd edition,
     John Wiley.

 [8] DeMarzo, P. (2005). The pooling and tranching of securities: a model
     of informed intermediation, Review of Financial Studies 18, 1-35.



                                        23
 [9] Deutsche Bundesbank (2004). Instrumente zum Kreditrisikotransfer:
     Einsatz bei deutschen Banken und Aspekte der Finanzmarktstabilität,
     Monatsberichte April, 27-45.

[10] Deutsche Bank Research (2004),. European Securitisation: 2003 Review
     & Outlook 2004, January.

[11] Diamond, D.W. and R.W. Rajan (2001). Liquidity risk, liquidity cre-
     ation, and financial fragility: a theory of banking, Journal of Political
     Economy 109, 287-327.
[12] Elsas, Ralf und J.P. Krahnen (2004). Universal banks and relationships
     with firms, German Financial System, Oxford University Press (Eds.
     Krahnen, J.P. and R.H. Schmidt), 197-232.
[13] Fabozzi, F.J., Modigliani, F., Jones, F.J. and M.G. Ferri (2002). Foun-
     dations of Financial Markets and Institutions, 3rd ed., Prentice Hall.
[14] Fitch Rating (2004). CDO Squared: A Closer Look at Correlation, Lon-
     don, FitchRatings, February 2.
[15] Franke, G. and J. P. Krahnen (2004). Understanding CLO markets,
     working paper, preliminary draft October.
[16] Gale, Douglas and Martin Hellwig (1985). Incentive-compatible debt
     contracts: The one-period problem, Review of Economic Studies 52,
     647-663.
[17] Gersbach, Hans (2002), "Financial Intermediation and the Creation of
     Macroeconomic Risks", CESifo Working Paper Series No. 695, April.
[18] Gorton, Gary und George G. Pennacchi (1995). Banking and loan sales:
     marketing non-marketable assets, Journal of Monetary Economics 35,
     389-411.
[19] Greenbaum, Stuart, and Thakor, Anjan (1987). Bank funding models:
     securitization versus deposits, Journal of Banking and Finance 11, 379-
     401.
[20] Hellwig, Martin (1994). Liquidity provision, banking, and the allocation
     of interest rate risk, European Economic Review 38, 1363-1389.

[21] Hellwig, Martin (1998), Banks, markets, and the allocation of risks in
     an economy, Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics 154,
     328-345.

                                     24
[22] Lockwood, Larry J., Rutherford, Ronald C., Herrera, Martin J. (1996).
     Wealth eﬀects of asset securitization, Journal of Banking and Finance
     20, 151-164.

[23] Longin, F. M., B. Solnik (2001). Extreme correlations of international
     equity markets during extremely volatile periods, Journal of Finance
     56, 649-676.

[24] Miller, Geoﬀrey P. (1998), On the Obsolescence of Commercial Banking,
     Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics 154, 61-77.

[25] Moody’s Investor Service (2002), Default and Recovery Rates of Euro-
     pean Corporate Bond Issuers, 1985-2001, July.

[26] Ongena, S., und D.C. Smith (2000). ‘Bank relationships: A review.’
     The performance of financial institutions, eds. P. Harker and A. Zenios.
     Cambridge University Press.

[27] Plantin, Guillaume (2003). Tranching, London School of Economics
     working paper, April..

[28] Riddiough, T. (1997). Optimal design of asset backed securities, Journal
     of Financial Intermediation 6, 121-152.

[29] Standard & Poors (2002). Global cash flow and synthetic CDO criteria,
     Standard & Poors Structured Research, March 21.

[30] Thomas, Hugh (2001). Eﬀects of asset securitization on seller claimants,
     Journal of Financial Intermediation 10, 306-330..

[31] Townsend, Robert M. (1979). Optimal contracts and competitive mar-
     kets with costly state verification, Journal of Economic Theory 21, 265-
     293.




                                     25
Notes
   1
      In addition to the persons mentionned already, we thank Andreas Jobst
for helping us to set up the data base and to discuss the intricacies of ABS
markets, and Ralf Elsas for helpful comments. We are also indebted to mar-
ket experts from major banks and agencies for their support and comments,
in particular M. Hermann (HSBC), T.Weinelt (Commerbank), S. Nicolaus
and R. Froitzheim (Deutsche Bank), T. Althaus (S&P), S. Bund (Fitch), C.
Benkert (JPMorgan), T. Klotz (Moody’s), J. Wasmund (DWS), C.-R. Wa-
genknecht and B. Specht (DrKW) . Furthermore, we have received numerous
helpful suggestions during the 2004 NBER-conference on Risks in Financial
Institutions in Woodstock, Vermont. We are particularly indebted to our
discussant, Patricia Jackson, and to Gary Gorton, Phillipe Jorion, Hashem
Pesaran and Til Schuermann for their valuable comments and suggestions.
    2
      The strict seniority can be weakened by early amortization provisions. If,
for example, a AAA-Tranche and a A-tranche get repaid annually, then the
latter tranche may receive substantial repayments in the early years, which,
in the end, may reduce the final repayments on the AAA-tranche.
    3
      See [26] and [12] for a review of relationship lending and its role in a
bank-oriented financial system.
    4
      Oﬀering Circulars (OC) are oﬃcial documents describing the issue’s col-
lateral composition, among many other contractual and legal details of the
arrangement. OCs are public information to be posted at the issue date.
In addition, most issues are accompanied by pre-sale reports published by
rating agencies.
    5
      There are a few simplifying assumptions: (i) there is no rating upgrade
once an asset has reached default status; (ii) a defaulted asset returns the
recovery rate multiplied by the nominal amount immediately; (iii) every asset
has a bullet structure, there is no prepayment.
    6
      The size of the senior tranche reported in the last line of Table 1 may
therefore diﬀer somewhat from the value reported in the oﬀering circulars.
However, this method allows us to estimate the loss quantiles allocated to
tranches, an information not available in the oﬀering circulars.
    7
      All issues were selected for which we could get the oﬀering circular.


                                      26
   8
      The size of the first loss piece is measured in percent of the underlying
portfolio volume.
    9
      From conversation with practitioners we know that the valuation of CDO
mezzanine tranches is typically preceded by a bookbuilding period resembling
an English auction, as modeled in [27].
   10
      Several ABS products are managed arbitrage deals that pass through the
cash flows of several originators at once.
   11
      We also ran the regressions with excess returns, rather than returns, and
found the same results.
   12
      With 73 x 241 observations, there are enough degrees of freedom to
estimate all coeﬃcients in the SUR system. The regressions were also run
in event time, without having a material eﬀect. In fact, the results are very
close, even numerically.
   13
      Thus the market sensitivity increases from 0.74 (in regression A.1) to
0.82 (in A.3), due to the addition of the excess bank return index. The net
sensitivity w.r.t. the market is 0.14, while it is 0.68 for the excess bank index.
   14
      We also employed alternative specifications of the banking industry model,
using Rb as a regressor, rather than the diﬀerence of (Rb − Rm ), and using
the error term from a first stage regression that relates Rb to Rm . All spec-
ifications lead to the same qualitative results. Furthermore, we also ran the
regression in event time, and as a set of OLS-regressions, with very similar
results for all specifications.




                                       27
Figure 1: Loss distribution of London Wall 2002-2, 50’000 iterations
This table displays the loss distribution of London Wall, as it was simulated using the information con-

tained in the Oﬀering Circular. A loss rate distribution for the entire portfolio is generated that takes into

account the correlation within and between industries and the credit migration risks referencing Standard

and Poor’s tables. The chart shows on the vertical axis the frequency of observations, and on the horizon-

tal axis the associated loss rate, truncated at 13 %. There was no observation surpassing this threshold.




                                                     28
Figure 2: Securitization and reinvestment: Impact on marginal loss distrib-
ution, 10’000 iterations
This table displays the diﬀerential loss rate distribution of a simulated loan portfolio with securitization

followed by reinvestment, and without reinvestment. The original portfolio consists of 50 B-rated loans of

equal par value with one year to maturity, split evenly across five industries. The new portfolio is obtained

by securitizing the original portfolio retaining a first loss piece of 10.11 percent and reinvesting the par

value of the original position minus the first loss piece in another portfolio which has the same character-

istics. The loss given default is assumed to be 52.5 percent. The pairwise within-industry correlations are

0.3, while pairwise between-industry correlations are assumed to equal 0.0. The resulting diﬀerential loss

rate distribution is displayed in the figure.




                                                    29
Figure 3: Securitization and reinvestment: Impact on cumulative loss distri-
bution, 10’000 iterations
This table displays the cumulative loss rate distributions of a simulated loan portfolio with securitization

and reinvestment (new), and without reinvestment (original). The same data as in Figure 2 are used.




                                                    30
Figure 4: Increase in correlation and marginal loss distribution, 10’000 iter-
ations
This table displays the diﬀerential loss rate distribution of a simulated loan portfolio with a low and a

high level of correlation. In the underlying collateral portfolios there are 100 assets each, all BB rated,

2 industries, the pairwise within-industry correlations increase from 0.3 to 0.7, while pairwise between-

industry correlations increase from 0.0 to 0.3. The resulting diﬀerential loss rate distribution is displayed

in the figure.




                                                    31
Figure 5: Time series of announcement dates
This figure plots the announcement of all 73 announcement dates between January 1999 and September

2002.




                                               32
Table 1: Loss rate distribution of European CDOs: Descriptive Statistics
This table summarizes basic characteristics of the CDO sample with 40 European transactions used in

the estimation of expected and unexpected loss. SME-CLOs are collateralized loan obligations where

underlyings comprise loans to small and medium size firms, CBOs are collateralized bond obligations,

with large firm corporate bonds as underlyings, and Non-SME-CLOs are a mixture of the two asset

classes, comprising corporate bonds and loans to large firms. The numbers in the table are averages across

the transactions listed in the column. Total volume is the amount in EUR of the portfolio underlying

the transaction, the number of tranches is the number of issued tranches, excluding the FLP. Size FLP is

the nominal value of a tranche relative to the nominal amount of the issue in fully funded and synthetic

transactions, Size Senior Tranche is the nominal value of the senior tranche relative to the nominal amount

of the issue, FLP/E(L) is the size of the FLP tranche relative to expected loss E(L) of the underlying

portfolio, and the FLP quantile is the cumulative density of losses not exceeding the size of the first loss

piece. All tranche related statistics rely on our own estimation of the loss rate distribution.




                                                    33
Table 2: Reinvestment of securitization proceeds: Simulation results for the
loss rate distributions
This table summarizes the results of a simulation exercise. The original portfolio consists of 50 B-rated

loans of equal par value with one year to maturity, split evenly across five industries. The new portfolio is

obtained by securitizing the original portfolio retaining a first loss piece of 10.11 percent and reinvesting

the par value of the original position minus the first loss piece in another portfolio which has the same

characteristics. The loss given default is assumed to be 52.5 percent. There are three scenarios in the

table, which diﬀer by their correlation assumptions. The lower panel shows the first four moments of the

resulting loss rate distribution for the bank’s loan book, including the retained first loss tranches, for the

three scenarios. The first column (original portfolio) describes the loan book before securitization, the

second (new portfolio) describes the loan book after the securitization transaction.




                                                     34
Table 3: European CDO data set: descriptive statistics
This table presents descriptive statistics of the CDO data set. The numbers (except no. of issues) are

averages across transactions. The upper Panel I uses information on 73 issues underlying the estimations

in section 3, collected from Datastream. The lower Panel II represents a subsample of 51, comprising only

those issues that did not experience a repeat issue by the same issuer within five months after the first

transaction. ’Size’ is the Euro volume of collateral assets underlying the issue, "Number of tranches" is

taken from the oﬀering circulars. All tranches, including non rated tranches, are considered. "Share of

balance sheet assets" divides Size by total assets of the bank. "Equity (book value)" is the sum of equity

and open reserves, according to Datastream.




                                                   35
Table 4: Announcement eﬀects: regression results
This table reports the results of the event study relating to the announcement of CDO issues. A calendar

time SUR estimation of the determinants of issue banks’ excess stock returns was employed. The first and

third regression (A.1 and A.3) are time series estimations with 73 events over a window of 241 trading days.

The second regression (A.2) has 51 events, excluding overlapping events by the same issuer (i.e. repeat

issues). All regressions use data from the period January 1999 to December 2002. The dependent variable

in all regressions is R(it), the daily log return on 27 banks (from Datastream). The explanatory variables

are R(mt), R(bt), D(event), D(other event) and D(after). R(mt) is the log return on the DJ EuroStoxx and

R(bt) is the log return on the DJ Euro STOXX Bank. Both indices are taken from Datastream. D(event)

equals one for the event window [-20,+20], where the event is the announcement date of the CDO issue,

D(other event) equals one for all other event windows in the period [-120,+120], and D(after) equals one

for the period [+20,+120]. If there is more than one other event, the dummy D-after is equal to two

(three) for the second (third) subsequent overlapping event. Wald-statistics (p-values) are in parentheses.




                                                    36
Table 5: Announcement eﬀects: second stage regression results
This table reports the results of the event study relating to the announcement of CDO issues. A SUR

estimation of the determinants of excess stock returns of the issuing banks was employed. The regression

in this table is a cross-sectional estimation of the determinants of delta-beta from the regression A.1 in

Table 4, i.e. the change in systematic risk after an event. The explanatory variables are D(dyn), D(syn),

D(CLO), D(CBO), D(other), D(99), D(00), D(01). D(dyn) equals one for a managed issue, D(syn) equals

one for a synthetic issue. D(CLO), D(CBO) and D(other) equal one when the collateral portfolio consists

of loans, bonds, or other assets. Mortgage backed securities are the reference group. D(99), D(00) and

D(01) equal one for the issue year 1999, 2000 or 2001. p-values are in parentheses. As in Table 4, the

estimation is with 73 events over a window of 241 trading days. The regression uses data from the period

January 1999 to December 2002.




                                                   37
Table 6: List of European CDO issues used for loss rate estimation
This table summarizes descriptive statistics of the issues that have been used to calculate
the loss rate distribution for the sample of European CDOs.




                                            38
