                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            A DYNAMIC MEASURE OF INFLATION

                                              Ricardo Reis

                                         Working Paper 11746
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11746


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2005




I am grateful to many colleagues and seminar participants (too many to list) for useful comments and
suggestions during the long gestation of this paper. Alisdair Mckay provided excellent research assistance.
Contact: rreis@columbia.edu. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2005 by Ricardo Reis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
A Dynamic Measure of Inflation
Ricardo Reis
NBER Working Paper No. 11746
November 2005, Revised July 2009
JEL No. E31,C43,J26,D91

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper shows that conventional measures of cost-of-living inflation, based on static models of
consumption, suffer from two problems. The first is an intertemporal substitution bias, as these measures
neglect the ability of consumers to borrow and lend in response to price changes. The second problem
is the omission of intertemporal prices, which capture relevant relative prices for a consumer who
lives for many periods. The paper proposes a dynamic price index (DPI) that solves these problems.
Theoretically, it shows that the DPI is forward-looking, responds by more to persistent shocks, includes
assets prices, and distinguishes between durable and non-durable goods' prices. A constructed DPI
for the United States from 1970 to 2008 differs markedly from the CPI, it is close to serially uncorrelated,
it is mostly driven by the prices of houses and bonds, and is twice as high as the CPI in 2008.


Ricardo Reis
Department of Economics, MC 3308
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street, Rm. 1022 IAB
New York NY 10027
and NBER
rreis@columbia.edu
      Three questions arise if prices are uncertain and change over time:

   1. If you have two children, one year apart, and wish to give each a bequest at a certain
        age, how much more should you give the younger one relative to what you gave the
        older one, so that they are equally well-o¤, in spite of the di¤erent prices they face?

   2. If you are managing the endowment of a long-lived institution (e.g., a university),
        what must be the minimum return on the endowment this year given current prices,
        so that the institution is able to serve future generations at least as well as it did last
        year with the past prices?1

   3. If you are about to retire and live o¤ the savings in your private retirement account,
        how much must the account have, given today’s prices, so that you are as well o¤ as
        you would have been had you retired last year?

      The answer to all of these questions involves adjusting a nominal amount by a scalar
between two successive years in response to changing prices. This scalar is a price index, a
function of all the prices measuring the change in the (broadly understood) cost of living.
      One feature of the three questions is that they are explicitly dynamic. Not only they
involve a comparison between two points in time, but also, and more importantly, they
involve entities that exist for many periods and face uncertainty.           However, conventional
measures of the cost of living are static, derived from models of agents that live for only
one period.     This paper provides a dynamic measure of in‡ation that answers the three
questions. For short, I refer to it as the dynamic price index, or DPI.2
      The paper is organized as follows.      Section 1 further motivates the need for dynamic
measures of in‡ation and surveys the related literature. Section 2 works through a simple
two-period model that highlights the main properties of dynamic in‡ation.                   Section 3
describes a more general model of intertemporal behavior and de…nes the DPI. Section 4
studies its theoretical properties, and section 5 takes a …rst stab at constructing a benchmark
DPI for the United States. Section 6 concludes.

  1
   This goal is sometimes called intergenerational equity (Association of American Universities, 2008).
  2
   A more appropriate, though more lengthy, nomenclature might be DS-COL-CPI, for Dynamic Stochastic
Cost-of-Living Consumer Price Index.




                                                  2
1        Motivation and relation to the literature

The three questions stated in the introduction involve large sums of money: intended be-
quests account for a large fraction of aggregate wealth; in 2007, U.S. university endowments
alone totalled at least $411 billion; and in the United States in 2001, 52% of the population
had a retirement account, these held 28% of the value of household’s …nancial assets, and
pension funds held $4.5 trillion in assets in 2004.3 Adjusting these accounts in response to
price changes to satisfy equity concerns is only one of the many issues involved in managing
them. But the sums involved are large enough that a price index that is useful for decisions
on bequests, endowments, and retirement should be in high demand.4
        A common practice to measure the cost of living is to measure the change in expenditure
required to buy a …xed basket of goods when facing a new set of prices, as Laspeyres or
Paasche suggested.        Economists have long criticized this …xed-basket approach since, in
general, consumers will substitute across goods in response to changes in prices, so keeping
baskets …xed will lead to a substitution bias.5 Rather than keeping baskets …xed, instead
one should keep utility …xed.           Konus (1924) …rst de…ned a cost-of-living price index as
the welfare measure of compensating variation in response to price changes. If V (W; pt )
is the indirect utility function of a consumer mapping the wealth she has, W , and the
prices she faces, pt , to the standard of living she can achieve by acting optimally, then the
cost-of-living price index      t+1   is the solution to:6

                                                   t+1
                                      V(   t+1 W; p    )   = V (W; pt ):                                  (1)


        The model of behavior behind the indirect utility function has so far been almost ex-

    3
      Sources: NACUBO 2007 Endowments Study, Survey of Consumer Finances, 2001, Tables 5.E and 4;
Flow of Funds, Tables L.119.b and L.119.c.
    4
      How much can indexing matter? A curious incident provides an answer. When social security and
disability bene…ts were …rst indexed to CPI-in‡ation in 1972, a mistake was made in the indexation formula.
Among other factors, this contributed to make the social security system so generous that it quickly fell into
disrepute. This led by the early 1980s to widespread reforms that scaled down the system, including an
adjustment of the indexing formula (Bound and Burkhauser, 1999, pp. 3454-3456). Boskin and Jorgenson
(1997) calculate that if an estimated 1.1% upward-bias of the CPI due to quality change was corrected,
government savings on social programs indexed to the CPI would in a decade lower federal debt by $1,066
billion dollars.
    5
      On quantifying this substitution bias, see Shapiro and Wilcox (1996), Boskin et al (1997) and the more
recent discussion in the National Research Council (2002).
    6
      The price index is sometimes de…ned using instead the expenditure function. Duality implies that it is
equivalent to de…ne it as in (1).



                                                      3
clusively the classical model of a consumer who lives for one period and maximizes a utility
function subject to a static budget constraint and no uncertainty.7                 Using these static
models with consumers that live for many periods creates at least two problems. First,
by ignoring time, static models su¤er from an intertemporal substitution bias. Consumers
that live for more than one period react to higher prices today relative to the future by
substituting away from present into future consumption, therefore partially attenuating the
welfare impact of the price change.          Second, static models su¤er from an intertemporal
price omission. For the consumer’s welfare the relative prices of apples today versus in the
future are as relevant as the prices of apples versus other goods today, yet the former are
ignored.
       This paper addresses these problems by using the modern theory of consumption (e.g.,
Deaton, 1992) modeling people that maximize utility over many periods and are subject
to shocks to measure in‡ation.          The cost-of-living price index is still de…ned by (1), as
all cost-of-living price indices are, but the underlying model of behavior is now dynamic
and stochastic, explicitly taking into account intertemporal substitution and intertemporal
prices.
       Dynamic measures of in‡ation have two further appeals relative to their static counter-
parts. The …rst is parsimony: economists now routinely use stochastic dynamic models of
consumption to study consumption, business cycles or growth. It is natural to use these
models also to measure the cost of living. Second, the DPI treats time in a theoretically co-
herent way, using a model of people that live for at least two periods when comparing prices
at two dates, and recognizing that their consumption basket includes both consumption in
the present as well as in all future dates.
       The consideration of intertemporal trade-o¤s in the context of price indices was, to my
knowledge, …rst articulated by Alchian and Klein (1973). They proposed a de…nition of a
dynamic price index with complete markets, noted that it would include futures prices, and
proceeded to use asset prices in the estimation of money demand equations. In this paper, I
de…ne the DPI in the more realistic case of incomplete insurance markets, I characterize the
in‡uence of di¤erent prices on the price index, and I actually construct a dynamic measure

   7
    Fisher and Shell (1972), Diewert and Montmarquette (1983), Pollak (1989) and Diewert (2001) give thor-
ough presentations of this approach, and Jorgenson and Slesnick (1999) provide an econometric application
of the static approach to indexing retirement accounts.




                                                    4
of U.S. in‡ation to answer indexation questions.
    A few other authors have expanded on Alchian and Klein (1973).                                         Jorgenson and
Yun (2001) discuss how to deal with dynamics but no uncertainty, Boskin (2005) defends
the merits of taking a dynamic approach, and Diewert (2002) criticizes the assumption of
complete Arrow-Debreu markets. All of them highlight in di¤erent ways the importance of
solving the problem in this paper. Pollak (1989, chapter 3) studies whether it is possible
to form period sub-indices in an intertemporal context. Some of his results can be applied
to the DPI; however, this paper focuses on a di¤erent set of questions.                                    Shibuya (1992)
and Wynne (1994) are the only studies that I am aware of that tried to build a price index
taking dynamics and uncertainty into account.                               They used very restrictive assumptions
though and can be seen as special cases of the more general results in this paper.
    Other authors have informally defended the inclusion of asset prices in price indices.
Goodhart (2001) persuasively argues that house prices should receive a special treatment.
This paper provides a theoretical foundation to many of his comments. Another literature
assumes the CPI is the correct measure of in‡ation, but asset prices are useful in forecasting
static in‡ation (Cecchetti et al, 2000, Stock and Watson, 2003). This paper instead notes
that asset prices enter directly into a dynamic measure of in‡ation.
    Finally, this paper studies price indices that measure the cost of living.                                        There are
many other measures of welfare in response to shocks that are not price indices in public
…nance (e.g. Auerbach and Kotliko¤, 1987), and many other measures of in‡ation for other
purposes for which dynamic considerations are important (e.g., Basu and Fernald, 2002,
Mankiw and Reis, 2003, Geanakoplos, 2005, Reis and Watson, 2008).


2    Dynamic in‡ation in a simple economy

Consider an economy populated by generations that live for two periods, young and old.
The problem of a young person is:
                                                       (                               "                  #)
                                                           u(ca ; cb )1    1=       u(c0a ; c0b )1   1=
          V (w; pa ; pb ; q) =        max                                       + E                            s.t.         (2)
                                 ca ;cb ;c0a ;c0b ;e          1 1=                     1 1=

                                                 pa ca + pb cb + qe              w                                          (3)

                                               p0a c0a + p0b c0b          (q 0 + 1)e                                        (4)



                                                                   5
There are two goods, indexed by a and b, that sell for prices (pa ; pb ) and (p0a ; p0b ) in the two
periods, respectively. The consumer’s static utility function is Cobb-Douglas, u(ca ; cb ) =
ca c1b    , he discounts the future by the factor                        , and has an intertemporal elasticity of
substitution . He lives o¤ his wealth in period 1, w, and can save by buying e units of
a consol for price q that next period earns a coupon of 1 and sells for price q 0 .                                             The log
of each price follows an AR(1) with independent, zero-mean, normal innovations: ln(p0a ) =

 a ln(pa )   + "a , ln(p0b ) =    b ln(pb )   + "b , and ln(q 0 + 1) =              q   ln(q) + "q .8
       A philanthropist in this economy can make unrestricted gifts to each of the generations at
the start of their life, e¤ectively controlling their starting wealth. The philanthropist cares
about the members of each generation equally, and has a Rawlsian social welfare function,
so she wants to make sure that they are all equally well o¤.                                         The question she asks is:
how much more wealth should the t generation have relative to the t                                             1 generation? The
three questions posed in the introduction are conceptually the same as this one, as they
all involve computing a measure of in‡ation to index an account that will be used by a
long-lived agent that can shift funds across time.
       The standard answer to this question would be to adjust wealth by the static cost-of-
living price index. Letting the indirect static utility function be


                      v(w        qe; pa ; pb ) = maxfu(ca ; cb ) : pa ca + pb cb                     w        qeg;                    (5)


static (gross) in‡ation, st , is de…ned as v(st (wt                  1   et   1 qt 1 ); pa;t ; pb;t )        = v((wt   1   et   1 qt 1 ); pa;t ; pb;t ).

Using the Cobb-Douglas preferences,


                                   ln(st ) =          ln(pa;t ) + (1            )       ln(pb;t ):                                    (6)


       However, the generation’s welfare is given by V (:); not v(:), so the right answer to the
philanthropist’s question is instead a dynamic measure of in‡ation                                       t   such that wt =        t wt 1

so:
                         V ( t wt     1 ; pa;t ; pb;t ; qt )   = V (wt    1 ; pa;t 1 ; pb;t 1 ; qt 1 ):                               (7)

This dynamic measure of in‡ation takes into account the fact that the consumer will live

   8
   The “twist” to the process for asset prices helps to make the problem analytical but plays no other
important role in the results.



                                                                 6
                            Figure 1: Simulated dynamic and static in‡ation


                                                                                                               DYNAMIC
                                                                                                               STATIC

                  1




                0.5




                  0




               -0.5




                 -1




               -1.5


                        5        10        15       20       25         30          35          40         45            50




for more than one period, and will optimally allocate consumption across life in response
to di¤erent prices at di¤erent ages.               Standard calculations (details in the appendix) give
the indirect utility function, and using this to solve for                          t    in equation (7) gives dynamic
in‡ation as a weighted average between static in‡ation and another term, where (pa ; pb ; q)
is a function of the three prices:

                                                     1                    (pa;t ; pb;t ; qt )
                      ln( t ) = ln(st ) +                    ln                                            :                           (8)
                                                         1            (pa;t 1 ; pb;t 1 ; qt           1)


      The …rst conclusion is that, in general, dynamic in‡ation is not equal static in‡ation.
Figure 1 illustrates that the di¤erence is quantitatively signi…cant in a 50-period simulation
using formula (8), where the correlation between the two measures is 0.67.9
      To understand what drives these di¤erences, I use an approximation around the non-

  9
      The …gure is drawn using        = 0:5;    = 1=3;   = 0:5;   a   =      b   = 0,    q   = 0:5,    a   =    b   =    q   = 0:05.




                                                             7
stochastic steady state. Letting g denote gross consumption growth in this steady state:
                                                      !                                               !
                             1 + g 1 1=           a                                 1 + g 1 1=    b
         ln( t )                                           ln(pa;t ) + (1       )                         ln(pb;t )
                              1 + g 1 1=                                             1 + g 1 1=
                         "                             #
                              g1   1=   (1        q)
                     +                                      ln(qt )                                                   (9)
                              1 + g1         1=



       Imagine that every good’s price is i.i.d. and increases by 1%. For                             =   = 0:5, static
in‡ation is st = 1%, but dynamic in‡ation is                        t   = 0:67%. Misguided by the static measure,
the philanthropist would be overly generous to the new generation. The reason is that she
would ignore the response of the member of this generation to the temporarily higher prices
by saving less for the future, partially bu¤ering the negative impact of the higher prices on
welfare. The second conclusion is that the ability to transfer funds over time attenuates the
impact of price changes on the cost of living. There is an intertemporal substitution bias
that leads static in‡ation to overstate dynamic in‡ation. This bias is larger if the elasticity
of intertemporal substitution is larger or if the shocks are more transitory, since in both
cases the consumer is more willing and more able to bu¤er the shocks via intertemporal
trade. Only in the limits, when either                      ! 0, or the price shocks are random walks, does
dynamic in‡ation equal static in‡ation, as in these cases the consumer is either unwilling
or unable to engage in any intertemporal substitution.10
       Finally, asset prices a¤ ect dynamic in‡ation but not static in‡ation. If the asset price
rises temporarily, static in‡ation is unchanged, but dynamic in‡ation is higher. The phil-
anthropist should compensate the person because expected returns are now lower, so the
costs of transferring funds from the present to the future has gone up, and the e¤ective
price of future consumption is higher. Only if returns are serially uncorrelated is it correct
to ignore equity prices as the static measure does.
       The correct dynamic measure of in‡ation for a long-lived agent is therefore di¤erent from
static in‡ation and takes into account substitution over time, the persistence of shocks, and
the price of …nancial assets.                The next section shows that these properties hold more
generally.

  10
     The reader may wonder whether it is intertemporal subsitution or risk aversion driving the results.
Using preferences that distinguish betwen the two, one can show that exactly the same expression (9)
de…nes the DPI with the elasticity of intertemporal substitution appearing and not the coe¢ cient of relative
risk aversion (details available from the author).



                                                                8
3     The theoretical framework

The person receiving the bequest in the …rst question, the institution using the endowment,
or the person contemplating retirement, can all be thought of as solving an intertemporal
consumption problem. In the …rst case, the utility function refers to the well-being of each
child, in the second case, it refers to an objective function of an institution, and in the third
case, to the well-being of the person close to retirement.11


3.1    The model of behavior

Compactly written, the problem at date t consists of choosing fCj;t+i ; Sj;t+i ; Bj;t+i g1
                                                                                         i=0 for

all j to maximize:

                                     "   1
                                                                                                       #
                                         X
                                                 i
                        V (:) = Et                   U (C1;t+i ; :::; CN;t+i ; S1;t+i ; :::; SD;t+i )           (10)
                                         i=0

subject to:

                  N
                  X                        D
                                           X                               X
                        Pj;t+i Cj;t+i +              Rj;t+i Sj;t+i +             Qj;t+i Bj;t+i         Wt+i ;   (11)
                  j=1                      j=1                         j2fB;Eg
                                     A
                                     X                               D
                                                                     X
                        Wt+1+i =               Dj;t+i Bj;t+i +             Rj;t+1+i (1        j )Sj;t+i ;       (12)
                                     j=1                             j=1

                                  Wt+1+i               0; Cj;t+i        0; Sj;t+i        0;                     (13)

                                     for i = 0; 1; 2; :::;            and Wt = At :                             (14)


    In words, the consumer maximizes total welfare, which equals the expected discounted
sum of period utilities.          Period utility is strictly monotonic in each of its arguments,
overall concave, unbounded above and below, with limx!0 @U (:)=@x = +1 for each of
its arguments x.         The agent faces a constant probability of dying, which combined with
impatience, leads to a discount factor                    < 1, and obtains utility from consuming non-durable
goods, each denoted by Cj;t+i , and from a ‡ow of durable goods that is proportional to the
stock, Sj;t+i .
    The consumer allocates his wealth each period Wt+i to the uses in (11). He can acquire

  11
     The interpretation of an institution managing an endowment as an in…nitely-lived consumption problem
has a long history, e.g. Merton (1993, chapter 21).



                                                                 9
non-durables at prices Pj;t+i , invest in the durables at prices Rj;t+i , or buy and sell one-
period …nancial assets in amount Bj;t+i that trade at the price vector Qj;t+i . Many of the
results in this paper apply to an arbitrary set of assets, but for concreteness, I will specialize
to the case where there are two …nancial assets: bonds, which pay a certain amount next
period, and equity, which pays a dividend and can be re-sold.
       The consumer starts date t with wealth At and from then on has two sources of wealth.12
The …rst is the payo¤ from the …nancial asset, Dj;t+i ; so the return on holding an asset is
Dj;t+i+1 =Qj;t+i . The second is the market value of the stock of durables after depreciation,
where      j   is the depreciation rate of durable j. Finally, the constraints in (13) impose that
consumption cannot be negative and that the consumer cannot run Ponzi schemes, which
in this case reduces to always having non-negative wealth.
       The last component of the model to specify is the stochastic processes.                    Because the
aim of this paper is to calculate the measure of in‡ation to index an account against price
changes, I assume that prices are the only source of uncertainty: pt+i is a random vector
containing the prices for non-durables, durables and assets, while tastes and the quality of
goods are known. This assumption implies that the resulting index will be a price index,
that responds to prices but nothing else.             I further assume that the consumer perceives
pt+i as following a Markov process so that pt = (pt ; pt              1 ; pt 2 ; :::)   constitutes a su¢ cient
statistic for forming his expectations. This implies that, at any date, the consumer’s wealth
and this vector of past prices are the state variables a¤ecting plans, so the indirect utility
function (or value function) is V (Wt+i ; pt+i ), measuring the standard of living.13


3.2      De…ning the dynamic price index

The answer to the three questions is given by a measure of in‡ation:

  12
      I abstract from other sources of income. For two of the questions, the funding of a charity and the
retirement problem, this is a roughly accurate assumption. For the bequests question, labor income may
be important, but if it is either deterministic or perfectly spanned by the …nancial assets, we can think of
the present value of labor income as being part of At (Merton, 1993). I abstract from other forms of labor
income in order to avoid the controversial question of whether changes in wages are a change in a price (of
leisure) that the price index should include, or a non-price shock that it should control for. In the …rst case,
then interpreting one of the Cj;t as leisure, the analysis is unchanged. In the second case, see footnote 14.
   13
      For there to exist an optimal solution to the consumer problem leading to a …nite value function requires
some constraint on the stochastic process for prices. This is to ensure that, following a shock, prices do not
go to zero too quickly driving consumption to in…nity and so leading to unbounded utility. It is di¢ cult to
state these conditions for a general Markov process for all of the prices. Later, when I specialize to low-order
Markov processes, I verify these conditions case by case.




                                                      10
De…nition: The dynamic price index                       t   is the scalar that solves:

                                                          t                   t 1
                                         V ( t At     1; p )   = V (At    1; p    ):                                      (15)


       For the question on bequests, the intertemporal consumers are the children. Then, the
left-hand side of (15) is the welfare of the younger child, while the right-hand side is the
welfare of the older, and the parent wishes to equate them. For the question on donations,
the consumer is the institution and the utility function is the goal that it tries to pursue
by spending its endowment. The left-hand side of (15) now is a measure of how it attains
its goals at date t, while the right-hand side is the same measure at t                                   1, so that       t   is
the necessary adjustment to the endowment in order to maintain its ability to sustain its
goals given the di¤erent prices. Finally, for the worker contemplating retirement, if he is
o¤ered an adjustment to his retirement account of                         t   conditional on the prices pt , he will
be indi¤erent between retiring at either date t or at date t                           1.
       A few remarks clarify this de…nition. First, note that since the DPI is de…ned taking
as base the previous period, it corresponds to a measure of in‡ation. This is not essential:
taking the base in the right-hand side of (15) with respect to a …xed date in time would
lead to a measure of the price level.
       Second, the DPI is an once-and-for-all adjustment to the wealth in the account. In
principle, one could use the standard theory of annuities to convert this amount into an
equivalent stream of payments over time.
       Third, the DPI measures the total adjustment in wealth required to leave the agent
equally well-o¤. If the agent has sources of income other than his parent / philanthropist /
prospective retiree, then the required contribution would take these into account in hitting
the desired target wealth.14 Moreover, if changes in …nancial prices lead to current capital
gains and losses or if the payo¤ of some assets includes insurance payments against price
changes, these may partially provide for the adjustments measured by the DPI. Because
the same At        1   appears on both sides of (15), the DPI will measure the total adjustment,

  14
     In the case of no-price shocks, like changes in wages, tastes, or quality of goods, we may want the
price index to not respond to them. Letting z t be a su¢ cient statistic for the no-price shocks, indi-
rect utility would be V (Wt ; pt ; z t ), and following Pollak (1989), a conditional price index could be either
(i) V ( t+1 Wt ; pt+1 ; z t ) = V (Wt ; pt ; z t ), or (ii) V ( t+1 Wt ; pt+1 ; z t+1 ) = V (Wt ; pt ; z t+1 ), or (iii) perhaps
Ez [V ( t+1 Wt ; pt+1 ; z t+1 )] = V (Wt ; pt ; z t ), where Ez [:] integrates over the density for z t+1 as of date t. In
the …rst two cases, one keeps non-price shocks …xed at a base period, and in the third, one uses the consumer’s
expectations of the shocks.


                                                               11
regardless of its source.
         Fourth, note that to answer the questions posed in the introduction only requires a
model of consumer behavior. The e¤ect that providing this index may have in the general
equilibrium of an economy is an interesting question that is not addressed here.15


4         Theoretical properties of dynamic in‡ation

After stating a few general properties that establish a common ground between the DPI and
static price indices, this section will start with a simpler version of the consumer problem
and progressively build in ingredients towards the general problem. Sometimes, to be more
concrete, I focus on log-preferences:

                                     N
                                     X                          D
                                                                X
                           U (:) =         N;j ln (Cj;t+i ) +         D;j   ln (Sj;t+i ) ;                (16)
                                     j=1                        j=1


4.1        Basic properties

A check that the questions posed have an answer is provided by:16

Proposition 1 If prices and wealth are positive and …nite, the DPI exists and is unique.

         Samuelson and Swamy (1974) showed that a static cost-of-living index is independent
of wealth if preferences are homothetic. With time-separable and homothetic preferences,
the value function is still homothetic, and the same result applies to the DPI:

Proposition 2 The DPI is independent of wealth At as long as U (:) is homothetic.

         Another useful property of conventional price indices is that they move one-to-one with
pure in‡ation. That is, if all nominal prices and payo¤s increase proportionally by the same
amount M , so no relative prices change but there is only a change in the unit of account,
then the price index increases by M as well. The DPI has this property:

Proposition 3 The DPI is proportional to M .

    15
     Who would provide these indices is another interesting question. There is also no impediment for private
…nancial institutions to supply accounts indexed to the DPI, especially since there is already a competitive
market in retirement accounts and endowment management. These could be supported by holding portfolios
that replicate its portfolio, and the aggregate risk could be diversi…ed interntionally, as suggested by Shiller
(2003).
  16
     The proofs of all the propositions are in the appendix.


                                                      12
      Generally, static and dynamic measures of in‡ation will be di¤erent as intertemporal
measures of welfare and equivalent variation are generically di¤erent from static measures,
as illustrated by Blackorby, Donaldson and Maloney (1984).                    It is instructive though to
investigate the special case when they are the same. This will be true if there is no scope
for any intertemporal substitution, which happens if all price shocks are permanent:17

Proposition 4 With log-utility, if goods prices all follow random walks and …nancial asset
returns are all i.i.d., up to a …rst-order approximation, the DPI equals the static cost-of-
living price index.


4.2      Long lives and looking forward

To start o¤, consider a simpler version of the consumer problem in (10)-(13) in which there
is no uncertainty nor any trade of resources over time, as there is no access to durable goods
or …nancial assets. In order to have non-zero consumption after the …rst period, assume
there is an annuity contract converting the initial assets into a …xed stream of nominal
income every period.           The only dynamic element in this case comes from the consumer
caring about total, rather than period, utility.

Proposition 5 If there is no uncertainty, no durable goods, no assets, and a constant
annuity payment of (1              )At every period:
a) If Pj;t+1+i         Pj;t+i for all i and j, then ln(     t+i+1 )   0.
b) In two situations A and B, such that: (Pt+1+i =Pt+i )A                      (Pt+1+i =Pt+i )B for all i,
ln(   A                 B
      t+i+1 )    ln(    t+i+1 ).

c) If the price sequence is: Pj;t+i = P for i 6= h, Pj;t+h > P for all j, then ln(            t+1 )   > 0.

      The …rst two results are sensible properties of any price index. The …rst result states
that if prices are rising, the DPI is above one, and the second result adds that if prices rise
faster, the DPI is higher. However, even in this bare case where the only link between dates
comes from the consumer living for many periods, the DPI is not identical to a conventional
static price index. The third result considers a case where prices are always the same with
one exception, in h periods, when prices will be higher.                   The consumer today, realizing
prices will rise, requires an increase in her nominal wealth to be able to a¤ord these higher

 17
      This result would hold exactly, without any approximation, if there were no durables.


                                                       13
prices at the future date.       The DPI is above one already today even though prices will
only increase in the future. Because consumers are forward looking, so is the price index,
reacting to news on future prices.


4.3     Non-durables goods prices and intertemporal trade

Next, I allow for intertemporal trade and uncertainty on non-durable goods prices.

Proposition 6 Assume that there are no durable goods and, without loss of generality,
separate each price into the product of a common stochastic component and an idiosyncratic
shock: Pj;t = Pt P^j;t . Then, up to …rst-order approximations around a steady-state:
a) If Pt is i.i.d. then ln(   t+1 )   (1     ) ln(Pt+1 =Pt )
b) If   ln(Pt+1 ) =       ln(Pt ) + "Pt+1 , then ln(   t+1 )   ln(Pt+1 =Pt )=(1        )
c) If P^j;t and P^k;t are independent and i.i.d. over time (@ ln(      t+1 )=@   ln(P^j;t+1 ))=(@ ln(   t+1 )=

@ ln(P^k;t+1 )) = Pj;t+1 Cj;t+1 =Pk;t+1 Ck;t+1 .

    Since Pt is the static price index, the …rst result shows that a 1% increase in static
in‡ation raises dynamic in‡ation by less than 1%. If periods are years, so                        0:96, the
static price index is biased up by a factor of 25. The reason for the smaller impact of price
shocks on the DPI is that consumers can use …nancial assets to borrow against temporarily
high prices, attenuating their impact on welfare by smoothing consumption.
    Empirically, goods’ prices are closer to a …rst-order autoregression in log di¤erences.
The second result shows that if        is positive, a 1% increase in static in‡ation raises dynamic
in‡ation by more than 1%. Higher prices today now imply that the consumer should expect
even higher prices in the future, so he requires a larger increase in wealth today in order not
to be worse o¤. The larger is the persistence of shocks, the larger their impact on dynamic
in‡ation.
    Turning to the third result, the relative marginal impact of shocks to two non-durable
prices equals their ratio of relative expenditures. Intuitively, if the consumer cares more
about a good and allocates a larger amount of spending to this good, then an increase in
its price a¤ects her cost of living by more.




                                                   14
4.4      Asset prices

One crucial di¤erence between the DPI and a static price index is the role of asset prices.
For a consumer that lives for many periods, the relevant consumption basket includes not
only consumption of di¤erent goods today, but also future consumption. If today’s relative
price between two goods a¤ects the price index, then so must the relative price between
today and the future. Asset prices measure precisely these relative prices, so in general,
they a¤ect dynamic in‡ation.             Moreover, note that what matters to the consumer are
expected relative prices, or expected capital gains and losses. An increase in asset prices
may induce current capital gains and losses but dynamic in‡ation does not respond to these
since, by the de…nition in (15), wealth is kept …xed. Because dynamic in‡ation measures
the total change in wealth to leave the consumer equally well-o¤, it is expected relative
prices going forward that matter.
   The next proposition assesses the quantitative signi…cance of asset prices in the DPI:

Proposition 7 Assume that there are no durable goods and, without loss of generality,
separate each asset price into the product of a common and an idiosyncratic component:
              ^ B;t+i and QE;t+i = Qt+i Q
QB;t+i = Qt+i Q                         ^ E;t+i . Assume that Qt+i is i.i.d. Then, up to a

…rst-order approximation:
a) In response to the common shock to asset prices: ln(               t+1 )   ln(Qt+1 =Qt )
                                                                     ^ E;t ) = 0.
b) If equity returns, DE;t+1 =QE;t ; are i.i.d., then @ ln( t )=@ ln(Q
      ^ B;t and Q
c) If Q         ^ E;t are independent and i.i.d. over time, then (@ ln(             t+1 )=@
                                                                                                 ^ E;t+1 ))=
                                                                                              ln(Q
(@ ln(   t+1 )=@
                      ^ B;t+1 )) = Q
                   ln(Q            ^ E;t+1 BE;t+1 =Q
                                                   ^ B;t+1 BB;t+1 .


   Higher asset prices raise the DPI because they make it more costly to transfer funds for
future consumption. The …rst result shows that asset prices can matter a lot. Again if
      0:96, they have an impact on dynamic in‡ation 24 times greater than that of goods’
prices. The second result show that again the persistence of the shocks matters. If equity
returns are i.i.d. (a rough description of the actual data), then they do not a¤ect the DPI
because, in this case, higher equity prices today have no implication for expected future
returns.     Thus, no relative prices change and neither does welfare or the cost of living.
The third result shows that the price of each asset receives a weight in the DPI that is
proportional to its portfolio share.
   We can combine the insights so far in a special case for which there is an analytical

                                                     15
solution for the DPI:

Proposition 8 If there are log-preferences, only common price shocks Pt , and only one
                              M
asset with a 1-period return It+i+1 ; then:

                                             1
                                                        "                !                #
                                             X                    M
                                                          Pt+1+i It+1
                                               i
      ln( t+1 ) = ln (Pt+1 =Pt ) + (1    )       Et+1 ln        M
                                                                              ln (Pt+1 =Pt ) (17)
                                           i=1
                                                          Pt+i It+i+1
                             1
                                                                 !
                             X                           Q
                                                         i
                                  i                          M
                  +(1      )        (Et+1 Et ) ln Pt+i =    It+j                              (18)
                             i=1                             j=1


   This simple formula separates movements in the DPI into the sum of three components.
The …rst term is the static price index, while the other two terms involve expected future
goods’price in‡ation discounted by interest rates. The second term measures the di¤erence
between expected future prices and current prices, the intertemporal substitution e¤ect of
Proposition 6. The third term captures the revision in expectations about future prices,
the price news e¤ect of Proposition 5. Asset prices matter because they a¤ect the e¤ective
interest rates used by households to discount the future.          Higher asset prices (or lower
interest rates) imply that the consumer’s retirement account will be worth less in the future
in terms of consumption goods and thus raises the cost of living.


4.5    Durable goods’prices

Finally, I introduce durable goods. They are particularly interesting because they combine
features of both goods and assets: they yield utility, and they also transfer wealth across
time. These two sides of a durable j are well captured by uj;t+1 , the ex post user cost of
holding it between t and t + 1:

                                                                M
                             uj;t+1 = Rj;t    (1      )Rj;t+1 =It+1 :                         (19)


Holding the durable for one period requires paying Rj;t for it at date t and then selling the
remainder after depreciation for Rj;t+1 at date t + 1, noting that the opportunity cost of
                                           M dollars at date t, where I M is the return on
investing a t + 1 dollar in durables is 1=It+1                         t+1

the portfolio of …nancial assets.

Proposition 9 If the log price of durable j and non-durable i follow …rst-order autoregres-


                                                 16
sions with coe¢ cients       j   and   i;   then:

         @ ln( t )=@ ln(Rj;t )     Sj @U (:)=@Sj         1      i          @uj;t+1         Rj;t
                                                                      Et                           :    (20)
         @ ln( t )=@ ln(Pi;t )     Ci @U (:)=@Ci         1      j           @Rj;t         uj;t+1

Moreover:
                                                1                               M
                         @uj;t+1        Rj;t            j (1    ) Rj;t+1 =Rj;t It+1
                                              =                                M
                                                                                      :                 (21)
                          @Rj;t        uj;t+1    1      (1     ) Rj;t+1 =Rj;t It+1

       The proposition gives the relative marginal impact of a change in durable j’s price
relative to a change in the price of non-durable i.                 The …rst fraction in the expression
captures the e¤ect of expenditure shares, and the second the role of persistence, both of
which were discussed in section 4.2.                What is special about durable prices is the third
fraction.     If user costs are always proportional to prices, it equals one.               This is the case
if the log of the price of the durable follows a random walk.                  In this case, durability is
irrelevant: whether the good is durable or not, it has the same weight on the DPI.
       If instead shocks are transitory, then user costs rise by more than 1% in response to
a 1% rise in prices. A higher durable good’s price then hurts the consumer in two ways:
…rst because it raises the current price paid for the good, and second because the consumer
expects a capital loss on holding this asset since the price is expected to fall. In this case,
durable goods have a larger weight on the DPI, and one that increases with 1                           , the
durability of the good. In the extreme case in which the price of the durable is i.i.d and the
return on bonds and durables are approximately the same, the last fraction in (20) equals
1= . For a very durable good such as housing, for which                    0:02, a temporary increase in
its price raises the DPI by about 50 times more than a comparable increase in a non-durable
price.
       Alternatively, if shocks to durable prices are very permanent, in the sense that a 1%
increase in Rj;t comes with an expected increase in Rj;t+1 of more than 1%, then even
though the consumer is hurt by paying more for the good, she bene…ts from the expected
capital gains on it. The user cost of the durable falls, and so the change in its price has a
smaller impact on the cost of living.18

  18
     One of the most important consumer durable goods is housing. Transaction costs and changes in quality
are two features of housing that the model ignores but which future research should explore. In related work,
Bajari, Benkard and Krainer (2005) study the impact of a change in house prices on welfare and provide
some related results to the ones in this section. They did not consider uncertainty or the persistence of
shocks however. Diewert (2003) provides a thorough review of the current state of knowledge on how to
include house prices in price indices.


                                                        17
4.6         Summary of theoretical results

To sum up, dynamic in‡ation shares some of the common features of static measures: it is
independent of retirement wealth as long as utility is homothetic, it increases one-to-one with
an increase in all prices, it responds more to goods that have a larger expenditure share, and
it is positive if prices trend upwards and higher the steeper this trend. However, considering
dynamics leads to several new features that make dynamic in‡ation very di¤erent from a
conventional static price index.               It is forward-looking, because consumers are forward-
looking.         Consumers engage in intertemporal substitution, and ignoring this can lead to
a large bias. The more persistent are shocks, the larger their impact on the DPI. Asset
prices generally a¤ect the price index, and may do so by a large amount, although in the
special case where equity prices follow a random walk, they do not a¤ect the DPI. Finally,
durable goods are special in that changes in their price have a double impact on the DPI:
through the change in expenditure and through expected capital gains and losses.


5         Dynamic in‡ation in the United States

This section takes a …rst stab at building a dynamic measure of U.S. in‡ation.                     A full-
‡edged DPI would have to include hundreds of prices and deal with many measurement
issues involving durables and taxes.19 The more modest aim of the calculations that follow
is to show the steps involved in building a DPI and to identify its broad movements since
1970.
         To take the general model to the data, I introduce a few modi…cations. First, I consider
a small number of broad consumption and asset categories. In particular, there are four
non-durable goods (food, energy, services, others), two durable goods (shelter, others), and
two assets (equity and bonds).                The goods span the whole of the consumer price index
(CPI), which I will take as the comparison.
         Second, I assume log-preferences as in (16), so the intertemporal elasticity of substitu-
tion is one. This reduces the number of parameters to calibrate and is a useful benchmark
for richer models of consumer demand.
         Third, I assume that adjusting durables is costly.              Otherwise, because user costs are
very volatile in the data, there are counterfactually wild swings on the stock of durables.

    19
         Triplett (1983) provides a lucid discussion of many practical issues.


                                                          18
The adjustment cost function is quadratic and preserves the homotheticity of the indirect
utility function.
    Fourth, I assume that agents perceive a stochastic process for asset prices that is the
sum of a Markov process plus a rare event that wipes out equity’s value and occurs with
some probability every period.          As Barro (2006) shows, this allows the simple model to
be roughly consistent with the asset market facts and to match the share of equity in the
portfolios that we observe in the data.


5.1    Data and calibration

The time period is one year and the sample goes from 1970 to 2004.                      The data are the
(log) price series for the six goods from the CPI database, with the exception of housing,
for which I use the Conventional Mortgage House Price Index produced by Freddie Mac.20
Asset returns come from the Center for Research in Security Prices, with equity referring to
the value-weighted index of stocks in the NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ, and bond returns
to the average yield on 3-month Treasury bills.
    Turning to the calibration of the parameters, the discount factor               is 1/1.04 to match a
steady-state 4% annual real return. The taste parameters                 j   match the relative shares in
household expenditures in the CPI. They are allowed to vary deterministically over time
to match the weight changes in each revision of the CPI. The depreciation rates,                      j,   for
shelter and durables are 1.6% and 21.1%, respectively, from the Fixed Assets Table of the
Bureau of Economic Analysis. The degree of adjustment costs for each durable is set to
match the variance of expenditures in that durable.
    Finally, for the price dynamics, the perceived probability of a rare event is set to match
the 27% average equity portfolio share from Ameriks and Zeldes (2004). Bar a rare event
(which in the sample never takes place), the price dynamics are governed by a …rst-order
vector autoregression in …rst di¤erences, estimated by least squares.

   20
      The BLS shelter series su¤ers from well-known de…ciencies: (i) it includes both rents and house prices,
but the two are close to uncorrelated (Verbrugge, 2005); (ii) there is a break in 1983, when the BLS went
from using reported sales prices to computing “rental-equivalent prices” for non-sold houses by matching
them with similar rented ones, so the series before and after 1983 are, strictly speaking, non-comparable;
(iii) the series seems to be biased downwards at least over long horizons (Gordon and van Goethem, 2007).
The Freddie Mac index gives a weighted indexed of house prices measured by repeat sales.




                                                     19
5.2    Dynamic U.S. in‡ation

Figure 1 plots annual U.S. in‡ation using the DPI, the CPI, and a static measure that uses
the same series and parameters values as the DPI. The DPI is strikingly di¤erent from
the CPI; their correlation is merely 0.34.21 While the two series are equally volatile, with
standard deviations of 2.8% and 3.1%, the DPI is noticeably less persistent than the CPI.
The serial correlation of dynamic in‡ation is 0.10, while that of the CPI is 0.81.                  Figure
2 shows the trends in each series, by plotting at each date the annualized accumulated
                               P
in‡ation over the past decade ( 9i=0 ln( t i )=10). The series are much closer (correlation
of 0.85 with the CPI and 0.92 with the SPI), but even at these lower frequencies there are
important di¤erences, the most striking during the 2000s. At the start of the decade high
house prices push static in‡ation over the CPI, as a gap arose between the house prices I use
and the rental-equivalent series of the BLS. Dynamic in‡ation was even higher, as house
prices have a large e¤ect on the DPI. In 2008, the last year of the sample, the DPI shot
up as bond prices rose dramatically, so that by then annual dynamic in‡ation was 7.3%
compared with 3.7% in the CPI.
    Table 2 tries to get behind what drives the di¤erences between the DPI and the CPI.
The …rst row shows the weight on the DPI of changes in prices in the static price index,
that is when each price follows an independent random walk (recall Proposition 4). The
second row shows the standard deviation of changes in the log of each price, with equity
prices standing out as being much more volatile than any other price. However, the third
row reports the coe¢ cient on an AR(1) regression for each price. Note that equity returns
are close to being serially uncorrelated. Consequently, despite being volatile, equity returns
have a small impact on the DPI. Unlike equity, bond returns are quite persistent and so
are house prices.
    Row four shows the marginal impact of shocks to each price using the independent
AR(1)’s as the forecasting model.22 The assumption of independence allows one to associate
changes in the price with structural shocks to that price. Noticeably, house prices receive
a large weight— they are very durable and very persistent, two of the features that lead to
a large impact on the DPI. Likewise, bond prices get a large weight because bond returns

  21
     The correlation between CPI and the static price index (SPI) is 0.84, while the correlation between the
SPI and the DPI is 0.29.
  22
     In contrast, with the VAR, shocks are not identi…ed, and it seems hopeless to try to come up with
enough identifying restrictions.


                                                    20
Figure 2: Annual measures of in‡ation: dynamic, static and CPI

   0.2
                                                                                                     DPI
                                                                                                     CPI
  0.18                                                                                               SPI

  0.16


  0.14


  0.12


   0.1


  0.08


  0.06


  0.04


  0.02


     0


 -0.02


 -0.04
     1972   1975     1978     1981   1984   1987     1990     1993   1996   1999     2002     2005    2008




Figure 3: Decade measure of in‡ation: dynamic, static and CPI

   0.1
                                                                                                     DPI
                                                                                                     CPI
  0.09                                                                                               SPI



  0.08


  0.07


  0.06


  0.05


  0.04


  0.03


  0.02


  0.01


     0
    1981      1984          1987     1990     1993          1996     1999     2002          2005      2008




                                                   21
are very persistent.

         Table 2. The volatility of the components of the DPI and their average impact
                                                                                      Other
                                           Food         Energy       Services
                                                                                  non-durables
       Static weights                       0.12          0.05         0.14            0.11
       Standard deviation                   0.03          0.08         0.03            0.02
       Serial correlation                   0.69          0.45         0.73            0.72
       Dynamic weights with AR(1)           0.34          0.09         0.45            0.37
                                                         Other
                                          Housing                     Equity          Bonds
                                                        durables
       Static weights                       0.48          0.10           0               0
       Standard deviation                   0.03          0.04         0.19            0.03
       Serial correlation                   0.72          0.87         0.00            0.83
       Dynamic weights with AR(1)           0.60          0.58         0.00            1.99


       These di¤erent pieces of evidence paint the following picture of dynamic in‡ation. First,
even though it includes equity prices, dynamic in‡ation is not more volatile than static
in‡ation, because returns are close to being i.i.d.23 Second, the DPI is less serially correlated
because it responds to news, rather than to the actual changes in prices. Third, housing
plays an important role, because it is very durable and its price changes are quite persistent.
Fourth, bond prices are the other main driving force in the DPI for two reasons: …rst,
because changes in bond prices tend to be very persistent, and second because they a¤ect
the DPI both directly and also indirectly through the user cost of housing. Fifth, the high
dynamic in‡ation of the last decade is partly due to the sharp increase in house prices and
partly due to the more recent rise in bond prices.


5.3      Alternatives and robustness

Three inputs went into the DPI: the price series, the agent’s forecasting model, and the
consumer’s parameters.

  23
    Goodhart (2001) and Bryan, Cecchetti and O’Sullivan (2001) worried that any price index that included
equity prices would be very volatile. The DPI dispels this worry.




                                                   22
       As an alternative to the house price series, I considered the House Price Index produced
by the O¢ ce of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight. For the other goods’ price series,
I considered the personal consumption expenditures series from the Bureau of Economic
Analysis, that are revised backwards with GDP revisions and update expenditure shares
more frequently than the BLS. These alternative price series led to almost identical results
for the DPI.
       Turning to the forecasting model, I also estimated vector autoregressions of order 2 and
3, but these had little impact on the DPI. In the baseline case, I took …rst di¤erences of
the series. Standard unit root tests strongly rejected the hypothesis that the price series
are stationarity, while there is mixed support for stationarity in …rst-di¤erences. I consider
alternatives in two directions. In one direction, I estimated a Bayesian VAR on the levels
of the prices (rather than their …rst di¤erences) using a Minnesota prior.                   In the other
direction, I supposed that the …rst-di¤erences in prices are cointegrated and used the CPI
as the common trend.24         For both cases, the conclusions on what is driving the DPI and
how dynamic in‡ation has evolved over time were unchanged.
       On the consumer parameters, I considered setting the depreciation rates so that the
model matches two moments from the Survey of Consumer Finances: the share of wealth
held in durables relative to …nancial assets, and the ratio of wealth in real estate relative
to wealth in other consumer durables. These led to annual depreciation rates of 2.4% and
10.8%. This higher depreciation rate for housing lowers the role of house prices in the DPI,
but the main conclusions again remain.
       Finally, I set parameters focusing on each of the three questions in the introduction.
For the …rst question, the baseline DPI using facts for the average U.S. household seemed
appropriate.      For the third question, I instead calibrated the taste parameters and the
probability of the rare event to match the expenditure shares and the equity share (20%)
of the population aged 55 to 64, again using the data from the BLS and from Ameriks
and Zeldes (2004).        The second question is more challenging since 60% of universities
expenditures are on wages, and data on their expenditure shares is harder to obtain.                       I
introduce two new expenditure categories, for academic and other employees, and measure

  24
    Johansen’s trace test of the number of cointegrating relations lends some support to this hypothesis (at
the 5% signi…cance level), by …nding 7 cointegrating relations between the 8 price series (Stock and Watson,
1988).




                                                    23
their price using wages for professors and for the aggregate economy, respectively.          The
sample now starts in 1975. The parameters          j   are re-calibrated to hit expenditure shares
obtained from several sources, and the perceived probability of the rare event is re-calibrated
to match a 59% share of equity in …nancial investments. The appendix contains more details
on the data sources.
    The three series are plotted in …gures 4 and 5 for the annual and decade measures. They
are all quite close, with correlation coe¢ cients above 0.9. The main noticeable di¤erence
is that, towards the end of the sample, the DPI for universities is lower. The two reasons
behind this di¤erence again point to the key role of housing and bonds in the DPI. First,
salaries have a large weight on university expenditure and they have grown at a slower pace
than housing costs in recent years. Second, universities hold a smaller share of bonds in
their portfolios, so they are less a¤ected by the recent increases in bond prices.


6    Conclusion

Some of the properties of the dynamic measure of in‡ation derived in this paper may at
…rst be a little startling.   On second thought, perhaps they should not be so surprising.
Hall’s (1978) seminal work on the role of dynamics and uncertainty on consumption led to
a radically new view of the properties of consumption. Contrary to previous knowledge,
economists learned that: (i) it is news, not changes in income or prices that matter, so
consumption growth is little serially correlated (ii) the persistence of income shocks is a key
determinant of the marginal propensity to consume, (iii) asset prices, or asset yields, alone
determine expected consumption growth, and (iv) durables have di¤erent dynamics from
non-durables.
    This paper brought this modern model of consumption, with dynamics and uncertainty,
into the study of cost-of-living price indices. It found results that mirror those in the
consumption literature: (i) news matter so in‡ation is little serially correlated, (ii) per-
sistence of price-shocks determine their impact on in‡ation, (iii) asset prices matter, and
(iv) durables are di¤erent from non-durables. A cost-of-living price index is the dual of a
model of consumption, so the properties of dynamic in‡ation mirror those of Hall’s study
of consumption. Since economists …nd dynamic models of consumption appealing, they
should be attracted to dynamic measures of the cost of living.



                                              24
Figure 4: Annual dynamic in‡ation for bequests, university endowments, and prospective
retirees

               0.2
                                                                                                  Bas eline
                                                                                                  Retiree
              0.18                                                                                Univers ity

              0.16


              0.14


              0.12


               0.1


              0.08


              0.06


              0.04


              0.02


                 0


             -0.02


             -0.04
                 1975   1978     1981    1984   1987   1990   1993   1996   1999    2002     2005         2008




Figure 5: Decade dynamic in‡ation for bequests, university endowments, and prospective
retirees

               0.1
                                                                                                  Bas eline
                                                                                                  Retiree
              0.09                                                                                Univers ity



              0.08


              0.07


              0.06


              0.05


              0.04


              0.03


              0.02


              0.01


                 0
                1984      1987          1990    1993      1996       1999    2002          2005           2008




                                                         25
   Computing the DPI does not pose any insurmountable data problems. Relative to the
static approach, one needs new information on consumer’s preferences for trading over time,
which is already routinely collected for portfolio and retirement advice, and on expectations
of future price changes, for which we have massive amounts of data from markets and in the
BLS records. The static approach does not need this information solely because it ignores
the future.
   Much remains to be done in future work. Empirically, one could consider more disag-
gregated categories of goods and more involved utility functions that better …t the cross-
sectional patterns of demand. Better measures of price expectations would also be useful,
whether using direct surveys, or using statistical and economic models.        Theoretically,
this paper used the standard model of consumption over time under uncertainty in order
to isolate the conceptual di¤erence between dynamic and static in‡ation.        Research on
consumption has found that borrowing constraints, household production, non-convex ad-
justment costs, habits, temptations, and inattentiveness, can all substantially improve the
empirical performance of the model. Incorporating these features in dynamic measures of
in‡ation is left for future work.




                                             26
    Appendix
A.1. Solution of the simple model in section 2
                            0
    Letting     and             be the Lagrange multipliers on the two periods’ budget constraints,
                                                                                                               0
the necessary and su¢ cient optimality conditions for (ca ; cb ; c0a c0b ; e; ;                                    ) are:


                                                      u(ca ; cb )1     1=
                                                                                   = pa ca                                           (22)

                                           (1        )u(ca ; cb )1     1=
                                                                                   = pb cb                                           (23)

                                                      u(c0a ; c0b )1   1=
                                                                                   = p0a c0a     0
                                                                                                                                     (24)

                                           (1        )u(c0a ; c0b )1   1=
                                                                                   = p0b c0b     0
                                                                                                                                     (25)

                                                     E     q0 + 1        0
                                                                                   = q ;                                             (26)


together with (3) and (4) holding as equalities. You can guess and verify the solution:


                                    pa ca =          (pa ; pb ; q)w;                                                                 (27)

                                    pb cb = (1            ) (pa ; pb ; q)w;                                                          (28)
                                                                           q0 + 1
                                    p0a c0a =    [1        (pa ; pb ; q)]                       w                                    (29)
                                                                              q
                                                                                          q0 + 1
                                    p0b c0b = (1          ) [1         (pa ; pb ; q)]                    w                           (30)
                                                                                             q

where the function (pa ; pb ; q) is de…ned by:
                                           8       8"                                                    #(1            99
                                           <       <                                                 1             )=   ==
                                1                 q                          p0a               p0b
            (pa ; pb ; q)             1=   E                                                                                     :   (31)
                                         :   : q +1
                                                0                            pa                pb                       ;;


The log-normality of the prices can be used to further simplify the term on the right-hand
side. Plugging into the utility function gives the value function:

                                                                                                !
                                                                   1 1=            w1 1=             (pa ; pb ; q)      1=
              V (w; pa ; pb ; q) =              (1         )1                                                      1 1=
                                                                                                                             :       (32)
                                                                                   1 1=              pa pb1

    For the approximation, note that in the non-stochastic steady-state, the right-hand side
of (31) equals g 1     1=       . A log-linearization of (8) and (31) around this non-stochastic steady




                                                                  27
state then delivers:
                                          !
                      g 1 1=
ln( t ) = ln(st )+                              (1        q)     ln(qt ) + (          a       1)   ln(pat ) + (1      )(   b       1)   ln(pbt ) ;
                   1 + g 1 1=

where I used the stochastic processes for each price. Rearranging gives the solution in (9).

A.2. Proof of Proposition 1: It is a standard result (e.g. Carroll, 2004) that this
consumption problem has a solution with a continuous value function that increases with
Wt . As    t   varies from 0 to in…nity, the left-hand side of (15) therefore increases continuously
from   1 to +1. Since for positive and …nite wealth and prices, the right-hand side of (15)
is a …nite number, a unique solution to the equation exists.

A.3. Proof of Proposition 2: Consider the following transformation of the problem:
fCj;t+i ; Sj;t+i ; Bj;t+i ; Wt g1                                      1
                                i=0 ! f Cj;t+i ; Sj;t+i ; Bj;t+i ; Wt gi=0 for all j for a non-zero

scalar . The feasibility set of the maximization problem is unchanged, while the objec-
                                              P t            P t
tive function goes through the transformation     U (C; S) !      U (C; S) if the utility
function is linear homogenous. Therefore, V ( Wt ; pt ) = V (Wt ; pt ), so the value function
is also linear homogenous. Letting                    =        t =Wt 1   and          = 1=Wt       1   on the two sides of (15),
respectively, it follows that: ln( t ) = ln(V (1; pt                     1 ))        ln(V (1; pt )), which does not depend
on wealth. The extension to the homothetic case follows immediately.

A.4. Proof of Proposition 3: Consider the following transformation of the problem:
fWt ; pt ; Dt g ! fM Wt ; M pt ; M Dt g for a non-zero scalar M . The feasibility set of the max-
imization problem is unchanged and so is the objective function. Thus, the transformation
leaves the value function unchanged. From the de…nition of the DPI,                                        t   = M.

A.5. Proof of Proposition 4: The dynamic program is:
                                   8                                                                                           9
                                   <XN                                D
                                                                      X                                                        =
   V (Wt ; pt ) =         max                    j   ln(Cj;t ) +                j   ln(Sj;t ) + Et V Wt+1 ; pt+1                   ;(33)
                       Cj;t ;Sj;t ;bt :                                                                                        ;
                                          j=1                         j=1
                             0                                                            1
                                           N
                                           X                      D
                                                                  X
                  M @
          Wt+1 = It+1 Wt                         Pj;t Cj;t              uj;t+1 Sj;t A ,                                            (34)
                                           j=1                    j=1
           M
          It+1 = bt DE;t+1 =QE;t + (1                      bt )DB;t+1 =QB;t :                                                      (35)


where bt is the portfolio share in equities such that bt =(1                                   bt ) = QE;t BE;t =QB;t BB;t , and
uj;t+1 is the user cost of durable j de…ned in (19). First, note that if asset returns are i.i.d.

                                                                 28
      M is i.i.d. But then, since I M only a¤ect wealth next period, and asset prices only
then It+1                          t+1
                       M , it follows that the value function is independent of asset prices.
a¤ect the problem via It+1
   Next, transform the variables C~j;t = Pj;t Cj;t =Wt ; S~j;t = Rj;t Sj;t =Wt ; u
                                                                                 ~j;t+1 = uj;t+1 =Rj;t
and re-write the problem as
                                                8 P                           PD                                            9
                                                >
                                                >  N                 ~
                                                                j ln(Cj;t ) +
                                                                                         ~                                  >
                                                                                                                            >
                                                >
                                                <  j=1                          j=1 j ln(Sj;t ) + ln(Wt )                   >
                                                                                                                            =
                                                               PN                  PD
V (Wt ; ln(Pj;t ); ln(Rj;t )) =        max                       j=1 j ln(Pj;t )     j=1 j ln(Rj;t )
                                                                                                                            (36)
                                                                                                                              ;
                                    Cj;t ;Sj;t ;bt >
                                                   >                                                                        >
                                                                                                                            >
                                               >
                                               :                                                                            >
                                                                                                                            ;
                                                          + Et [V (Wt+1 ; ln(Pj;t+1 ); ln(Rj;t+1 ))]
                                              0                                  1
                                                         N
                                                         X       XD
                              M
                      Wt+1 = It+1 Wt @1                    C~j;t    ~j;t+1 S~j;t A ,
                                                                    u                                                       (37)
                                                         j=1          j=1


   The envelope theorem condition with respect to wealth is:

                                             1       VW (Wt+1 ; :)Wt+1
                           VW (Wt ; :) =        + Et                   ;                                                    (38)
                                             Wt            Wt

where Vx        @V (:)=@x. This implies that Wt VW (Wt ; :) = 1=(1                              ); which after integrating
implies that V (Wt ; :) = ln(Wt )=(1               ) + T (ln(Pj;t ); ln(Rj;t )), where T (:) is an unknown
function. From the de…nition of the DPI, it then follows that:


                 ln( t ) = (1      ) [T (ln(Pj;t    1 ); ln(Rj;t 1 ))             T (ln(Pj;t ); ln(Rj;t ))] :               (39)


   The optimality conditions are:
                                                                          "                                             #
      j                   M                                                                      1
            =      Wt Et It+1 VW (Wt+1 ; :)        =                 Et                P~            P                      (40)
   C~j;t                                                 1                    1          Ci;t            ~i;t+1 S~i;t
                                                                                                         u
                                                                                       "                            #
       j                         M                                                              u
                                                                                                ~j;t+1
            =      Wt Et u
                         ~j;t+1 It+1 VW (Wt+1 ; :) =                              Et        P~      P                (41)
    S~j;t                                                        1                      1    Ci;t      ~i;t+1 S~i;t
                                                                                                       u

where the equalities follow from the solution for the marginal utility of wealth, and using
the budget constraint to rearrange.
   Evaluating these optimality conditions at the non-stochastic steady-state, we get the
steady-state solutions:         I M = 1, Cj =          j (1     ), and uj Sj =              j (1          ). Log-linearizing




                                                          29
the …rst-order conditions around this steady-state and letting hats denote the log-deviations:

                                 1                 hX                       X                                    i
                      C^j;t +                Et                ^
                                                             i Ci;t     +           i     S^i;t + u
                                                                                                  ^i;t+1                 = 0         (42)

                                 1                 hX                       X                                    i
        S^j;t + Et (^
                    uj;t+1 ) +               Et                ^
                                                             i Ci;t +               i     S^i;t + u
                                                                                                  ^i;t+1                 = 0:        (43)


The solution to these equations is:


                                 C^j;t = 0 and S^j;t =                  Et (^
                                                                            uj;t+1 ) ;                                               (44)


which going back to the budget constraint implies that

                                                               D
                                                               X
                  ^ t+1 = W
                          ^ t + I^t+1
                                  M                1
                  W                                                         j   [^
                                                                                 uj;t+1       Et (^
                                                                                                  uj;t+1 )]                          (45)
                                                               j=1


   Returning to the Bellman equation in (36) and using the known solution for V (:):

                                           N
                                           X                                        D
                                                                                    X
      ln(Wt )                                                     ~
              + T (ln(Pj;t ); ln(Rj;t )) =                   j ln(Cj;t ) +                  j   ln(S~j;t ) + ln(Wt )
       1
                                                    j=1                             j=1
                                                       N
                                                       X                                D
                                                                                        X
                                                                   j   ln(Pj;t )                j   ln(Rj;t )
                                                        j=1                             j=1
                                                                   ln(Wt+1 )
                                                    + Et                     + T (ln(Pj;t+1 ); ln(Rj;+1t ))                          (46)
                                                                     1

Using the log-linearized solutions in (44) and (45), and cancelling terms:

                                         D
                                         X                                  N
                                                                            X                              D
                                                                                                           X
       T (ln(Pj;t ); ln(Rj;t )) =                  j Et (^
                                                         uj;t+1 )                    j ln(Pj;t )                     j   ln(Rj;t )
                                         j=1                                j=1                            j=1
                                               h                                                        i
                                     +   Et I^t+1
                                              M
                                                  =(1                   ) + T (ln(Pj;t+1 ); ln(Rj;+1t )) :                           (47)


But, with i.i.d. …nancial returns Et I^t+1
                                       M                     = 0 and with random-walk durables prices
Et (^
    uj;t+1 ) = 0. The solution to the di¤erence equation above, using the fact that all prices
follow a random-walk, then is:

                                                   PN                               PD
                                                       j=1     j   ln(Pj;t ) +            j=1       j   ln(Rj;t )
                T (ln(Pj;t ); ln(Rj;t )) =                                                                           :               (48)
                                                                                1




                                                          30
Going back to the de…nition of the DPI in (39), therefore:

                                                 N
                                                 X                             D
                                                                               X
                                ln( t ) =                  j   ln(Pj;t ) +             j   ln(Rj;t );                           (49)
                                                 j=1                           j=1


which is, of course, just the static price index.

A.6. Proof of Proposition 5: The assumptions reduce the problem to:
                          8                                                                                                           9
                          <X1                                                  N
                                                                               X                                                      =
                                       i
V (At ; :::) =     max                     U (C1;t+i ; :::; CN;t+i ) :               Pj;t+i Cj;t+i      (1       )At for i = 0; 1; :::
                 fCt+i g1
                        i=0
                            :                                                                                                         ;
                                i=0                                            j=1
                                                                                                                                (50)
With the assumptions on the utility function, it is clear that indirect utility increases with
wealth, and the budget constraints always bind. Then, because all three scenarios involve a
tightening of the budget set, they imply a lower value. This must be o¤set by higher wealth,
which implies higher dynamic in‡ation to solve equation (15). With log-preferences, it is
easy to derive:
                                                           1
                                                           X         N
                                                                     X
                                                                 i
                            ln( t ) = (1               )                   j   ln(Pj;t+i =Pj;t    1+i );                        (51)
                                                           i=0       j=1

con…rming the general result.

A.7. Proof of Proposition 6: The consumer problem is:


                  V (Wt ; pt ) =    max U (C1;t ; :::; CN;t ) + Et V Wt+1 ; pt+1                                    ;           (52)
                                           Cj;t ;bt
                                         0                         1
                                                   XN
                                     M @
                       Wt+1       = It+1  W t Pt        P^j;t Cj;t A ;                                                          (53)
                                                                   j=1


       M is de…ned in (35).
where It+1
     Starting with result a), since Pt is i.i.d., the value function includes assets and only
the contemporaneous common component in prices: V (At ; Pt ; :). Recall the de…nition of
dynamic in‡ation, V ( t At             1 ; Pt ; :)     = V (At        1 ; Pt 1 ; :),   and note that if Pt = Pt            1,   then

 t   = 1: A …rst-order Taylor approximation of the left hand-side around this point gives:


             V (At     1 ; Pt 1 )     + VW Wt         1 ln ( t )   + V P Pt     1      ln (Pt )   V (At      1 ; Pt 1 ):        (54)




                                                                     31
Re–arranging gives the result:

                                                            P VP
                                        ln ( t )                             ln(Pt ):                                  (55)
                                                            W VW

    To compute the needed derivatives, use the envelope theorem conditions:

                                                     M
                     VW (Wt ; :) =               Et It+1 VW (Wt+1 ; :) ;                                               (56)
                                                    X
                     VP (Wt ; :) =                      P^j;t Cj;t Et It+1
                                                                       M
                                                                           VW (Wt+1 ; :) :                             (57)


Replacing this into the approximate expression for dynamic in‡ation in (55) gives:

                                                      PN                 !
                                                           j=1 Pj Cj
                                  ln ( t )                                     ln(Pt ):                                (58)
                                                               W

Finally, note that from the budget constraint:

                                                                    PN                !
                                  Wt+1    M                           j=1 Pj;t Cj;t
                                       = It+1              1                                  :                        (59)
                                   Wt                                     Wt

                                                                                                  PN
At a steady-state, Wt+1 = Wt and                   I M = 1, which implies that                     j=1 Pj Cj =W   =1      .
This gives result a). Result c) follows by almost identical steps.
    For result b), note that the relevant state variables in the value function now are:
V (At ;   ln(Pt ); :). A similar …rst-order approximation then shows that:

                                                           V ln(P )
                                     ln ( t )                                  ln(Pt ):                                (60)
                                                            W VW

The envelope theorem condition for                   ln(Pt ) now is:

                                                       X
                                                                             M
                 V    ln(P ) (Wt ; :)     =                    Pj;t Cj;t Et It+1 VW (Wt+1 ; :)

                                                     Et        V    ln(P ) (Wt+1 ; :)     :                            (61)


In steady-state, this implies that


                                 V      ln(P )   =    (1           )W VW =(1              );                           (62)


which once plugged in the approximation gives the result.


                                                               32
A.8. Proof of Proposition 7: The dynamic problem is:


             V (Wt ; pt ) =   max U (C1;t ; :::; CN;t ) + Et V Wt+1 ; pt+1                     ;      (63)
                                Cj;t ;bt
                                   0                    1
                                       X N
                               M @
                  Wt+1      = It+1  Wt        Pj;t Cj;t A ,                                           (64)
                                                 j=1
                                           ^ E;t + (1 bt )DB;t+1 =Q
                                bt DE;t+1 =Q                      ^ B;t
                    M
                   It+1 =                                               :                             (65)
                                                   Qt

   Starting with result a), similar steps to those in proposition 6 show that an approxima-
tion of dynamic in‡ation is:

                                                   QVQ
                                  ln ( t )                         ln(Qt ):                           (66)
                                                   W VW

The envelope theorem conditions with respect to wealth and asset prices are:

                                     M
            VW (Wt ; :) =        Et It+1 VW (Wt+1 ; :) ;                                              (67)
                                               X
                                                                   M
             VQ (Wt ; :) =       ( =Qt ) Wt          Pj;t Cj;t Et It+1 VW (Wt+1 ; :) :                (68)


Using these in the approximation gives:

                                                 X
                             ln ( t )        1         Pj Cj =Wt       ln(Qt ):                       (69)

                                                                              PN
As shown in the proof of proposition 6, at the steady state                    j=1 Pj Cj =Wt   =1   , from
where result a) follows.
   Turning to result b), note that in the statement of the problem above, QE;t only a¤ects
                                          M .
the problem via the return on equity and It+1               If the return on equity is i.i.d, then the
             M does not depend on Q
forecast of It+1                   E;t . Thus, the value function V (:) does not depend

on QE;t and so neither does dynamic in‡ation.
   Now to result c).       Identical steps to those used to prove result a) show that by the
implicit function theorem:

                                                  ^ E;t )
                                  @ ln ( t ) = ln(Q         ^ E VQ
                                                            Q     E
                                                          =         :                                 (70)
                                                  ^ B;t )
                                  @ ln ( t ) = ln(Q         ^ B VQ
                                                            Q     B




                                                       33
The envelope theorem conditions with respect to the two separate asset prices are:
                              0                            1
                                          N
                                          X
                         bt @                              DE;t+1
     VQE (Wt ; :) =             Wt      Pj;t Cj;t A Et                 VW (Wt+1 ; :) ;     (71)
                        QE;t                                 QE;t
                                    j=1
                                 0                      1
                                        XN
                        (1 bt ) @                              DB;t+1
     VQB (Wt ; :) =                Wt         Pj;t Cj;t A Et               VW (Wt+1 ; :) : (72)
                           QB;t                                   QB;t
                                                j=1


In turn, the optimality condition with respect to bt is:
                  "                                                                           !#
                                                X                        DE;t+1      DB;t+1
               Et VW (Wt+1 ; :)       Wt              Pj;t Cj;t                                    =0     (73)
          Qt                                                              ^ E;t
                                                                          Q           ^ B;t
                                                                                      Q

Using this to combine the previous two envelope theorem conditions delivers:

                                          ^ E VQ
                                          Q          b
                                                E
                                                  =     ;                                                 (74)
                                          ^
                                          QB VQB    1 b

Using the de…nition of b, result c) follows.

A.9. Proof of Proposition 8: The dynamic program is
                                          8                                           9
                                          <XN                                         =
                V (Wt ; pt ) = max                  j ln(Cj;t ) +   Et [V (W t+1 ; :)]  ;                 (75)
                                   Cj;t   :                                           ;
                                              j=1
                                                    X
                              M
                      Wt+1 = It+1 Wt                    Pj;t Cj;t :                                       (76)


   The Euler equation for the consumption of each good j is:

                                         M               Pj;t Cj;t
                                 1 = Et It+1                                 ;                            (77)
                                                       Pj;t+1 Cj;t+1

It is easy to see that the solution Pj;t Cj;t =            j (1   )Wt satis…es the Euler equations as
                                                                            M W .
well as the budget constraint, implying a law of motion for wealth: Wt+1 = It+1 t

   The value function at date t equals the expected sum of discounted utility obtained by
behaving optimally.    Using the optimal consumption choices and the evolution of wealth
and summing over time, gives the value function:
                                                                                        2             3
                                   1
                                   X          N
                                              X                              1
                                                                             X           Xi 1
                       ln(Wt )
      V (:) = const: +                    i
                                                    j Et [ln(Pj;t+i )]   +         i
                                                                                     Et 4         M 5
                                                                                              ln It+j
                        1
                                   i=0        j=1                            i=0        j=0



                                                      34
Evaluating expectations and using the de…nition of the DPI gives the result.

A.10. Proof of Proposition 9: The dynamic program now is:


V (Wt ; ln(Pi;t ); ln(Rj;t )) = max fU (C1;t ; :::; SD;t ) + Et [V (Wt+1 ; ln(Pi;t+1 ); ln(Rj;t+1 ))]g
                                                                                                   (78);
                                  Cj;t ;Sj;t
                                    0                                     1
                                         XN                 D
                                                            X
                                M @
                      Wt+1   = It+1  Wt         Pj;t Cj;t     uj;t+1 Sj;t A ,                      (79)
                                                 j=1             j=1


       M is de…ned in (35), and user costs are de…ned in equation (19).
where It+1                                                                                          Using the
de…nition of the DPI and the implicit function theorem:


                              @ ln( t )=@ ln(Pi;t ) =         Vln(Pi ) =VW W;                                (80)

                             @ ln( t )=@ ln(Rj;t ) =          Vln(Rj ) =VW W;                                (81)


so the goal is to …nd Vln(Rj ) =Vln(Pi ) . The envelope theorem for durable j and non-durable
i implies:

                                               M                Rj;t @uj;t+1
Vln(Rj ) (Wt ; :) =      Sj;t Et VW (Wt+1 ; :)It+1 uj;t+1                         +      j Et [Vln(Rj ) (Wt+1(82)
                                                                                                              ; :)]
                                                                uj;t+1 @Rj;t
                                                     M
Vln(Pi ) (Wt ; :) =      Pi;t Ci;t Et [VW (Wt+1 ; :)It+1 ]+     i Et [Vln(Pi ) (Wt+1 ; :)]:                   (83)


The …rst order conditions for these two goods in turn are:

                             @U (:)                             M
                                         =     Et VW (Wt+1 ; :)It+1 uj;t+1                                   (84)
                              @Sj
                             @U (:)                                  M
                                         =     Pi;t Et VW (Wt+1 ; :)It+1                                     (85)
                              @Ci
                                                                      h                                      i
                                                                           M u                Rj;t @uj;t+1
    Using the approximations: Et [Vln(Rj ) ]           Vln(Rj ) and Et VW It+1 j;t+1          uj;t+1 @Rj;t
       M u               Rj;t @uj;t+1
Et VW It+1 j;t+1 Et      uj;t+1 @Rj;t   , the result in the proposition follows. The second result
follows from the de…nition of user costs.

A.11. Empirical model of the DPI: The consumer problem is just like in (10)-(13),
with preferences given by (16), with N = 4 and D = 2; and with a change to (11) to include




                                                    35
adjustment costs:

                   4
                   X                       2
                                           X                              X
                         Pj;t+i Cj;t+i +         Rj;t+i Sj;t+i +                   Qj;t+i Bj;t+i
                   j=1                     j=1                        j2fB;Eg
                             2
                             X                                                         2
                                   j       Sj;t+i Rj;t+i =Wt                                Wt+i
                   Wt+i +                                                          1                  Rj;t   1+i Sj;t 1+i
                                   2   Sj;t 1+i Rj;t 1+i =Wt               1               Wt 1+i
                             j=1


Let zt be the 8x1 vector with all …rst-di¤erences of prices and returns: zt = ( ln(P1;t ), :::,
   ln(P4;t );        ln(R1;t );    ln(R2;t ); ln(DB;t =QB;t            1 ),    ln("t DE;t =QE;t     1 )).   I assume that:


                                                     z t = zt         1   + vt ;


where vt follows a multivariate normal distribution with zero mean, Et [vt vt0 ] =                                          ; and
Et [vt vt0   k]   = 0 for k 6= 0. As for the rare event "t , each period with probability & it equals
0 and otherwise equals 1.
     The calibrated parameters are ( ;                  ,   1,    2,       1,    2,    &), following the details in the text,
while        and         are estimated by …tting a VAR to the data. To deal with the large number
of state variables, I use perturbation methods to solve the dynamic program.

A.12. DPI construction for a university: I introduce two new non-durable goods,
faculty and other (administrative, clerical and service) employees, so N = 6 now.                                            The
salaries of faculty are measured using the data since 1975 from the American Association of
University Professors; those of other employees using compensation per hour in the nonfarm
business sector from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
     Turning to the preference weights,                     , I use data from the Commonfund institute for
their Higher Education Price Institute on the non-durable expenditure of universities, to
obtain the relative weights of faculty salaries (30%), other salaries (30%), and non-durable
goods (10%), apportioning the non-durables goods to the four categories using the same
proportion as in the CPI. The remaining 30% are expenditure on durables, which I again
apportion to housing (20%) and others (10%) using the same weights as in the CPI. I was
unable to …nd a systematic analysis of the relative share of spending on durables (or capital
projects) by universities.             The 30% number used for durables comes form a particular
university (Yale) that makes their budget publicly available.
     Finally, for the portfolio shares, I use data from NACUBO from 1989 to 2001, aggre-


                                                                 36
gating into equity investments in …ve categories, U.S. equity, non U.S. equity, hedge funds,
private equity and venture capital, and aggregating three categories into bonds, U.S. bonds,
non-U.S. bonds, and cash. Equity accounts for 59% of the portfolio and bonds for 37%,
with the residual 2% invested in natural resources and real estate.




                                            37
References

 [1] Alchian, Armen and Benjamin Klein (1973). “On a Correct Measure of In‡ation.”
    Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 5 (1), pp. 173-191.

 [2] Ameriks, John and Stephen P. Zeldes (2004). “How do Portfolio Shares Vary with
    Age?” Columbia University, working paper.

 [3] Auerbach, Alan J. and Laurence J. Kotliko¤ (1987). Dynamic Fiscal Policy, Cambridge:
    Cambridge University Press.

 [4] Bajari, Patrick, C. Lanier Benkard, and John Krainer (2005). “Home Prices and Con-
    sumer Welfare.” Journal of Urban Economics, vol. 58, pp. 474-487.

 [5] Barro, Robert J. (2006). “Rare Disasters and Asset Markets in the Twentieth Century.”
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 121 (3), pp. 823-866.

 [6] Basu, Susanto and John G. Fernald (2002). “Aggregate Productivity and Aggregate
    Technology.” European Economic Review, vol. 46 (6), pp. 963-991.

 [7] Blackorby, Charles, David Donaldson, and David Moloney (1984). “Consumer’s Surplus
    and Welfare Change in a Simple Dynamic Model.” Review of Economic Studies, vol.
    51, pp. 171-176.

 [8] Boskin, Michael J. (2005). “Causes and Consequences of Bias in the Consumer Price
    Index as a Measure of the Cost of Living.” Atlantic Economic Journal, vol. 33, pp.
    1-13.

 [9] Boskin, Michael J., Ellen Dulberger, Robert Gordon, Zvi Griliches, and Dale Jorgenson
    (1997). “The CPI Commission: Findings and Recommendations.”American Economic
    Review Papers and Proceedings, vol. 87, pp. 78-83.

[10] Boskin, Michael J. and Dale W. Jorgenson (1997). “Implications of Overstating In-
    ‡ation for Indexing Government Programs and Understanding Economic Progress.”
    American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, vol. 87 (2), pp. 89-94.

[11] Bound, John and Richard V. Burkhauser (1999). “Economic Analysis of Transfer Pro-
    grams Targeted on People with Disabilities.” In Handbook of Labor Economics, edited
    by Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, North Holland: Amsterdam.

                                           38
[12] Bryan, Michael, Stephen Cecchetti and Roisin O’Sullivan (2001). “Asset Prices and
    the Measurement of In‡ation.” De Economist, vol. 149, 405-431.

[13] Carroll, Christopher (2004). “Theoretical Results for Bu¤er-Stock Savings.” Johns
    Hopkins University working paper.

[14] Cecchetti, Stephen, H. Genburg, J. Lipsky, and S. Whadwani (2000). Asset Prices
    and Central Bank Policy, Geneva Reports on the World Economy, no. 2, International
    Center for Monetary and Banking Studies and Centre for Economic Policy Research.

[15] Deaton, Angus (1992). Understanding Consumption, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

[16] Diewert, W. Erwin (2001). “The Consumer Price Index and Index Number Theory.”
    University of British Columbia Department of Economics discussion paper no. 01-02.

[17] Diewert, W. Erwin (2002). “Harmonized Indices of Consumer Prices: Their Conceptual
    Foundations.” Swiss Journal of Economics and Statistics, vol. 138, pp. 547-637.

[18] Diewert, Erwin (2003). “The Treatment of Owner Occupied Housing and Other
    Durables in a Consumer Price Index.”University of British Columbia discussion paper
    03-08.

[19] Diewert, W. Erwin and Claude Montmarquette (1983). Price Level Measurement, Ot-
    tawa: Statistics Canada.

[20] Fisher, Franklin and Karl Shell (1972). The Economic Theory of Price Indices: Two
    Essays on the E¤ ects of Taste, Quality, and Technological Change, New York: Acad-
    emic Press.

[21] Geanakoplos, John (2005). “The Ideal In‡ation Indexed Bond and Irving Fisher’s The-
    ory of Interest with Overlapping Generations.” American Journal of Economics and
    Sociology, vol. 64 (1), pp. 275-305.

[22] Gillingham, Robert (1983). “Measuring the Cost of Shelter for Homeowners: Theoret-
    ical and Empirical Considerations.” Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 65 (2),
    pp. 254-265.

[23] Goodhart, Charles (2001). “What Weight Should Be Given to Asset Prices in the
    Measurement of In‡ation?” Economic Journal, vol. 111, pp. F335-F356.

                                           39
[24] Goodhart, Charles and Boris Hofmann (2000). “Do Asset Prices Help to Predict Con-
    sumer Price In‡ation.” The Manchester School Supplement, vol. 68, pp. 122-140.

[25] Gordon, Robert J. and Todd van Goethem (2007). “Downward Bias in the Most Im-
    portant Component of the CPI: The Case of Rental Shelter, 1914-2003.” In Hard-to-
    Measure Goods and Services: Essays in Honor of Zvi Griliches, edited by Ernst R.
    Berndt and Charles R. Hulten, University of Chicago Press: Chicago.

[26] Hall, Robert E. (1978). “Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle-Permanent Income
    Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence.”Journal of Political Economy, vol. 86, pp. 971-987.

[27] Jorgenson, Dale W. and Daniel T. Slesnick (1999). “Indexing Government Programs
    for Changes in the Cost of Living.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, vol.
    16 (2), pp. 170-181.

[28] Jorgenson, Dale W. and Kun-Young Yun (2001). Investment, Volume 3. Lifting the
    Burden: Tax Reform, the Cost of Capital, and U.S. Economic Growth, Cambridge:
    MIT Press.

[29] Konus, Alexandr A. (1924). “The Problem of the True Index of the Cost of Living.”
    Translated in Econometrica (1939), vol. 7, pp. 10-29.

[30] Mankiw, N. Gregory and Ricardo Reis (2003). “What Measure of In‡ation Should a
    Central Bank Target?” Journal of the European Economic Association, vol. 1 (5), pp.
    1058-1086.

[31] Merton, Robert C. (1993). Continuous-Time Finance, revised edition, Basil Blackwell.

[32] National Research Council (2002). At What Price? Conceptualizing and Measuring
    Cost-of-Living and Price Indexes, Panel on Conceptual, Measurement, and Other Sta-
    tistical Issues in Developing Cost-of-Living Indexes, Charles Schultze and Christopher
    Mackie eds., Committee on National Statistics, Division of Behavioral and Social Sci-
    ences and Education, Washington, DC: National Academy Press.

[33] Pollak, Robert (1989). The Theory of the Cost-of-Living Index, Oxford: Oxford Uni-
    versity Press.




                                           40
[34] Reis, Ricardo and Mark W. Watson (2008). “Relative Goods’ Prices, Pure In‡ation
    and the Phillips Correlation.” Princeton University working paper.

[35] Samuelson, Paul and Subramanian Swamy (1974). “Invariant Economic Index Numbers
    and Canonical Duality: Survey and Synthesis.” American Economic Review, vol. 64,
    pp. 566-593.

[36] Shapiro, Matthew D. and David W. Wilcox (1996). “Mismeasurement in the Consumer
    Price Index: An Evaluation.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1996, Cambridge MA:
    MIT Press.

[37] Shibuya, Hiroshi (1992). “Dynamic Equilibrium Price Index: Asset Prices and In‡a-
    tion,” Monetary and Economic Studies, vol. 10, pp. 95-109.

[38] Shiller, Robert (2003). The New Financial Order: Risk in the 21 st Century, Princeton:
    Princeton University Press.

[39] Stock, James and Mark Watson (1988). “Testing For Common Trends.”Journal of the
    American Statistical Association, vol. 83, pp. 1097-1107.

[40] Stock, James and Mark Watson (2003). “Forecasting Output and In‡ation: The Role
    of Asset Prices.” Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 41, pp. 788-829.

[41] Triplett, Jack (1983). “Escalation Measures: What is the Answer? What is the Ques-
    tion?” In Price Level Measurement, edited by W. Erwin Diewert and Claude Mont-
    marquette, Ottawa: Statistics Canada.

[42] Verbrugge, Randal (2005). “The Puzzling Divergence of Rents and User Costs, 1980-
    2002.” Division of Price and Index Number Research, Bureau of Labor Statistics.

[43] Wynne, Mark (1994). “An Intertemporal Cost-of-Living Index.” FRB Dallas working
    paper.




                                            41
