                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      INTERNATIONAL TRADE, FOREIGN INVESTMENT, AND THE
            FORMATION OF THE ENTREPRENEURIAL CLASS




                       Gene M. Grossman


                    Working Paper No. iiiI




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge MA 02138

                          August 1983




I gratefully acknowledge helpful discussions with Avinash Dixit,
Elhanan Helpman and Henrik Horn, and the financial support of the
National Science Foundation under grant no SES 82OT613. The
research reported here is part of the NBERts research program in
International Studies and program in Productivity (World Economy).
Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper #1174
                                                  August 1983



                International Trade, Foreign Investment, and
                 The Formation of the Entrepreneurial Class



                                  ABS TRACT




     In this paper, I examine the argument that free trade may be harmful

to less developed countries, because such international competition inhibits

the formation of a local entrepreneurial class.   I view the entrepreneur

as the manager of the industrial enterprise, as well as the agent who bears

the risks associated with industrial production. A two—sector model of a

small open economy is developed in which the size of the entrepreneurial

class is endogenous.

     It is shown that the entrepreneurial class is smaller under free trade

than would be first—best optimal in the presence of efficient risk—sharing

institutions such as stock markets. Nonetheless, there are potential gains

from trade, and any protectionist policy that increases the number of

entrepreneurs will have deleterious welfare consequences.




                                                    Gene M. Grossman
                                                    Woodrow Wilson School
                                                    Princeton University
                                                    Princeton, NJ    08544
                                                    609—452—4823
 I. INTRODUCTION


       An important aspect of the development process in market—

oriented economies is the formation of a "class of entrepreneurs" —

that   is, a group of individuals who are capable of organizing production

and are willing to bear the risks associated with industrial activity.

These agents serve an essential function in many less developed

countries, because the markets and infrastructure necessary for the

efficient and widespread allocation of risk across the population are

often very imperfect or completely absent. In cases where the supply

of entrepreneurs remains limited, there may occur what Rostow (1956)

has called "secular stagnation", with little if any economic growth,

and a tendency for overspecialization in the agricultural and traditional

sectors. This point was argued most forcefully by W. Arthur Lewis:


       Outside the sphere of agriculture, which can be conducted on a
       family size basis, economic growth is bound to be slow unless
       there is an adequate supply of entrepreneurs looking out for
       new ideas, and willing to take the risk of introducing them.
       Thus a private enterprise economy will be retarded if it has
       not enough business men, or if its business men are reluctant
       to take risks, whether because they cannot raise the capital, or
       because they are timid by nature, or because the differentials
       for risk—taking are inadequate.1 (1955, p. 182)


       It has been further claimed by some (see e.g., Pazos, 1967 and

Hirschxnan, 1969) that openness to international competition, in the

forms of free international trade, and especially inflows of direct

foreign investment, serves to impede the development of the entre-

preneurial class, and thus can be detrimental to the economy as a

whole. Quoting from Hirschman,
                                2




      The opponents of free trade have often pointed out that for
      a variety of reasons it is imprudent and harmful for a country
      to become specialized along certain product lines in accordance
      with the dictates of comparative advantage. Whatever the merits
      of these critical arguments, they would certainly acquire over-
      whelming weight if the question arose whether a country should
      allow itself to become specialized not just along certain
      commodity lines, but along factor—of—production lines. Very
      few countries would ever consciously wish to specialize in
      unskilled labor, while foreigners with a comparative advantage
      in entrepreneurship, management, skilled labor and capital
      took over these functions, replacing inferior "local talent".
      (1969, p. 5)


     An implication that has been drawn is that (at least) temporary

restrictions to commodity trade and inward foreign investment can be

justified on these grounds. Such intervention would not necessarily

be inconsistent with the tenets of welfare economies as applied to

trade policy, since the assumed starting point is one with an

incomplete market structure, and thus falls under the rubric of "the

theory of distortions" (see Bhagwati, 1971).

     Indeed, it is now known that in some situations of uncertainty,

free trade may not be superior to autarchy, and that tariffs may be

welfare—improving even for a small economy (see, e.g., Newbery and

Stiglitz, 1981, Eaton and Grossman, 1981, and Grossman, 1983). Trade

may cause the inefficiency associated with an initially suboptimal

allocation of risk across agents to be exacerbated, and thus generate

a deleterious side—effect that offsets the direct gains from specialization.

In the present context, for example, free trade might be harmful if

it ceteris paribus lowered the return to the entrepreneurial activity,

and thereby caused fewer individuals to choose to become entrepreneurs,

from an initial situation in which the supply of this factor was

already suboptimally small. It seems, therefore, that a case might

be made on this basis for sheltering (to some extent) domestic
                                  3




industrial enterprises in the less developed economies from exposure

to the competitive forces of international trade and foreign

investment until such a time as factor—supply conditions allow them

to compete with the industrialized world on a more equal footing.

     Compelling as these arguments may appear to be, it is nontheless

necessary to subject them to careful analytical scrutiny. The purpose

of the present paper, then, is to explore in the context of a formal

model some of the implications of topenness?t, for an economy in which

domestic markets for risk sharing are absent and the supply of

entrepreneurs is endogenous. Drawing on the work of Kanbur (1979,

1981), I develop in Section II a two—sector model of the open, less—

developed economy. There it is shown, in accordance with the verbal

treatments cited above, that the free trade equilibrium is characterized

by an undersupply of entrepreneurs and an excessive degree of

specialization in agricultura.l (or traditional) production, relative

to a first—best social optimum.

     In Section III, I compare the free—trade outcome with the

equilibrium under complete autarky.   First I investigate the effects

of international trade on the welfare levels of the various "classes"

in society, in the absence of any government redistributional policy.

Then the question of potential gains from trade is addressed, with

explicit consideration of whether trade creates an opportunity, via

a feasible compensation scheme, for Pareto welfare improvement.

     The efficacy of interventionist trade policy is examined in

Section IV. I show that protection from foreign competition can

indeed be effective as a means of enlarging the pooi of domestic

entrepreneurs. However, the conclusions I draw regarding the welfare

implications of such policies are considerably less sanguine.
                                  4




     Section V deals with direct foreign investment, taken here to

mean the establishment of foreign—owned enterprises in the Less—

developed economy. I analyse the effects of an inflow of foreign

firms on the size of the local entrepreneurial class, and on   national
income and welfare in the host country.

     The main findings of the paper are suumiarized in a concluding

section.


II. THE MODEL


     I wish to endogenize the supply of entrepreneurs in an open—

economy, general equilibrium setting. For this purpose, I borrow

from Kanbur (1979, 1981), who has developed a model of occupational

choice in which individuals face an ex ante decision as to whether

to join a class of risk—bearers or work instead for a safe (i.e.

certain) wage.2 This approach to entrepreneurship can be embedded in

a simple, familiar specification of intersectoral resource allocation

and international trade, so as to provide a tractable framework for

addressing formally the issues raised in the introduction.

     Consider then a small economy comprising an agricultural or

"traditional" sector, and an industrial or "modern" sector. The output

in agriculture is denoted by x, and this good is chosen as numeraire.

Industrial output is z, with an (exogenous) relative price of p on

world markets.

     Production in agriculture requires the input of labor L and

land T, according to x =
                           g(L,   T). Labor earns a wage w (in units

of the x—good). The return to the fixed supply of land accrues to

a predetermined group of rentiers, whom I shall refer to as the

landlord class. The input of labor is assumed to be governed by

rent maximization by landlords, and satisfies
                                 5




 (1)           T) = w


        Production in the industrial sector is organized and managed

by a class of entrepreneurs. This undertaking involves risk, which

may stem either from uncertainty regarding the ability of the

entrepreneur as a manager or from some inherent aspect of the production

process. The output of the 1th enterprise is         z) , where o is
a random variable and 9 is the labor hired by this entrepreneur (for

simplicity, I assume that each firm or enterprise has exactly one

entrepreneur). At the time that production takes place, labor is

assumed to be perfectly mobile between firms and sectors, so that

all labor in the industrial sector must be paid the (safe) competitive

wage, w.     The entrepreneur, then, must bear the production (and hence

profit) risk, and it is assumed that there do not exist markets on

which he can purchase insurance.

        Let the number of entrepreneurs in the economy be N, and suppose

that the individual uncertainties are stochastically independent, but

governed by the same density function,        with E =       Each

entrepreneur seeks to maximize his profits given the realization of

the relevant random variable; thus, employment in the th production

unit is determined by


(2)                = w.
        pc1f,(2)


       It remains only to specify the occupational—choice decision.

The total population excluding landlords is L. Each of these individuals

may opt to become a laborer, in which case a nonstochastic income of

w is ensured, or else may join the entrepreneurial class, and bear the

associated profit risk. This decision is taken ex ante; that is,

prior to the time when the prospective entrepreneur learns the value
                                  6




of    which would be applicable for him. Once uncertainty is

resolved, the occupational choice cannot be reversed. Implicitly,

I am assuming that there are fixed costs associated with entrepreneur-

ship which, once borne, prevent the entrepreneur from abandoning

ship even if he discovers that he lacks managerial ability or that

his luck is bad.

      Suppose that all individuals (including landlords) have identical

preferences represented by the indirect utility function V(p, y),

where y stands for the appropriate income variable. For algebraic

convenience, let us further assume that the function takes the

particular form V(p, y) =   h(p)y1/(1—)      for y >   0,   y   1 or


V(p, y )   = h(p)log   y for y = 1.   The indirect utility function has

this form if underlying preferences are homothetic and individuals

exhibit constant relative aversion to income risk (y is the Arrow—

Pratt measure of relative risk aversion, as extended to a many—

commodity setting by Stiglitz (1969). In equilibrium, neither the

entrepreneurial activity nor the labor activity can be strictly pre-

ferred, if identical agents face a choice between the two and a positive

number select each occupation. Incomplete specialization thus requires

that the expected utility of an entrepreneur be equal to the utility

derived from the (certain) wage earned by a laborer, or that


(3)   E(h(p)[pc1f(i) - w      ]1(/(1.Y)} =


where 2? in (3) is now the optimal (state—dependent) choice of labor

input, as determined by (2). Since p is nonstochastic, (3) can be

written more simply as


(4)   E{[pcfU) -       w1]l} = w1
                                 7




        The model is closed by the labor—market clearing condition. At

the time that production takes place, the supply of labor is L—,

i.e. the non—landlord population less those who have chosen entrepreneur-

ship as their profession. Full employment requires


(5)     Lx +NE21=L—N.
               z


Equations (1), (2), (4) and (5) determine the endogenous variables

L, N,       and w as functions of the endogenous variables, p and T,

and the distribution and ultimate realization of c.

        To recapitulate, I have assumed that production in the modern

sector involves risk. Examples might include uncertainty about whether

a new production process is viable or whether a particular manager is

capable of organizing his employees efficiently. Such uncertainty is

specific to the individual enterprise, but there are no institutions

such as stock markets in the economy under consideration which would

allow risks to be pooled by entrepreneurs, or shared by the various

income classes. Entrepreneurship involves fixed costs, so that

occupational choice Is irreversible. Finally, hiring decisions are

taken ex post, and profit maximization governs interfirm and inter—

sectoral resource allocation.

      It is easy to show that relative to a first—best allocation

(which would result if markets were complete or if the government

could plan production and distribute income), the equilibrium described

above has too few entrepreneurs and exhibits overspecialization in

agriculture. Note first that with independent entrepreneurial risks,

the economy as a whole is subject to no aggregate risk. Hence, the

first—best allocation is the one that maximizes the value of national

output at international prices. The central planner's problem is

to
                                                8




 (6)     max         g(L, T) +          p   N E cf(2)
         N, L,

                  subject to L +            N E        =   L—N



 Let tildes denote variables in the first—best situation.

 Manipulation of the first—order conditions to (6) gives


         E pct1f() —       g(L T)               E1 g(L T)

 or, if we substitute           E                   T)(where ?   is   the shadow price of

 labor at the optimum)


 (7)
                i d wL)
                    i
          E{pct f(Z) —              =       w


By comparison, application of Jensen's inequality to (4), recalling

the fact that y is positive,implies E{pcf(i1) —                        wi1}   >   w.   It follows

immediately that       >   w.

        Now, the marginal products of labor in agriculture in the

equilibrium and in the first—best allocation are equal to the market

and shadow wage rates, respectively, Thus,                        > w implies £'       < L,, and

       < ELi. These in turn imply                   > N. Overspecialization in agriculture

and a shortage of entrepreneurs are direct consequences of the absence

of risk—sharing markets. The question that arises, then, is whether

or not this inefficiency in risk—bearing and the attendant resource

misallocation are exacerbated by the presence of free international

trade or direct foreign investment.


III. FREE      TRADE VERSUS AUTARKY



        The size of the entrepreneurial class and the intersectoral

allocation of resources will, of course, be different in the free trade

and autarky equilibria, because the relative price of the industrial—

sector good is altered by the presence of international trade. It is
                                  9




useful to begin by considering the effect on equilibrium allocations,

incomes and welfare levels of an exogenous change in the relative

couodity price. Then the comparison of the alternative equilibria

can be conducted by integrating the price derivatives between the

autarky and free—trade price levels.

        The effects of a relative price change are straightforward to

derive. First, we divide both sides of equation (4) by p1', and

note that this equation determines a unique value for the real product

wage in terms of the industrial good. The supply of entrepreneurs is

perfectly elastic at this real product wage, and incomplete special-

ization, which requires a positive supply of both entrepreneurs and

labor, can only occur if this particular value for w/p is realized.

Letting a circumflex denote a proportional derivative, it follows

from (4) that


(8)     w=p.

Then, from (2), we have


(9) dtz = 0.

Differentiation of (1), and substitution of (8) gives

              —a
(10)    L =
        X     i_eX
                   Lx
where       is the elasticity of substitution between land and labor

in agriculture, and eLX is the labor share in agricultural income.

The proportional change in the rental rate, r, is found by differen-

tiating the price—equals—unit—cost equation for agriculture, and is

given by
                                         10




(11)     r =
               i—e
                     Lx

Finally, from (5) and (8) through (10),


(12) N=                           p
               (1-XL)(i-eL)

where XL is the fraction of the non—landlord population employed in

the    agricultural sector.

         What do these results imply about the effects of free trade?

First, equations (9), (10) and (12) together show that supply responses

are "normal"         in   the model; that is, an increase in the relative price

of the z—good causes an increase in industrial output and a fall in

agricultural output. Preferences are, by assumption, identical and

homothetic, so aggregate demands must be negatively related to own

prices.     Hence, the economy's excess demand for the industrial—

sector good is everywhere a non—increasing function of the relative

price of this good. It follows that if the economy is an importer

of this good, the autarky price must lie above the free—trade price.

This is likely to be the case, both because the less developed

country might suffer from a technological disadvantage in modern—

sector production, and because the existence of stock markets which

facilitate risk—sharing in the more advanced countries implies that

any bias against industrial output will be quantitatively less important

there.

         Let us assume that the LDC does import the industrial—sector

good in the free—trade equilibrium. Then from (12) it is clear

that "openness" indeed can be held responsible for inhibiting the

formation of the local entrepreneurial class. Furthermore, in the

absence of any government redistribution policy, free trade has a

striking and unambiguous effect on the welfare levels of the various
                                11




 income classes in the LDC economy. Landlords necessarily benefit

 from free trade (relative to autarchy), because as p falls the real

 rental rate, measured in terms of either good, rises. Similarly,

 the labor class is harmed by the introduction of trade, since the

 wage remains constant in units of the industrial—sector good, but falls

 in terms of agricultural products. Finally, entrepreneurs must lose

 from trade as well, because equation (3) ties their level of expected

utility to the welfare level of the laborers. These results are, of

course, reminiscent of the Stolper—Samuleson (1941) findings for

 the familiar Heckscher—Ohlin model of trade. The similarity stems

from the fact that the ex ante transformation schedule relating the

number of entrepreneurs to the number of laborers is perfectly elastic

at a particular product real wage. When this real wage prevails,

the non—landlord population is "as if" a single factor of production.

      In circumstances where the introduction of free trade generates

both "winners" and "losers", it is natural to ask whether or not a

feasible compensation scheme exists that could guarantee a Pareto

welfare improvement. This standard gains—from—trade question is

especially interesting in the present context, because we have noted

that free trade effects a contraction of the entrepreneurial class,

and an expansion of the agricultural sector, from an initial autarchy

situation in which the former is smaller, and the latter is larger,

than would be first—best optimal.

      The redistributive policy that I shall consider is a proportional

income tax—cum—subsidy scheme, with tax at rate T on rental income

and subsidy at rate s on "earned" income. Implementation of these

policy instruments is more likely to be feasible in LDCs than would

be lump—sum taxes and subsidies, and unlike the latter policies,
                                       12




proportional income taxes do not alter the allocation of resources

or occupational—choice decision under the assumption of constant

relative risk aversion. My strategy will be to construct a tax

scheme under free trade that restores all income classes to their

autarchy level of welfare, and then check whether positive government

revenue is thereby created. If so, it would be possible to lower

a tax or raise a subsidy slightly to generate a situation that Pareto—

dominates autarchy.

        The utility of landlords, uT, is given by


        uT =   h(p)[r(1-T)]1/(1_y)

from whence (applying Roy's identity),


(13) dUT = h(p) {r(1T)] Y{_cT dp + (1—T) dr - rdT}


where cT is the consumption of industrial—sector goods by landlords.

As the relative price moves from its autarchy to its free trade level,

the welfare of landlords can be held constant by continuous variation

of the income—tax rate that satisfies (noting (11))

                                   e
                                       Lx
(14) dT         T   = —(1—r)[8 +             ]p
           idUO                         Lx

where     is the proportion of expenditure devoted to z—goods.

        Similarly, the utility of laborers, uL, can be maintained

at a constant level by an income subsidy that varies with the relative

price change according to


(15) ds duL=o =      (-1)(1+s)   p.


Recall that the expected utility of entrepreneurs is equal to that

of laborers, so that (15) also fixes the welfare of entrepreneurs.
                                               13




        Finally, the government budget surplus is


        B =    r   —   s(x   + pz —   r)

 so that


        dB =   (s+T)r    r +   r(ds+dr)      — (x+pz) ds —
                                                           spz p—s(dx+pdz).


Substitution of (10), (14) and (15) into (16), and some simple

manipulation, yields


(17) dB = p(z—c) p — s(dx+pdz)


where c is aggregate consumption of the z—good. The first term is

clearly positive, since both p and imports of the industrial—sector

good are negative. The second term can be computed from


        dx = wdL
                x


and (with d=0),

                                           E cf(Z1)
        dz   = [E c1f(L')]dN =         —
                                                      dL.
                                           1+E2z
Thus,


        —s(dx+pdz) =
                             s(E      T.w)dL
                             1 + E
                                       z

where Eu1 is the expected income (i.e. profits) of the representative

entrepreneur. This term is positive as well, since E'ir1 > w by           risk
aversion,     and both s and dL remain positive as p falls.6

        Despite the second—best setting created by the absence of risk—

sharing markets, the occupational choice modelof entrepreneurship

generates potential gains from trade. A system of proportional income

taxes and subsidies can always be constructed such that the social
                                14




classes which benefit from trade can compensate those that are

harmed by it. Of course, whether or not the required redistribution

will actually take place in any particular country is, as always,

a political question that cannot be answered here. Nontheless, the

analysis serves to demonstrate that one cannot infer solely from

the fact that free trade inhibits the development of the entrepreneurial

class the conclusion that trade is harmful.


IV. CAN PROTECTION BE WELFARE IMPROVING?


      Although free trade is necessarily better than no trade, policies

that alter the intersectoral allocation of resources might conceivably

raise social welfare above the free trade level, if they can work so

as to offset the distortion associated with the inefficient allocation

of risk. Such "tariffs and production subsidies as insurance" have

been studied in other contexts by Newbery and Stiglitz (1981) and

Eaton and Grossman (1981). The mere existence of risk with incomplete

markets is not, however, sufficient for the non—optimality of free

trade (see Grossman, 1983), so it is not obvious a priori whether

trade or industrialization policy can be efficacious in the present

context.

      Consider then a tax on agricultural output at ad valorem rate

t.   As before, let us assume that the change in regime is accompanied

by the implementation of proportional income taxes and subsidies that

preserve the initial (in this case, free trade) levels of utility.

It is easy to check that this policy package is fully equivalent to

a production subsidy in industry plus the appropriate redistributive

measures, so it will not be necessary to investigate the latter

interventions separately.
                                         15




      A change in the tax on agricultural output does not affect the

product real wage (in units of industrial—sector goods), as determined

by equation (3). Since p does not change (because terms of trade are

fixed for a small country), neither does the wage rate. This implies

that the welfare levels of laborers and entrepreneurs are unaffected

by the policy change, and no direct taxes or subsidies to their incomes

are needed. There remains, therefore, only to check whether or not

the revenue generated by the production tax is sufficient to compensate

the landlords for their income losses.

      After—tax income of landlords is r(1—i) where r = (1—t)x           — wL
                                                                                x
A constant level of utility requires that r be varied to satisfy


(18) r dT = —(1—T)x         dt.



The corresponding change in the government budget, (where B =       tx    +   rr)
is given by


(19) dB =     t   dx + (1—t)x dt +   r   dr.



Substitution of (18) into (19) yields


(20) dB =     t   dx.


The right—hand—side of (20) is negative for non—infinitesimal changes

in t about t =      0,   since dx/dt is clearly negative. But government

deficits, as required here, are infeasible in the model. The

implication is that any non—infinitesimal tax or subsidy. to agricultural

production must generate utility losses for some individuals in the

economy.

      This finding can be understood as follows. Intersectoral policy

does indeed alter the supply of entrepreneurs; but it does not bring

about a more efficient allocation of risk across agents. Since risk
                                 16




misallocation, rather than the number of entrepreneurs, is the

economically relevant manifestation of the distortion created by

the incomplete market structure, a policy instrument which merely

shifts resources between sectors and occupations is bound to be a

failure. Instead, policy intervention should be tailored to work

at the distorted margin — a point which was emphasized by Baldwin

(1969) in his analysis of infant—industry protection. There, as here,

the mere existence of a distortion is not enough to justify inter-

vention with the blunt tools of trade policy.

      Note, furthermore, that tariff intervention is even more costly

here than is a production tax—cum—subsidy. The former entails

consumption losses, whicharein addition to the production losses

implicit in (20) above. Indeed, a policy of free trade constitutes

a type of constrained optimum for an economy with an endogenous

entrepreneurial class. If the institutional constraints on risk

sharing are taken as immutable, then the efficiency gains associated

with specialization according to (endogenous) comparative advantage

are the most that can be attained.


V.   FOREIGN INVESTMENT AND LOCAL ENTREPRENEURS


      Foreign   investment, even more so than international trade, has
been criticized on the grounds that it   inhibits   the development of   an

entrepreneurial   class. It has been argued that foreign enterprises

merely crowd out local efforts, and thus impart few if any benefits

on the LDC economy. It is easy to see, without any formal algebra,

that the logic of this argument is essentially confirmed in our

model of the formation of the entrepreneurial class.
                                17




      Consider the effects of an inflow of foreign enterprises into

 the industrial—good sector of the LDC economy. Managers of these

foreign—owned establishments face an infinitely elastic supply of

labor at the real wage determined by equation (3). Whatever their

demand for labor, there will be no effect on the domestic wage rate,

provided that some domestic business continue to operate in the cum—

foreign—investment equilibrium. The upshot is that an inflow of

foreign enterprises has no impact on the welfare of any group in the

domestic economy. With-wages unaffected, landlord rents are constant

at their pre—foreign—investment levels, and domestic entrepreneurs

continue to have expected utility equal to the (unchanged) level

enjoyed by laborers. All the surplus derived from the establishment

of the new business accrues to the foreigners.

      Furthermore, the inflow of foreign enterprises does indeed have

the effect of crowding out local ventures. The supply of domestic

entrepreneurs must shrink so as to release the individuals needed to

serve as workers in the foreign firms. Although this shift in the

occupational distribution has no direct consequences for welfare,

it does imply a decline in national income for the less developed

country, since the wages earned by the (new) laborers are less than

the sum of the profits of the (former) entrepreneurs. The fall in

aggregate income is, essentially, a premium paid by the domestic

economy in exchange for the income insurance provided by the foreigners.

      It does not follow from this analysis that foreign investment

ought to be prohibited. For one thing, a tax on foreign profits would

allow the host country to share in any surplus created by the inflow

of foreign firms. But more to the point, we have seen that the size

of the entrepreneurial class is not, in and of itself, a sensible
                                   18




policy target for the less developed economy. The contraction of

the supply of local entrepreneurs when faced with competition from

abroad — whether in the form of international trade or of direct

foreign investment — should be viewed as symptomatic of a more

fundamental market failure, namely the inability of the economy to

share its production risks in an efficient manner. Policy efforts

should be devoted to rectifying this inefficiency, rather than reacting

to its consequences.


VI. CONCLUSIONS


      In this paper I have examined the argument that free trade and

foreign investment may   be   harmful to less developed countries, because

such international competition inhibits the formation of a local

entrepreneurial class. A two—sector model of a small open economy

was developed in which the size of the entrepreneurial class is

endogenously determined. Following Kanbur (1979, 1981), I viewed the

entrepreneur as the manager of the industrial enterprise, as well as

the agent who bears the risks associated with industrial production

in an economy in which markets for risk—sharing are absent. In the

model, the non—landlord population faces an ex ante occupational—

choice decision between the entrepreneurial and labor activities.

      It was shown that the size of the entrepreneurial class so

determined is smaller than would be first—best optimal in the presence

of efficient risk—sharing institutions such as stock markets. Free

international trade causes the supply of local entrepreneurs to fall

relative to autarky, if the LDC imports the industrial—sector good

in equilibrium. Nonetheless, there are potential gains from trade, in

the sense that a feasible scheme of income taxes—cum—subsidies can
                                19




 always be devised to allow those who benefit from trade (landlords)

 to compensate those who lose (entrepreneurs and laborers)

      Protectionist policies, such as tariffs on industrial—sector

 imports or taxes on agricultural output, can be used to augment the

size of the entrepreneurial class. However, these policies will

always have deleterious welfare consequences. It turns out, much

as in Baldwints (1969) case against infant—industry protection, that

intersectoral policy instruments are too blunt to deal with the

distortion implicit in the absence of risk—sharing institutions. To

improve allocative efficiency, an intervention would need to provide

insurance to potential entrepreneurs against adverse outcomes in

their industrial—sector ventures. Trade policy does not satisfy this

criterion.

      An inflow of foreign—owned industrial enterprises into the less

developed country also has an adverse effect on the supply of local

entrepreneurs. In the absence of any tax on the profits of these firms

all the surplus from direct foreign investment accrues to the foreigners.

The less developed country experiences a decline in national income,

but the (expected) utility levels of all social classes in the

economy remains fixed at pre—investment levels.

      An important lesson that emerges from the analysis is that the

size of the risk—bearing entrepreneurial class should not, in and

of itself, be a policy target in less developed economies. Rather,

policy should aim to provide the mechanisms by which risk can be

efficiently allocated across the population.
                                 20




FOOTNOTE S


1.    Similarly, Rostow (1956, P. 41)   argued   that "...   it   is evident
that the take—off requires the existence and the successful activity
of some group in the society which accepts borrower's risk..." For
further discussion, see Kilby (1971).


2. Kihistrom and Laffont (1979) present a model of entrepreneurship
and risk—taking which is quite similar to that of Kanbur.


3. The analysis could also be carried out under the assumption that
entrepreneurs hire labor prior to the resolution of uncertainty,
rather than afterwards. The main results of this paper do not depend
upon which of these alternative timing assumptions is made.


4. The symbol E represents the expectation operator. In what follows,
I shall also assume that N is sufficiently large to permit application
of the tiaw of large numbers.'

5.    Many, but not all, of the results of the paper go through without
this assumption, which, however, simplifies the exposition greatly.


6. Similar reasoning establishes gains from trade also in cases
where the economy exports the industrial—sector good. Then (z—c)
and     in (17) would be positive, and s would be negative, implying
again dB > 0.


7. Kanbur (1981) analyzes the welfare effects of alternative policy
interventions in a one—sector model of entrepreneurship and occupational

choice. An example of a policy which facilitates risk—spreading, and thereby
improves the efficiency of resource allocation, is a progressive income
tax—cum—subsidy scheme.
                                  21




REFERENCES


Baldwin, Robert E., 1969, "The Case Against Infant—Industry Tariff
  Protection", Journal of Political Economy 77, 295—305.


Bhagwati, Jagdish N., 1971, "The Generalized Theory of Distortions
  and Welfare", in J. Bhagwati et al. (eds.), Trade, Balance of
  Payments and Growth (North—Holland, Amsterdam).


Eaton, Jonathan and Gene M. Grossman, 1981, "Tariffs as Insurances:
  Optimal Commercial Policy when Domestic Markets Are Incomplete",
  Working Paper No. 797, National Bureau of Economic Research.


Grossman, Gene M., 1983, "The Optimal Tariff for a Small Country
  Under International Price Uncertainty:   A Comment", Oxford
  Economic Papers, forthcoming.


Hirschman, Albert 0., 1969, "How to Divest in Latin America, and
  Why", Essays in International Finance No. 76, International
  Finance Section, Princeton University.


Kanbur, S.M., 1979, "Of Risk Taking and the Personal Distribution
  of Income", Journal of Political Economy 87, 769—797.


Kanbur, S.M., 1981, "Risk Taking and Taxation: An Alternative
  Perspective", Journal of Public Economics 15, 163—184.


Kihistrom, Richard E. and Jean—Jacques Laffont, 1979, "A General
  Equilibrium Entrepreneurial Theory of Firm Formation Based on
  Risk Aversion", Journal of Political Economy 87, 719—748.


Kilby, Peter, 1971, Entrepreneurship and Economic Development (Free
  Press, New York).


Lewis, W. Arthur, 1955, The Theory of Economic Growth (George Allen
  and Unwin, London).
                                22




Newbery, David M.G. and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 1981, The Theory of
 Conunodity Price Stabilization (Oxford University Press, Oxford).


Pazos, Felipe, 1967, "The Role of International Movements of
 Private Capital in Promoting Development", in J.H. Adler (ed.)
 Capital Movements and Economic Development (St Martins Press,
 New York).


Rostow, Walt W., 1956, "The Take—off Into Self—Sustained Growth",
  Economic Journal 66, 25—48.


Stiglitz, Joseph E., 1969, "Behavior Towards Risk with Many Commodities",
  Econometrica 37, 660—667.
