NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHY DON’T MORE PUERTO RICAN MEN WORK?
THE RICH UNCLE (SAM) HYPOTHESIS
María E. Enchautegui
Richard B. Freeman
Working Paper 11751
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11751
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2005

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by María Enchautegui and Richard B. Freeman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Why Don’t More Puerto Rican Men Work? The Rich Uncle (Sam) Hypothesis
María Enchautegui and Richard B. Freeman
NBER Working Paper No. 11751
November 2005
JEL No. J4, J6
ABSTRACT
Puerto Rico has an extraordinarily low employment rate for men. We document the low employment
rate using Census of Population and labor force survey data and offer “the rich uncle (Sam)
hypothesis” that the connection of the relatively poor economy of Puerto Rico to the wealthier US
has created conditions that generate low employment. In support of the hypothesis, we show: 1) that
GNP and GDP have diverged on the island, distorting the relationship between GDP and
employment, due potentially to federal tax benefits to companies operating in Puerto Rico; 2)
transfers to Puerto Rican families funded mainly by the federal government, which account for about
22 percent of personal income; 3) open borders to the U.S. that give men with high desire for work
incentive to migrate to the US, and potentially creates a lower bound to wages on the island; (4) a
wage structure with relatively higher earnings in low paid jobs; and (5) employment in the informal
sector, which is unmeasured in official statistics. We note that other regional economies with rich
“uncles”, such as East Germany with West Germany, Southern Italy with Northern Italy, have
comparable employment problems.
María E. Enchautegui
University of Puerto Rico
Department of Economics
PO Box 23345
San Juan, PR 00931
mariaenchautegui@aol.com
Richard B. Freeman
National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
and Harvard University
freeman@nber.org

I. Introduction

3

One of the biggest economic problems facing Puerto Rico is the low employment rate of
its adult population. In 2000, only 31 percent of the overall population was employed, giving the
island the lowest employment to population ratio in the Americas and Caribbean, if not in the
world. By way of comparison in 2000, 44% of the population in the Dominican Republic was
employed, 40% of the Mexican population was employed, and 50% of the US population was
employed. The low employment rate compromises the island’s development by diverting
resources that could go to investment to public assistance and services to the large non-working
population.
Low participation of women in the work force contributes to the overall low employment
rate, but it is the low employment rate for men that is “off the map” compared to other countries.
Moreover, the male participation rate has been falling while the female participation has been
increasing. Even in the late 1990s economic boom, when the Puerto Rican economy was growing
and the rate of unemployment fell, the labor force participation of men dropped by 3 percentage
points, while the labor participation rate of women increased.
The paper begins by laying out the dimensions of the male employment problem in Puerto
Rico, using both the Census and labor force surveys, which give somewhat different figures on
the participation rate of Puerto Ricans. Despite differences between the Census and labor force
survey, however, both data sets show that the employment rate among men on the island is
exceptionally low and declining. The remainder of the paper analyzes factors that could explain
the low employment of Puerto Rican men, such as the rising divergence between the national
product of the Island and the national income accruing to Puerto Ricans and the industrial
distribution of output and employment, in social security disability insurance and related welfare

4
payments, migration to the US, opportunities for working in the informal economy, and relatively
high wages in low skilled occupations. We organize our discussion around a new hypothesis,
which we call the “rich uncle (Sam) hypothesis”. A rich uncle is a wealthy relative who provides
resources to poorer relatives for consumption while employing other resources for production.
The rich uncle reduces incentives for relatives to supply labor and lowers the demand for their
services as well. We argue that the connection of the relatively poor economy of Puerto Rico to
the advanced and rich economy of the United States have created conditions that generate low
employment.
In support of this hypothesis, we present data that shows: 1) an increasing divergence
between GNP and GDP on the island, which has distorted the relationship between GDP and
employment, due potentially to federal tax benefits to companies operating in Puerto Rico; 2)
transfers accruing to Puerto Rican families funded mainly by the federal government, which
account for about 22 percent of personal income; 3) open borders to the U.S. give unemployed
individuals with high desire for work incentive to migrate readily to the US, and potentially
creates a lower bound to wages on the island; (4) a wage structure in which low paid jobs have
relatively higher earnings than in low income US states, possibly related to the federally imposed
minimum wage, free mobility of labor between U.S. and Puerto Rico and to high reservation
wages determined from the amount of transfers obtained in case of non-work; and (5)
employment in the informal sector, which is unmeasured in official statistics. We argue that the
“rich uncle” contributes to the sizeable informal sector because it allows workers who earn
means-tested government transfers to supplement those earnings by generating “unreported”
income; and by reducing labor supply pressures for lower wages in the formal sector.

1

From the vantage of the rich uncle hypothesis , Puerto Rico’s seemingly unique

5

experience is comparable to that of other economies connected to rich “uncles”, such as East
Germany after unification with West Germany, or of Southern Italy with Northern Italy. 2 These
areas have also experienced high unemployment while attached to a much richer economy. The
rich uncle analysis also links Puerto Rican economic problems to those faced by low income
indigenous groups in wealthier societies, such as American Indians, Maori in New Zealand,
aborigines in Australia. All of these groups also receive great social support from the wealthier
society, live in particular geographic areas, and have employment problems. The details vary, but
in all case attachment to the wealthier “uncle” produces economic problems ranging from low
employment and high dependency on social benefits to migration from the poorer area to
wealthier areas and potentially higher reservation wages than are consistent with full employment
for the lower income group, that resemble the employment problems in Puerto Rico.

II. The male labor participation and employment problem
Figure 1 displays the labor participation rates of men and women of working age in
Puerto Rico, the US, 19 Latin American or Caribbean countries, and 11 other countries from
around the world. The horizontal axis gives male participation rates, while the vertical axis gives
1

Our rich uncle analysis has links to Santiago’s (1992) study of Puerto Rico employment.
Spilimbergo (1999) has developed a general equilibrium model in which workers finance a
transfer to the unemployed in the South to limit migration, but this does not fit the Puerto Rican
case.
2

German experience is particularly insightful for analyzing how linking a poorer economy to a wealthier economy
can adversely affect employment in the former. This is because the timing of the “rich uncle” linkage can be dated
fairly precisely. Prior to unification, East Germany had essentially full employment. Following monetary union with
the West in June 1990 and adoption of West German wage levels and social benefits, the employment rate for east
Germans aged 18-54 years old fell from 89% to 73% in six years, and unemployment rose to as high as 20% (Hunt,
2000). Firms made different capital investments in the East than had made been before unification. West German
firms dominated the East’s economy, with few locating headquarters in the East, so that profits were “repatriated” to

female rates. Each point represents a country. Puerto Rico is at the far left of the figure, with a

6

male participation rate of 57.7 percent that is the lowest among the countries, and a female
participation rate of 35.0 that is low but comparable to that in some other countries, such as Italy,
Chile and Argentina.
Over time, moreover, the participation rate of men in Puerto Rico has fallen while female
participation has increased. Even in the late 1990s economic boom, when the Puerto Rican
economy was growing and the rate of unemployment fell, male labor force participation dropped
by 3 percentage points. Figure 2 displays the labor force participation rates for men and women
aged 16 and over in Puerto Rico from 1971 to 2003, using labor force household survey data. It
also gives comparable rates for men and women in the US. Over this period, the male
participation rate in Puerto Rico fell by 11.5 percentage points, from 70.8 to 59.3, with most of
the decline occurring between 1971 and the early 1980s. Figure 2 also shows that the US male
participation rate also fell, but by half as much as in Puerto Rico, by 5.7 percentage points, from
79.4 to 73.7. Over the same period, the labor participation rate of Puerto Rican women rose by 9
percentage points, while US females increased theirs by 13.4 percentage points. As a result, the
US-Puerto Rico gap in labor force participation increased twice as much for men (67 percent)
than for women (33 percent). These trends also meant that by 2003, the US female participation
rate stood close to the Puerto Rican male participation rate.
Data on participation by age group given in appendix table A1 show that participation
among Puerto Rican men fell more among older men than among younger men. Between 1970
and 1999, participation fell by 4.3 points for men aged 25-34, by 5.8 points among men aged 3544, by 11.1 points among men aged 45-54 and by a huge 24.3 points among men aged 55-64. As
the West.

in Puerto Rico, the decline of male participation in the US was larger at older age groups, but the

7

declines were considerably less for each group than the declines in Puerto Rico: a 2.4 point drop
for men aged 25-34, a 3.6 point drop for men aged 35-44, a 5.2 point drop for men aged 45-54
and 14.6 point drop among men aged 55-64.
To see how male participation and employment varies by education in Puerto Rico, we
examined data from the Census of Population of Puerto Rico. The Census shows a lower rate of
male employment in 2000 than does the household survey for the same year, for reasons that
statisticians have not resolved. The Census has the virtue of large sample sizes, which allows for
analysis of the rates for detailed groups, and is the natural comparison for data from the US
Census of Population. We use both the household survey and the Census data sets, to make sure
that any conclusions we reach are not dependent on the particular source of data.
Table 1 records participation and employment rates by education for Puerto Rican men
from the 2000 Puerto Rican Census, and for comparison, participation rates for US men from the
2000 US Census. At all education levels, the labor participation rate of men in Puerto Rico lies
below that of men in the US. The magnitude of the Puerto-Rican US difference is lowest among
men with a bachelor’s degree or higher education (a 15 point difference) and is largest among
those with a high school education but without a bachelor degree (20 points). The employment
population ratio shows a similar but more pronounced set of differences due to the higher rate of
unemployment in Puerto Rico than in the US. The Puerto Rico-US employment gap is highest
among high school graduates and lowest among bachelor degree holders. Given the sizeable
increase in educational attainment among Puerto Rican men since World War II, the pattern of
rising participation and employment rise with education should have raised male labor force

activity. Instead, participation and employment fell. This shows the unreliability of using

8

analyses based on cross-section patterns of labor participation to investigate patterns of change.
Another way of examining the low participation of Puerto Rican men in the work force is
to follow the labor force behavior of a given cohort as it ages over time. Since we do not have
longitudinal data that follows the same person over time, we use synthetic cohort data that
compare the behavior of increasingly older age groups over time– i.e. we use the participation of
persons aged 25-34 in 1970, aged 35-44 in 1980, 45-54 in 1990, and so on, to reflect the
participation of the 25-34 year old 1970 cohort.
The top panel of Table 2 records the trajectory of labor force participation by Puerto Rican
men in synthetic age cohorts that were 25-34 years old in 1970, 1980, and 1990 every ten years
from 1970 to 2000. The bottom panel gives the trajectory of labor participation for Puerto Rican
women. Column 1 records the participation of persons aged 25-34 in the appropriate year.
Column 2 gives the participation of persons in the same cohort aged 35-44 ten years later.
Column 3 gives the participation of persons in the same cohort aged 45-54 twenty years late.
Column 4 gives the participation of the cohort aged 25-34 in 1970 when it reached 55-64 years
old in 2000.
The labor force attachment of the male group aged 25-34 in 1970 fell by 12.9 percentage
points as they aged twenty years from 1970 to 1990 and then fell another 30.7 points in the next
decade. The 1980 cohort also shows a sharp drop in participation when it enters the 45-54 age
group. By contrast, the data for women show modest drops in participation as a cohort ages, with
no major decline in participation as the cohorts enter the 45-54 year old age bracket. Finally,
comparing the participation of younger persons, the youngest female cohort shows a rise in

participation of 7 points between 1990 and 2000. This contrasts with a decline in participation of

9

3.6 points from men in the same cohort from 1990 to 2000.
We consider next the annual work activity of employed men and the past work activity of
men out of the labor force. A low annual participation or employment rate could reflect low
levels of weeks worked by most of the population or it could reflect a sharp division between
persons who work full year and persons who work little if at all. The upper panel of Table 3 gives
the weeks and hours worked of employed men in Puerto Rico and in the US in 1999, as reported
in the 2000 Census of Population for the Island and for the US. The lower panel of the Table
gives the proportion of non-working men who worked in the past five years. The weeks worked
data show that relatively fewer men worked 50-52 weeks over the year in Puerto Rico than in the
US, with the bulk of the difference occurring among those reporting 48-49 weeks a year. The
difference is modest3 and possibly spuriously due to differences in how some workers report
weeks worked with vacations on the Island relative to the mainland. Additional tabulations of
weeks worked in Puerto Rico for earlier Censuses shows little change over time. The hours data
in the table also show only a modest difference between the proportion of Puerto Rican men
working 35 hours or more per week and the proportion of US men working 35 hours or more per
week.
The big difference in the table is in the proportion of non-working men who worked in the
past 5 years. Whereas just 35 percent of Puerto Rican men out of the labor force report having
worked in the past five years, 68 percent of men out of the labor force in the US reported having
worked in the last 5 years. This is not the result of any huge difference in the age distribution of

Puerto Rican and American men, but rather reflects the relatively permanent detachment of a

10

large number of Puerto Rican men from the work force – another measure of the employment
problem for men on the island.
Figure 3 shows the principal activities of persons in Puerto Rico who are out of the labor
force for men and women from the limited data on non-work activities in the Puerto Rican labor
force household survey for 1970 through 2002. The two principal non work activities are
working at home and reporting one self as disabled. A sizeable and rising proportion of men
report themselves as out of the labor force and disabled. Between 1990 and 2000, the proportion
of men reporting themselves as disabled jumped from 16.4% to 25.6%. By contrast, most women
out of the labor force are engaged in household work; less than 3% report themselves as disabled.
In sum, diverse measures of labor force activity from the Census and household surveys
show that Puerto Rican men had an exceptionally low involvement in the labor market at the turn
of the 21st century – the result of a downward trend in participation in the 1970s that produced a
permanent detachment of many men from the work force and a rising proportion who reported
themselves disabled in the 1990s. This pattern motivates our paper: Why don’t more Puerto Rican
men work?

III. The distorted relationship between aggregate demand and employment
Since the implementation of the 936 code of the Federal Internal Revenue system in
Puerto Rico in the late 1970s a divergence has grown between gross national production and gross
domestic production. The ratio of GNP to GDP in Puerto Rico fell from 0.93 in 1970 to 0.74 in
3

Since a 2 week difference in weeks worked over the year would be associated with almost a 4
percentage point difference in employment in a given period (= 2 weeks /52 weeks), the

4

1985 to 0.67 in 1997 , which means that GDP grew much more rapidly than did GNP. By

11

contrast, the ratio of GNP to GDP in the US and most other countries shows little or no trend over
this period. The reasons are two-fold. First, GDP includes profits of foreign companies,
particularly in the highly productive manufacturing sector, which then leave the island. The
second reason is that Puerto Rico'
s favorable tax structure creates incentives for companies to
shift profits to Puerto Rico, by under-reporting imported inputs such as R&D and thereby
overstating value-added (Bosworth and Collins, 2005). As a consequence, Puerto Rico seems to
have generated a type of growth based on production of highly productive manufacturing firms
which does not translate into large enough gains in employment.
To the extent that GDP does not accurately measure production on the island, employment
should be more closely related to the slower growing GNP than to the faster growing GDP. To
assess this possibility, we regressed ln employment separately on ln real GNP and ln real GDP
(allowing for first order serial correlation) and also regressed the first difference of ln
employment on the first difference of the ln GNP and ln GDP. In addition, we also regressed the
first difference in the absolute change in employment on the first difference in the absolute
change in GDP. As our counterfactual or norm for assessing the coefficients, we estimated the
same regressions for the US over the same period.
Table 4 summarizes the results of these regressions, for Puerto Rico and the US. Line 1
shows that ln GNP has a higher estimated impact on ln employment than does ln GDP for Puerto
Rico in all specifications. By contrast, line 2 shows no such difference in regression coefficients
of ln employment on ln GDP and ln GNP in the U.S. The ln forms show that the impact of GNP
on employment is modestly larger for Puerto Rico than for U.S., which presumably reflects the
difference in weeks worked is associated with some of the difference in employment rates.

lower productivity on the island, though the absolute form shows a higher impact of changes in

12

output on changes in employment for Puerto Rico in the GNP analysis but a lower impact in the
GDP analysis.
These estimates and the slower growth of GNP per capita than GDP per capita indicate
that aggregate economic growth in Puerto Rico was less favorable to employment than first
appears to be the case because it took the form of GDP growth that is not part of GNP. The
divergence between GNP and GDP is largely due to the 936 code companies operating in Puerto
Rico. This tax benefit given by the federal government to Puerto Rico to attract foreign capital
has produced a highly capital intensive and nominally highly productive manufacturing sector, in
which the extra GDP has a smaller impact on employment than would be the case if
manufacturing firms made a different set of investments, not distorted by the tax breaks.
Table 5 shows the extent to which the pattern of GDP and employment in Puerto Rico
may have been distorted by the close relation to the US and the tax incentives given to investing
in capital-intensive activities. In 2003, 42.1% of Puerto Rican GDP was in the manufacturing
whereas just 11% of Puerto Rican employment was in manufacturing. The ratio of the share of
output to the share of employment in manufacturing was nearly 4 to 1. This contrasts with a ratio
of the share of output to the share of employment in manufacturing in the US of about 1.1 to 1.5
Firms invest in capital-intensive manufacturing and declare large profits from those activities.
Within manufacturing, one-quarter of Puerto Rican employment is in the highly capital-intensive
chemicals sector, whereas just 5% of US manufacturing employment is in chemicals.

4

Data downloaded from Penn World Tables, http://pwt.econ.upenn.edu/php_site/pwt_index.php

5

US Council of Economic Advisors, Economic Report of the President, 2005
http://www.gpoaccess.gov/eop/download.html

IV. Transfer programs

13

Puerto Rico benefits from transfer programs from the US. In 2003, island residents
received $14.3 billion in transfers, according to the Economic Report to the Governor of Puerto
Rico, with most of these transfers coming from the federal government. By contrast, residents
paid out $4.4 billion, largely as employee contribution to social security and contribution to
Medicare.6 The $9.9 billion net transfer was 22 percent of personal income and 26 percent of net
income on the island. This has to be one of the greatest proportionate transfer payments from one
economy to another, with potentially large impacts on labor supply.
Disability Insurance: The major federally funded transfer program in Puerto Rico is Old
Age, Disability and Survivors Insurance (OASDI). A larger proportion of OASDI spending in
Puerto Rico consists of disability payments than in the US. Administrative data from the Social
Security Administration shows that 19% of Puerto Rican Social Security beneficiaries were on
disability payments, in comparison to 12% of U.S. social security beneficiaries.7
Census data also provides information about disability. In 2000, 17% of the Puerto Rican
male population aged 18-64 in Puerto Rico said that they had an employment disability, defined
as a disability ”that affects their ability to work at a job or business” compared to 13% in the US
(Table 6). 8 The table shows that a much smaller proportion of persons who report a work
disability are employed in Puerto Rico than are employed in the US. In 2000 38% of men with a
work disability in Puerto Rico were working. By contrast, 63 percent of US men with some work

6

These numbers are from the Economic Report of the Governor 2003. They differ from those
reported by the US Social Security Administration as given in US Statistical Abstract, 2004.
The Statistical Abstract reports 10.4 billion in transfers and residents paid out $2.9 billion, giving
a $7.3 billion net transfer.
7
On the mainland, West Virginia is the outlier with 17 percent
8
Mississippi had the 2nd highest percentage with an employment disability in the US at 14.4%.

14
disability were working. The employment ratio in Puerto Rico relative to the employment ratio in
the US among those with a work disability is 0.60 (38/63), which is slightly lower than the ratio
of the overall male employment rate in Puerto to the male employment rate in the US of 0.62
(47/67). Among men without a high school diploma the differences between Puerto Rico and the
US are even larger: only 26 percent of men in Puerto Rico with a work disability are employed,
while 52 percent of those men in the U.S. are employed.
Using the Census data, we can infer whether or not men younger than 65 years of age
receive social security disability insurance from whether or not they receive social security.
Almost one in every ten adult men in Puerto Rico under the age of 65 receive social security
income. The comparable figure for US is one in every twenty. Social security income is quite
common among men 46 to 64, of which 22 percent receive this type of income. The Census data
in Table 6 show that a much larger proportion of Puerto Rican men aged 18 to 64 are on social
security disability insurance than are US men aged 18-64 – 9.8% vs 4.4%. The absolute
difference in the rates reporting that they are on social security disability is larger for older than
for younger workers and larger for the less educated workers, while the relative difference varies
in a less clear pattern.
Across time, however, the Census data show a small decrease for the rate of recipiency in
Puerto Rico and a small increase for the US. The implication is that while differences between
Puerto Rico and the US in receipt of disability insurance contribute to differences in employment
rates, they cannot account for trends or differences in trends between Puerto Rico and the US.
On the other hand, the Puerto Rican labor force survey, which allows for a self-reported category
of “disabled” in labor force status, shows a steady rise in the proportion of men reporting that they
are disabled, reaching 25 percent in 2000.

Finally, administrative data also show that the ratio of disabled workers to the overall

15

workforce is higher in Puerto Rico than in the U.S. In 2002, 131,340 persons claimed disability
insurance in Puerto Rico according to administrative data, which compared to 1.157 million
employees, giving a ratio of disabled workers to employees of 0.11 and ratio of disability
insurance recipients to the population of working age of 0.06. By contrast, the comparable ratios
for U.S. are .04 and .03, respectively.9
The potential for disability insurance to discourage work in Puerto Rico is enormous,
considering the low earnings of Puerto Rican workers and the high levels of unemployment. In
2002 support for disabled workers in Puerto Rico was $713 per month – 80% of the $891 monthly
support for disabled workers in the US. This compares to retirement benefits that are 66% those
in the US and wages that are also about 2/3rds those in the US. Given monthly earnings of male
workers in Puerto Rico of $1,032 as reported by the Department of Labor, the ratio of disability
income to wages is 69 percent. By contrast, the ratio of disability income to wages is about 56
percent in the United States, where monthly earnings of workers are on the order of $1,600.
Hence availability of disability income creates stronger incentives not to work in Puerto Rico than
in the U.S. Given that studies of the effect of disability insurance for the US indicate that it
affected male labor force behavior (Autor and Duggan, 2003), it is likely to have done the same in
Puerto Rico.10 High unemployment levels may also be pushing Puerto Rican men into claiming
disability insurance, since studies have pointed that disability insurance participation responds to
aggregate demand shocks (Autor and Duggan, 2003).

9

The US had 5.4 million workers with disability insurance in a 137 million person work force.
There remain debates over the magnitude of the effect and over how men who said they were
disabled might have behaved absent disability insurance (Bound and Weidmann, 1992,
Haveman, DeJong and Wolfe, 1991)
10

16
In sum, these figures suggest that social security disability insurance may be encouraging
Puerto Rican men, particularly those with low levels of education, to drop from the labor force.
Nutritional Assistance Program: Another component of federal transfers to Puerto
Rico is the Nutritional Assistance Program (NAP), which is the most widespread government
assistance program on the Island. This program was initially created as a Food Stamp Program,
but was cashed-out in 1985, so that benefits were given electronically, with 75 percent nominally
allocated to food and 25 percent to cash. The Puerto Rican NAP benefits differ from the US Food
Stamp Program. NAP has high implicit tax rates and covers a huge proportion of the work force,
in contrast to the low implicit marginal tax rates on the US Food Stamp program and its limited
coverage of the population. NAP, rather than Temporary Assistance for Needy Families, is the
main government assistance program in Puerto Rico. The Department of the Family reports about
half a million “units” on NAP. While NAP units are not exactly families as measured by the
Census, the half a million compares to approximately 1 million families in the 2000 Census,
which suggests that on the order of half of the families receive government assistance. A family
of four with no income may receive about $300.00 monthly on NAP.
Although single mothers are the most likely demographic group to be on assistance
because they are poorer, the NAP covers married couples as well. We have not estimated the
effect of this program on the low labor participation rate of Puerto Rican men, but the sheer
volume of participation in this program suggests that negative labor supply effects on men are
present. Taken together, the social security disability program and the NAP program combined
could have large effects on male employment. However, there are no data rich enough in Puerto
Rico to sort out these effects. The only household data collected regularly are the labor force
surveys which do not have questions on annual income and nor its sources. Decennial Census

data are also limited in the information they contain as to address these issues rigorously. Still,

17

we can draw some inferences about the potential effect of non-work income on labor supply from
data on the work patterns of married couples. If we assume that any couple in which neither the
husband nor wife work must be earning income from some other source, of which transfer
payments are a likely part, particularly from the NAP program, the proportion of families that are
without work give some notion of the proportion of husbands for whom the non-work income
reduces the pressure to obtain a job.
Work Patterns of Married Couples
To determine the work patterns of married couples, we matched wife and husband records
for persons aged 18-64 from the 2000 Puerto Rican Census and tabulated the employment status
of both spouses. Table 7 shows the proportion of couples that fall within four work arrangement:
husband jobless; wife jobless; husband employed, wife jobless; husband jobless, wife employed;
and both husband and wife employed. In 36 percent of the cases both the wife and husband were
without work. This is the largest group in the table, giving Puerto Rico an extraordinarily high
proportion of “jobless families” in an economy (Gregg and Wadsworth, 2001). In 31% of the
cases, the husband works and the wife does not; in 8% of the cases the wife works and the
husband does not work. In just 25% of the cases both spouses work.11
While it is not possible given the data at hand to estimate how many of the husbands in the
“jobless families” are not working because their family can obtain income from transfers, the
huge proportion of couples falling into that category suggest that effects of transfers on male
employment could be quite large. The families with no earners are making money in some
11

Analyzing the pattern in table 7 further, we estimated a logit model where the dependent variable took the value of
1 of the husband is employed and 0 otherwise, with the education and age of the husband, and whether or not the wife
was employed as right hand side variable. The regression shows that husbands with a non-employed wife had a 63%

18
fashion. With about half the families obtaining NAP support and many men obtaining disability
insurance, we would expect that many of the 40% of jobless families would be recipients of either
or both of these forms of income, depressing their incentive to work, at least in the formal sector.

V. Migration: selectivity and wage
Puerto Ricans are US citizens with the right to a US passport and the freedom to travel and
reside on the mainland at their discretion. For half a century, tens of thousands of Puerto Ricans
have migrated to the US each year, and many return to the Island. The legal right to move back
and forth between the US and Puerto Rico distinguishes Puerto Ricans from persons in other
developing economies with close ties to the US, such as Mexico or the Dominican Republic. It
leads to a potentially different pattern of migration with some workers going back and forth
within relatively short time periods.12 In 2000 37 percent of all persons aged 18 and over and
born in Puerto Rico were living on the mainland (see column 1 of Table 7).
Migration can affect the employment-population and labor participation ratios on Puerto
Rico in three ways. First, if unemployed persons leave the island to seek work in the US, it would
reduce the number of unemployed persons and raise the employment rate by reducing the number
of persons of working age. Thus, migration can serve as a way to export the unemployed. In fact,
time series data shows a positive correlation between the rate of unemployment and net migration
(Pol, 2004a). But when unemployed persons leave the island, their movement lowers the labor
participation rate. This is because it reduces the number of persons in the labor force by

lower likelihood of employment than a husband with an employed wife.
12
Godoy, et al (2001) report that 13.5% of persons in Puerto Rico in 1990 had lived on the mainland at various
times in the preceding decade.

proportionately more than it reduces the population of working age.

13

Second, migration could

19

reduce the labor participation rate through selective migration if persons with strong attachment to
the labor market migrated to the US. The migration of those who want to work but do not have
jobs would lower the labor force proportionately more than it would lower the population.
Consistent with this, Enchautegui (2005a) found that the labor force participation rates of recent
migrants and prior migrants to the US are higher than those of persons who remain on the island,
even within the same age and educational groups. Third, migration could affect employment and
participation indirectly by raising reservation wages of persons on the Island. Since migration
gives Puerto Ricans access to higher wage US jobs, some persons might set their reservation
wages on the basis of what they could get working in the US, producing a lower bound on wages
that could be too high to accommodate excess labor. This could reduce the labor participation rate
if persons with high reservation wages dropped out of the work force. For migration to help
explain the low rate of employment, the second and third factors must dominate. But even if
migration is only an outlet for the unemployed, it would contribute to the low participation rate.
We use Census data on the employment of Puerto Rican born men residing in Puerto Rico
and residing as migrants to the US to assess the maximum contribution that selective migration
could make to the low employment rate in Puerto Rico. We make the strong assumption that
migrants to the US have higher rates of employment than comparable persons in Puerto Rico
solely because the migrants have positively selected themselves according to their desire for or
ability to get a job and that if migrants returned to Puerto Rico, they would obtain work at the
same rate as in the US. By attributing all of the difference in employment rates to selective
13

A numeric example demonstrates this. Assume 10 people of working age, 5 in the labor force, of whom 2 are
unemployed. The migration of one unemployed worker reduces the working age population to 9 persons and the
labor force to 4 persons. The labor participation rate falls from 5/10 to 4/9 while the employment rate rises from 3/10

20
migration, we obtain the maximum possible contribution that selective migration could make to
the low level of employment on the island.
Table 8 shows the result of our calculation for men aged 16 and over. Line 1 gives the
proportion of men aged 16 and above born in Puerto Rico who are living in the US, for all men
and for men by education group. The proportion living in the US is much higher for persons with
less education than it is for those with greater education – a pattern of migration that has long
characterized the Island. Lines 2 and 3 record the employment rates for men living in Puerto Rico
and for men who have migrated to the US, while line 4 records the difference in the two rates. For
all men, 46% of those living in Puerto Rico were employed whereas 55% of those migrating to
the US were employed – a 9 point differential. Within educational groups, the difference in
employment rates is even greater. Line 5 gives our counterfactual estimate of what the male
employment rate on the Island would be if all migrants returned to Puerto Rico and had the same
employment rate in the US. If the 37% living in the US moved back to Puerto Rico and were
employed at the 55% rate of employment in the US, the rate of employment would have risen to
49% – a three point increase over the 46% rate for Island residents. Within the four education
groups, the increase in the rate of employment if immigrants returned to the Island but had the
same employment rate as in the US ranges from 3 to 5 percentage points. This suggests that
selective migration is a modest factor in the low employment rate on the Island. If migration is a
major contributor to the low employment rate, it must also be operating by placing a lower bound
on the structure of wages.

VI. The Structure of Wages
to 3/9.

21
From the perspective of labor demand analysis, low employment suggests an imbalance in
the level and pattern of wages. Are wages too high relative to the level of economic development
of Puerto Rico? Is the structure of wages by skill inconsistent with the supply of skills? If so,
part of the Island’s employment problem could be associated with wage levels and patterns
inconsistent with the levels necessary to clear the labor market.
Table 9 compares earnings in Puerto Rico with earnings in the US and in the state with the
lowest per capita income, Mississippi. The upper panel of the table records data on earnings in
Puerto Rico from establishment surveys for 2003. It shows that in manufacturing the hourly pay
or labor costs (which includes fringe benefits) for production workers is about 2/3rds of the
hourly pay/labor costs in the US. Compared with Mississippi, Puerto Rican production workers
in manufacturing earn 81%-85% of the hourly pay or labor costs of production workers in
manufacturing. Since living expenses are comparable between the island and the mainland, these
figures are indicative of differences in real earnings.14
The data for the hourly earnings of all workers show a bigger gap between Puerto Rico
and the US and Mississippi. Puerto Ricans earn 59% of the earnings of workers on the mainland
and 74% to 79% the earnings of workers in Mississippi, depending on whether earnings are given
as medians or means. The larger gap in earnings among all workers than among manufacturing
workers reflects that fact that the manufacturing sector in Puerto Rico diverges more from the rest
of the economy than does the manufacturing sector in the US, consistent with the huge
productivity difference on the Island between manufacturing and the rest of the economy shown
in Table 5.

14

Bosworth and Collins (2005) show that Puerto Rico cost of living is similar to that of the District of Columbia.

The lower panel of Table 9 gives annual earnings by gender and years of schooling for

22

men and women separately from the 2000 Census of Population for the US and the 2000 Census
of Population for Puerto Rico. They show that men’s annual earnings in Puerto are 52% of male
annual earnings in the US. This ratio is lower than in hourly pay because workers in Puerto Rico
work fewer weeks and less hours than those on the mainland. Compared to men in Mississippi,
those in Puerto Rico earn 65% as much. Women’s annual earnings in Puerto Rico are closer to
those of women in the US. For all women annual earnings in Puerto Rico are 64% those in the
US and are 82% those in Mississippi. The data by education show that compared to the US
relative earnings for both and women on the Island are highest among the most educated and
among the least educated. Compared to earnings in Mississippi, the relative earnings of men in
the Island are highest for the most educated. For women the relative earnings are highest for the
least educated.
The normal pattern in earnings differences among countries with different levels of
income is that earnings in a lower income economy are closer to earnings in a higher income
economy among the most educated or skilled. The reason is that lower income economies have
fewer highly skilled workers than advanced economies and thus pay relatively high wages in the
top occupations (Freeman and Oostendorp, 2002). However, in three of the four comparisons in
Table 9, the highest relative earnings are for less educated workers.
Relative Earnings by Occupation: To see whether the pattern of relatively high
earnings among low paid workers holds across occupations, we compare next earnings by
occupation in Puerto Rico and in Mississippi, our low income mainland comparison area, from

the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ establishment-based Occupational Employment Survey (OES).

23

15

This survey obtains earnings and employment data at the three digit occupation level for detailed
geographic areas of the US and outlying areas. Since the data come from establishment records,
they offer a more accurate measure of rates of pay than self reported earnings in the decennial
Census. The OES contains data on the relative earnings of persons in Puerto Rico in 538 detailed
occupations from the May 2003 survey and in 643 detailed occupations from the comparison
state, Mississippi. Do these data show high relative pay for Puerto Ricans with limited skills?16
Table 10 summarizes the OES data for a selection of high wage, middle wage, and low
wage occupations. It shows that earnings in Puerto Rico are higher than in Mississippi in the
selected occupations at the top of the earnings distribution; are markedly lower for the
occupations in the middle of the distribution; but are relatively close for occupations with low
earnings. The wages for maids and housekeeping cleaners are higher in Puerto Rico than in
Mississippi, possibly reflecting the Island’s comparative advantage in tourism and demand for
these workers.
To see if the pattern of relatively high wages at both the top and bottom of the earnings
distribution holds over the entire spectrum of occupations, we performed two additional
calculations. First, we ranked earnings in all of the occupations reported for Puerto Rico and in
all the occupations reported in Mississippi. We divided the distribution of earnings by decile and
calculated the average earnings for occupations in each decile of the Puerto Rican distribution,
and for occupations in each decile of the Mississippi distribution. For example, for occupations in
15

The OES survey samples approximately 400,000 establishments each year and, over a 3-year
period, contacts approximately 1.2 million establishments. It provides wage and employment
estimates for detailed geographic areas, including Puerto Rico and its main metropolitan areas.
See www.bls.gov/oes/current/oessrcst.htm

the lowest 10% of earnings in Puerto Rico, we averaged the earnings in that decile; while for

24

occupations in the 2nd lowest decile, we averaged the earnings in that decile, and so forth. We
made the same calculations for the occupations in Mississippi, ranked by the Mississippi
distribution. This contrast uses the data on all occupations in both areas and places occupations in
its area-specific distribution. Dividing the average earnings in each decile in Puerto Rico by the
average earnings in each decile in Mississippi, we estimated the pattern of earnings differences
from low wage to high wage occupations. The line labeled all occupations in figure 4 gives the
results of these calculations. It shows that the ratio of wages among occupations by decile fits a
U-shaped curve: the PR/Mississippi wage rate is high for low wage occupations, falls for middle
wage occupations, and then rises for high wage occupations.
Second, we examined the distribution of earnings in the 513 occupations that were the
same in both locations. This eliminates occupations found in one area but not in the other. The
correlation coefficient between the wages by occupation in this case was 0.82, indicating some
difference in the ranking of occupations by wages in Puerto Rico and Mississippi. We computed
the mean wage of the occupations in each decile for Puerto Rico and Mississippi taken separately
and took the ratio of those wages as our measure of the pattern of earnings differences from low
wage to high wage occupations. The line labeled same occupations in figure 4 gives the results of
these calculations. Again, we obtain a U-shaped curve that shows that the PR/Mississippi wage
rate is high for low wage occupations, falls for middle wage occupations, and then rises for high
wage occupations.
As a final check on this pattern, we categorized the 513 occupations for which we had
earnings in both localities by the average of their ranking in the Puerto Rican and Mississippi
16

http://www.ctdataengine.com/uswages/index0008.html

17

earnings distributions ; computed the decile in which each occupation fell by the average rank

25

and regressed the ln of the ratio of earning in Puerto Rico to those in Mississippi on ten dummy
variables for the decile in which the occupation fit. Table 11 gives our regression results. Again,
we obtain the inverse-U relation. Puerto Rican wages were 0.15 ln points below wages in
Mississippi for occupations in the lowest decile, fell to 0.31 ln points below wages in Mississippi
in the fifth decile and then rose to 0.15 ln point below wages in Mississippi in the highest decile.
Given that Puerto Rico has relatively high wages at the bottom of the earnings distribution
and high joblessness, the natural question to ask is why the high joblessness on Puerto Rico has
not driven wages down at the bottom of the wage distribution to create more jobs. The rich uncle
hypothesis directs attention at three possible answers.
On the demand side, it is possible that Puerto Rico’s adoption of US level minimum
wages limited downward wage adjustments (Castillo-Freeman and Freeman, 1992). Since 1977,
employers in Puerto Rico covered by the Federal Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) are subject to
the federal minimum while those not covered by the Act must pay at least 70 percent of the
Federal minimum wage or the applicable mandatory decree rate set by the Department of Labor,
whichever is higher. Since Puerto Rico has lower productivity and average wages than the US,
this means that the minimum affects a larger proportion of the work force than in the US.
However, Puerto Rican minimum wage law allows the Secretary of Labor and Human Resources
to authorize a lower rate to any employer who can show that implementation of the 70 percent
rate would substantially curtail employment in that business. Debate over the impact of the
minimum wage law on the island on employment has focused on the period when the island

17

That is if an occupation was ranked 6th in Puerto Rico and 14th in Mississippi, we gave it an
average rank of 10.

adopted the federal minimum (Krueger, 1995). As the federal minimum rate was constant at

26

$5.15 per hour from 1997 through 2004, it would bound annual earnings of full-time workers on
the Island at about $10,700 per year. This level is below the earnings for low wage occupations
shown in table 10 and indeed falls below the mean earnings in the lowest decile of the Puerto
Rican earnings distribution: $13,399 for the sample of 538 occupations. The minimum wage may
affect the lower part of the wage distribution but given this large gap we suspect that other factors
are more important.
A second possible reason for the relatively high level of wages for low-paying occupations
in Puerto Rico is that income transfers have created a reservation wage considerably above the
minimum and above the full employment wage rates. Our survey of men in communities along
El Caño Martín Peña in San Juan, to be described shortly, asked them for their reservation wage.
The reservation wage of the non-employed men was 7 dollars per hour. Virtually no one said they
would take a job for less than 7 dollars per hour. Seven dollars per hour would produce a lower
bound on earnings for men around $14,500, consistent with earnings at the bottom of the
occupational wage structure and considerably above the minimum wage.
The third possible reason for a high reservation wage on the Island is that potential
migration to the US creates a floor for wages above the minimum. Given an annualized cost of
mobility to the mainland of C and mainland earnings of W, annual earnings on the Island could be
bounded by W-C, with workers migrating when unemployment develops at the wage. Arguably,
if migrants returned to Puerto Rico, they would increase the labor supply and drive down the
wage, which would raise employment. However, this would not necessarily raise the rate of
employment, which would change depending on how much wages fell and the elasticity of
demand to labor. The rich uncle impact of migration on the wage structure reverses the Harris-

Todaro migration mechanism in which people from rural areas migrate to urban areas with

27

institutionally determined wages until urban unemployment equates the expected earnings in the
two areas. In our model the potential of migration to the higher wage mainland sets a lower
bound on wages in Puerto Rico, which depresses employment there. What makes the lower
employment tolerable is the existence of diverse social benefits for persons on the island, paid by
the mainland, the option to migrate to the US to earn higher wages, and the potential to make
money outside of the formal sector.

VII. The role of the informal economy
There is a widespread belief that many jobless Puerto Rican men work in the informal
sector, which standard labor force surveys fail to measure. Employment in the informal sector
grew in many Latin American countries in the 1980s and 1990s – part and parcel of poor
economic growth and the de-industrialization of Latin American economies, which has made
informalization of work a major issue in understanding the economic circumstances of workers in
those economies. In Puerto Rico, the informal labor market could provide job opportunities for
men who cannot find work in the formal labor market while allowing them to receive government
benefits like NAP, disability insurance, which are work- tested or means-tested, that they would
lose if they took formal sector jobs. The low measured employment of Puerto Rican men would
be a measurement problem due to the failure of official statistics to capture work in this sector.
For the informal sector to explain the low level of labor participation in Puerto Rico, it
must be a large share of the economy. Some studies estimate that it accounts for upwards of 23
percent of the GDP of Puerto Rico (Pol, 2004b; Estudios Técnicos, 2004). For the informal sector

28
to explain the declining participation and employment population rate in Puerto Rico, however, it
would have to have grown since the 1970s, or which the evidence is not as clear.
Standard labor force data provide indirect evidence on the possible size and development
of informal sector work. One natural indicator of the informal sector is the proportion of workers
who are self-employed. Since 1980 the proportion self-employed reported by the Department of
Labor in Puerto Rico has fluctuated between 11 and 12 percent or about 5 points above the 6-7
percent self-employed in the US. Since the self-employed are counted as workers, these figures
do not measure non-labor force participants who work in the informal sector. Still, if many
workers worked in the informal sector, one would expect some to report that they are selfemployed, so that a high level of self-employment is consistent with a large number working in
the informal sector. The constancy of the self-employment rate in Puerto Rico suggests that the
proportion of men in the informal economy has not grown in comparison to 20 years ago.
Another indicator of the potential level and growth of the informal sector is the proportion
of men who are out of the labor force, not disabled, not going to school, and not doing
housework. These men may be idle, but they could just as readily be informal sector workers
since they have no other reported activity and have no reported physical or other impediments to
work. Figure 5 shows that the proportion of men in this category declined from 1970 to 2000.
Based on self-employment rates and the proportion of non-working men who are idle, it
does not seem that the informal sector has grown significantly in the last two decades, although it
still may be a significant constant in the Puerto Rican labor market structure and a sector that
needs close examination.
A pilot survey: Despite the appeal of the informal sector hypothesis as a contributor to the
low participation rate of Puerto Rican men, there has been no direct study of workers involved in

29
the sector. To fill this gap, we undertook a pilot survey in summer 2004 to find out what men in
communities with potentially low employment were doing. We randomly selected men in
households from low-to-medium income communities along El Caño Martín Peña in the capital
city of San Juan. The Department of Transportation and Public Works was undertaking a massive
infrastructure project in the area related to the cleaning of the water route of el Caño and had
commissioned a Census of the eight communities that composed the Caño. This Census provided
us with a sampling frame to draw participants for the survey. We selected households in three
communities: Marina, Bella Vista Hato Rey and Bella Vista Santurce, which were in the middle
of income distribution for the eight communities. We drew samples from households containing
men aged 18 to 64, not attending school. We interviewed 133 men. While our sample has some
drawback for analyzing the informal sector,18 it offers new insight into informal sector work on
the Island and illuminates how informal sector workers report that work on the household survey.
The first question we asked on our survey was the question about employment that the
Labor Department in Puerto Rico uses in its monthly survey: “Can you tell me what were you
doing last week?”19. The possible answers are: (1) Working, (2) Looking for work; (3) With
employment but not at work; (4) Domestic chores; (5) Going to school: (6) Disabled; (7) Retired;
(8) Other. These responses are problematic for describing workers with contingent informal labor
market arrangements. Men in sporadic or in contingent employment of short duration may not
see themselves as working and not report that activity. To capture these types of work activities,
18

One drawback is that employment opportunities in the metro area of San Juan tend to be better than elsewhere on
the Island, which would lead to an underestimate of Island-wide informal work. Another drawback is that the area has
a sizable number of foreign-born men, mainly Dominican, whose behavior may differ from that of the Puerto Rican
born.
19

The US Current Population Survey and Census ask the question “did this person do any work
for pay last week”. This question is more specific since any work no matter how small for which

30
we showed men a flash card that asked “Which of the following best describes your employment
situation?” with answers such as: occasional or casual worker without a fixed job, occasional
worker, contract worker, worker on call, worker on daily contract, worker through the duration of
project, and handyman. These are the type of non-traditional employment situations associated
with the informal labor market and likely to be missed in standard surveys. We classified men
who answered yes to any of these employment situations as non-traditional workers.
Table 12 summarizes the results to the standard DOL question and to our question that
probed about informal sector work in terms of the number of people whose responses put them
into particular categories and the proportion of men with specified characteristics who fit into
those groups. Lines 1 to 3 show the work activity on the basis of the household survey question:
94 men or 71% of the sample reported that they worked; 11 or 10.5% of those in the labor force
reported that they were seeking work; while 105 or 79% of the sample reported being in the labor
force. Lines 4-9 give the results from our non-traditional work question. Line 4 shows that the
question identified 29 workers in non-traditional employment situations – 22% of the sample.
Most of these men reported activities in construction, with the most common type of work being
“chivero” (a person that get occasional jobs on construction or other related tasks, and works for
the duration of the project).20 Line 5 shows that the household survey question would have
classified 15 of those workers (11% of the sample) as not working, which implies that the
household survey would have missed the work activity of approximately half of those in informal
sector work. Line 6 shows that 5 men who reported that they were doing non-traditional work had

pay was received is expected to be reported, though people may still interpret it to refer to formal
jobs.
20
The amount of work reported varied from 6 to 30 hours weekly. Men in these activities
reported incomes of 550 dollars monthly.

responded that they were neither employed nor looking for work on the household survey

31

question – 4% of the sample. . Counting the 15 men engaged in some kind of informal work but
who said they were not employed on the household survey question from lin5 to the employed,
we obtain an estimated employment in the sample of 109 or 82% (line 7). Adding those 15 men
in informal work to the number counted in the labor force (lines 1 and 2) gives a total in the labor
force, including nontraditional workers, of 110 – or 83% of the sample (line 8).
If these magnitudes are reasonably correct, how much of low male employment and
participation might be due to informal sector work? Our survey has one problem in answering
this question. The problem is that the employment level in the survey was higher than on the
household survey and on the Census of Population, which makes it hard to generalize magnitudes.
Still, the estimated proportion working in our sample increased from 71 percent under the
traditional question to 82 percent under the wider definition of working – an 11 point or 15%
increase (line 7).21 If we assume that this 15% greater employment holds in comparisons with the
lower reported rate of employment in the household and Census, our calculations suggest that a
better counting of informal workers would increase the employment rate for men aged 18-64
not attending school on the household survey from 48% to55 %.
But this adjustment would not produce as large an effect on the labor participation rate
found in both the Census and household survey. The reason is that most of the men in nontraditional employment situations reported themselves as looking for work on the household
survey question. Line 8 shows that only 5 of the 29 men working in non-traditional employment
in our survey said that they were neither working nor looking on the household survey question.

21

The 71 percent rate of employment using the DOL-question exceeds the 55 percent labor
participation rate for Puerto Rican in the household survey!

32
They are just 4% of the total sample and would raise the labor force participation rate to 83% or
by 5%. If this increase is applied to the overall male population 18-64 years old not attending
school, it would raise the male labor force rate from 58% in the household survey to 61%.
In sum, our pilot survey suggests that the official DOL question understates employment
considerably but understates labor force participation only modestly. Since, as noted, our survey
covered a group of men that had a relatively high rate of employment and participation even by
the DOL question, it is possible that the understatement, particularly of labor participation, may
be larger in a more representative sample. Taking our results as valid, informal sector work helps
explain a significant part of the low employment rate of Puerto Rican men but can explain only 3
or so percentage points of their low participation rate.

VIII. Conclusion and implications
Our analysis shows that a variety of factors contributed to the low employment rate of
Puerto Rican men: the pattern of economic growth, with GNP increasing much less rapidly than
GDP, and GDP heavily weighted to capital intensive manufacturing; the emigration of men with
potentially high attachment to the work force to the US; the attractiveness of disability insurance
and NAP transfers funded in large part by the US; relatively high wages in low paid occupations;
opportunity to work in the informal sector. The common thread behind all these separate factors
which we have termed the “rich uncle” hypothesis: that the primary reason for the low
employment is that Puerto Rico’s unique relationship with the United States has produced an
economic environment which discourages work on both the supply and demand sides of the
market. The rich uncle hypothesis suggests that the close tie between the island and the mainland
has been a double-edged relation, offering Puerto Ricans many of the benefits of living in a highly

advanced economy but also contributing to the employment problem. There are advantages to

33

having a rich uncle but as anyone with rich relatives knows, it is a mixed blessing.
The analysis points to the difficulties facing Puerto Rico in solving the employment
problem of its male population. Factors that affect employment such as the level of benefits of
social security and eligibility into this program, the minimum wage, federal tax incentives, the
amount of transfer to the poor, and border control are not controlled by Puerto Rico but by the
federal government. Puerto Rico needs to work with the US government to redesign these
programs, which help reduce poverty on the Island, to be more work-friendly. Government
transfers to the poor need to reward work effort in various ways. The Nutritional Assistance
Program could adopt work incentives and time limits similar to those mandated by the US 1996
welfare reform, the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act. Puerto
Rico could seek ways to make support of low income persons more compatible with employment,
for instance through Earned Income Tax Credit type arrangements or tax credits to firms on the
basis of the number of jobs created. Although the 936 federal tax benefits program has ended,
Puerto Rico should seek ways to encourage the high-technology industries that it engendered to
expand employment in the future, and to shift some of their purchases of intermediate services
and goods to the Island. For instance, pharmaceutical companies could set up distribution centers
and costumer service centers in Puerto Rico and use Puerto Rican agencies for some of their
marketing campaigns. Non-governmental organizations could try to combine their services to the
low income population with employment. Work activities common to the informal labor market
such as construction and reparation work could be organized through cooperatives of community
workers or through community organizations, bringing these workers out of the shadows of
informality. Since much of the low participation of men occurs among older men, perhaps a shift

in compensation toward deferred benefits such as pensions or health insurance could reduce the

34

rate of withdrawal from the work force. The goal should be to link benefits to work rather than to
non-work, to induce adult men from out of the work force or informal work into regular jobs, and
raise Puerto Rico from its current position at the bottom of country or area tables of male
employment and labor participation rates.

Bibliography

35

Autor, David H, and Mark G. Duggan. 2003. “The Rise in Disability Rolls and the Decline in
Unemployment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118: 155-205.
Bosworth, Barry, Susan Collins. 2005. Chapter 1 in The Economy of Puerto Rico Restoring
Growth, edited by Barry Bosworth, Susan Collins, Miguel A. Soto-Class. Brookings Institution
Press and the Center for the New Economy 2005.
Bound, John and Timothy Waidmann. 1992. “Disability Transfers, Self-reported Health and the
Labor Force Attachment of Older Men. Evidence from the Historical Record.” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 107: 1393-1149.
Castillo-Freeman.Alida and Richard B. Freeman. 1992. "When the Minimum Wage Really Bites:
The Effect of the US-Level Minimum on Puerto Rico." Chapter 6 in Immigration and the Work
Force. Edited by George Borjas and Richard B.Freeman. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Enchautegui, María E. 2004. Amarres de las Mujeres: Hogar y Empleo: Dos Investigaciones.,
Gráfica 3. San Juan Puerto Rico: Estado Libre Asociado de Puerto Rico, Oficina de la
Procuradora de las Mujeres.
Enchautegui, María E. 2005. “Educación y Salarios en Puerto Rico”. Unpublished manuscript.
Enchautegui, María E. 2005. “Selectivity Patterns in Puerto Rican Migration.” Paper presented
at the Annual Meetings of the Population Association of America, March 31 to April 2,
Philadelphia.
Estado Libre Asociado de Puerto Rico. 2003. Informe Económico a la Gobernadora 2003,
Oficina de la Gobernadora, Junta de Planificación, San Juan Puerto Rico.
Estado Libre Asociado de Puerto Rico. 2002. Serie Histórica de Empleo y Desempleo, Años
Naturales, 1970-2001. Departamento del Trabajo y Recursos Humanos, Negociado de
Estadísticas, San Juan Puerto Rico.
Estudios Técnicos. 2004. La Economía Informal en Puerto Rico. Estudios Técnicos: San Juan
Puerto Rico,
Freeman, Richard B. and Remco Oostendorp. 2002. “Wages Around the World: Pay Across
Occupations and Countries,” Chapter 1 in Inequality Around the World, Richard B. Freeman,
editor. London, UK: Palgrave, in association with the IEA, Conf Vol #134.
Godoy, Ricardo, Ilana Redstone, Faisal Islam, Tanya Price, Amara Saeed, and Salamat Tabassum.
2001. “English proficiency and quality of life among Puerto Ricans: Does it matter? Brandeis,
November. http://www.heller.brandeis.edu/sid/downloads/englishpro.pdf

Gregg, Paul and Jonathan Wadsworth, “Everything you ever wanted to know about measuring
worklessness and polarization at the household level but were afraid to ask
Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, vol 63 issue S1, Sept 2001

36

Haveman Robert, Philip DeJong and Barbara Wolfe. 1991. Disability Transfers and the Work
Decisions of Older Men. Quarterly Journal of Economics 106: 939-949.
Hunt, Jenny. 2004. “Convergence and Determinants of Non-Employment Durations in Eastern
and Western Germany.” Journal of Population Economics Volume 2.
Krueger, Alan. 1995. “The Effect of the Minimum Wage When It Really Bites: A Reexamination
of the Evidence from Puerto Rico.”in Solomon Polachek, editor. Research in Labor Economics,
Vol. 14. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Pol, Julio Cesar. 2004a. Determinantes Económicos de la Migración Entre Puerto Rico y Estados
Unidos. Universidad de Puerto Rico, Unidad de Investigaciones Económicas, Ensayos y
Monografías, Num 119.
Pol, Julio Cesar. 2004b. Estimaciones de la Economía Dubterránea: El caso de Puerto Rico.
Universidad de Puerto Rico, Unidad de Investigaciones Económicas, Ensayos y Monografías
Num 117.
Santiago, Carlos. Labor in the Puerto Rican Economy. Westport: Praeger, 1992.
Spilimbergo, Antonio. 1999. “Labor Market Integration, Unemployment, and Transfers” Review
of International Economics 7(4) (November): 641-50.
United States Bureau of Labor Statistics: Customized Tables:
http://data.bls.gov/PDQ/outside.jsp?survey=ce, http://www.bls.gov/cps/cpsatabs.htm
United States Bureau of Labor Statistics. . 2003. May 2003 State Occupational Employment and
Wage Estimates. http://www.bls.gov/oes/2003/may/oessrcst.htm
United States Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2003. November 2003 State Occupational Employment
and Wage Estimates. www.bls.gov/oes/current/oessrcst.htm
United States Bureau of the Census. 2004. United States Statistical Abstract 2004.
United States Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis, National Economic
Accounts Tables:
http://www.bea.gov/bea/dn/nipaweb/TableView.asp?SelectedTable=44&FirstYear=2002&LastYe
ar=2004&Freq=Qtr

37
Table 1: Labor force participation rates by education: US and Puerto Rico:
Men ages 18 to 64, 2000.
Labor force participation rates
Education
Puerto Rico US
Difference (US-PR)
Less than high school graduate
41
58
17
79
20
High school graduate
59
Some college
64
84
20
91
15
Bachelor's or more
76
ALL educational levels
59
81
22
Employment rates
Education
53
24
Less than high school graduate
29
High school graduate
47
75
27
79
24
Some college
55
89
3
Bachelor's or more
72
All educational levels
46
76
30
Source: Calculated from US Census of Population and Census of Population of Puerto Rico, 2000.

38
Table 2. Labor force participation rates of synthetic cohorts at given age: 1970-2000

1970
1980
1990
2000

91.7
86.8
86.8

35-44 45-54
(2)
(3)
Males
85.2
78.8
85.9
72.2
83.2

1970
1980
1990
2000

40.5
45.5
47.4

Females
39.8
39.4
48.0
41.8
54.4

Year cohort was 25-34:

25-34
(1)

55-64
(4)

Change
((3)-(1)

Change
(4)-(3)

48.1

-15.9
-14.6

-30.7

21.4

-1.1
-3.7

-18

Source: Serie Histórica de Empleo y Desempleo, Años Naturales, 1970-2001,
Negociado de Estadísticas, Departamento del Trabajo y Recursos Humanos,
Estado Libre Asociado de Puerto Rico.

39
Table 3. Percentage of men with different work status in Puerto Rico and the US, 2000.
Puerto Rico
United States
1. Percentage of employed, by weeks worked ovr the year
50-52
60.9%
70.3%
48-49
11.3
4.8
27-47
12.5
12.6
<27
15.3
12.3
2. Percentage of Employed by hours usually worked per week
35 or more hours
15-34
1-14
3. Percentage of those out of the work force, by year last worked
Worked in past 5 years
Did not work past 5 years

82.6%
12.2
5.2

86%
11
3

35%
65

68%
32

Source: Tabulated from US and Puerto Rican Census of Population 2000.

40
Table 4. Effects of Output on Employment: US and Puerto Rico: 1970-2003
Functional form of regression equation
Ln form Change in Ln
Change in level
1. Puerto Rico
Coefficient and SE on GNP
0.72
0.78
0.14
(0.09)
(.21)
(.043)
Coefficient and SE on GDP

2. United States
Coefficient and SE on GNP

Coefficient and SE on GDP

0.49
(.05)

0.67
(.16)

0.045
.(025)

0.54
(.03)

0.53
(.07)

0.008
.(001)

.54
(.03)

0.54
(.07)

0.008
(.001)

Source: Data for GNP, GDP and employment for Puerto Rico
are from Informe Económico al Gobernador, Junta de
Planificación, San Juan Puerto Rico, (various years)
Data from U.S. were downloaded electrinically from Department of Commerce
Bureau of EconomicAnalysis, National Economic Accounts
http://www.bea.gov/bea/dn/nipaweb/SelectTable.asp?Popular=Y
Note: All equations are corrected for serial correlation. Ln form is regression of ln employment
on ln output. Change in Ln is a regression of change in ln employment on change in ln output.
Change level form is regression of change in employment on change in output, measured on
thousands and in constant dollars.

41
Table 5. Percentage Distribution of GDP and Employment in Puerto Rico, by
Industry 2003
Manufacturing
Finance, insurance and real estate
Trade
Services
Government
Transportation and other public utilities
Construction and mining
Agriculture
Source: http://welcome.topuertorico.org/economy.shtml

GDP
42.1
17.1
11.6
9.9
9.6
6.9
2.4
.3

Employment
11
4
21
28
21
5
7
2

42
Table 6: Percentage of Men, aged 18-64, by Work Disability and Recipiency of Social Security Income,

PR and US

Puerto Rico

US

PR / US Ratio

17

13

1.3

38
26
47

63
52
68

0.63
0.50
0.69

Percentage on Social Security Disability Insurance, 1999
Age 18-30
Age 31-45
Age 46-64
Without a high school diploma
With at least a high school diploma

9.8
2.1
5.7
21.7
15.3
6.6

4.4
1.1
2.1
9.8
7.4
3.7

2.2
1.9
2.7
2.2
2.1
1.8

Percentage on Social Security, 1979

9.2

4.9

1.9

Percentage with a work disability, 2000
Percent of those with work disability, who are employed
Total employed
With education <12 yrs
With education 12> yrs

Source: Tabulations by the author based on 2000 PUMS of the Census of Population of United States and
Puerto Rico. The 1979 data are from 1980 Census of Population of US and Puerto Rico

43
Table 7: Percentage of Couples by Work Status of Spouses: Puerto Rico, 2000
Spouses ages 18- to 64
% with husband not employed, wife not employed
% with husband employed, wife not employed
% with husband not employed, wife employed
% with husband employed, wife employed
Total

36.1
30.8
7.9
25.2
100.0

Source: Tabulations by the author based on 2000 PUMS of the Census of Population of United
States and Puerto Rico

44
Table 8. Emigration and Employment Rates of Puerto Rican Men in Puerto Rico and in the U.S. by
Education: Men, Ages 18-64 Years Old or More (Percentages)
Emigration Rate %

Educ 0-11
45

Educ 12
37

Educ 13-15
26

Educ 16+
27

All
37

% Employed in PR

32

48

54

72

46

% Employed in US – Puerto Ricans

43

61

70

84

55

% Employed if:
All migrants go back to PR and have the
same probability of Employment as in US

37

53

58

75

49

11
6

13
8

16
12

12
9

9
6

Difference
PR in PR; PR in US
PR in PR: Simulation

Source: Based on tabulations by the authors of the Public Use Micro Samples of the 2000 Census

45
Table 9. Wages and Labor Costs in Puerto Rico, US and Mississippi, 2000-2003
PR

US

In $
In $
1. Establishment Data, Hourly Earnings and Labor Costs

Mississippi
In $

Ratios of Wages or
Labor Costs
In PR to:
US
Mississippi

Production workers in manufacturing
Hourly Earnings
Hourly labor costs

9.87
13.91

15.18
20.93

12.12
16.45

.65
.66

.81
.85

All Workers
Mean hourly, May 2003
Median hourly, May 2003

10.41
7.92

17.56
13.65

13.13
10.73

.59
.59

.79
.74

2. Household Data, Census of Population, by Gender and Years of Schooling
Annual Earnings, Male
All
College, 4 or more years
College, 1-3 years
Schooling, 12 years
Schooling, <12 years
Annual Earnings, Female
All
College, 4 or more years
College, 1-3 years
Schooling, 12 years
Schooling, <12 years

20,200

39.142

31,199

.52

.65

37,151
19,127
15,888
12,639

66,842
35,612
30,316
19,415

54,304
30,142
27,821
19,825

.56
.54
.52
.65

.68
.63
.57
.54

15,499

24,074

18,966

.64

.82

22,231
12,994
10,922
9,580

37,902
22,278
19,013
12,513

30,161
18,174
16,102
12,278

.59
.55
.57
.77

.74
.71
.66
.78

Source:
lines
1-2
Commonwealth
of
Puerto
http://www.pridco.com/english/operational_advantages/4.2opr_adv_wages_salary.html
lines 3-4, BLS, http://www.bls.gov/oes/2003/may/oessrcst.htm; Household data, calculated from US
Census of Population and Puerto Rican Census of Population 2000

Rico,

46

Table 10 – Yearly Earnings in Puerto Rico and Mississippi,

Selected Group of Detailed Occupations, by Wage Level
Puerto Rico

Mississippi

Ratio:
PR/Miss

All Workers

21650

27310

0.79

Chief Executives

113500

101540

1.12

Marketing Managers

68860

63570

1.08

Optometrists

53580

95970

0.59

Lawyers

53850

73310

0.73

Mechanical Engineers

50450

55800

0.9

Loan Officers

34250

42070

0.81

Accountants and Auditors

30700

43190

0.71

Firefighters

17630

27350

0.64

Child, Family and School Social Workers

22690

29090

0.78

Registered Nurses

22300

43990

0.51

Maids and housekeeping cleaners

14420

14280

1.04

Security guards

13520

16910

0.8

Laborers

16300

18730

0.87

Cooks, fast food

12630

13390

0.94

Bus drivers, school

13360

15910

0.84

Higher Wage Occupations

Middle Wage Occupations

Low Wage Occupations

Source:
Tabulated
from
BLS,
May
Survey,http://www.bls.gov/oes/oes_dl.htm#2003_m

2003

Occupational

Employment

47
Table 11: Coefficients and Standards Errors for the Regression of the Ln of Earnings in PR
Relative to Ln Earnings in Mississippi by Decile
Lowest Decile
Decile 2
Decile 3
Decile 4
Decile 5
Decile 6
Decile 7
Decile 8
Decile 9
Decile 10

Coefficient (standard error)
-.15 (.03)
-.26 (.03)
-.29 (.03)
-.26 (.03)
-.30 (.03)
-.31 (.03)
-.22 (.03)
-.21 (.03)
-.17 (.03)
-.15 (.03)

2

R = 0.55
Source: Tabulated from Bureau of Labor Statistics, Occupational Employment Survey
Notes: The following regressions summarize the data for the 513 occupations which overlap.
Ln PR/Miss = ln of the ratio of the earnings in Puerto Rico to the earnings in the US
Decile (N) = decile in which the occupation fit on the basis of its average rank

48
Table 12. Labor force activity of men in Pilot Survey according to household survey question and
modified question
Numbers
Percent of Total
Sample
Number of men on pilot survey

133

100.0%

I. Activity according to household survey (DOL) question
1. Working, traditional work
2. Not working, but looking for work (unemployed)
3. Working or unemployed (labor force)

94
11
105

71.0%
8.0%
79.0%

29

22.0%

15

11.0%

5

4.0%

109

82.0%

110

83.0%

II. Activity according to alternative question reporting non-traditional work
4. Reporting non-traditional employment
5. Reporting non-traditional work who said they were not working on
household survey question
6. Reporting non-traditional work who said they were not working or
looking for work, on household survey question
7. All: Working including the 15 non-traditional workers who reported
they were not working on household survey
8. Reporting participating in the labor force: including non-traditional
employed
Source: Encuesta de Empleo y Uso del Tiempo-El Caño

49

Female labor force
participation

Figure 1. Male and Female Labor Force Participation: The
Americas and other Selected Countries, 2000-2003
70
Zimbawe
65
U.S
60
55
50
Ireland
45
Spain
40
Chile
35
Mexico
Puerto Rico
Italia
Argentina
Nicaragua
30
Guatemala
25
20
50.0 55.0 60.0 65.0 70.0 75.0 80.0 85.0 90.0 95.0
Male labor force participation

50

Figure 2. Labor Force Participation Rate: Puerto Rican
Men and Women, and U.S. Men: 1971-2003.
99
89
79

79.4
73.7
70.8
59.3

69
59
49
39

56.2

42.8

37.5
28.5

29
19
9

Women
Men
US Men
US Women

19
71
19
73
19
75
19
77
19
79
19
81
19
83
19
85
19
87
19
89
19
91
19
93
19
95
19
97
19
99
20
01
20
02
20
03

-1

Source: Serie Histórica de Empleo y Desempleo, Años Naturales, 1970-2001, Negociado de Estadísticas,
Departamento del Trabajo y Recursos Humanos, Estado Libre Asociado de Puerto Rico. Data for US are from
the online data services of the US Bureau of Labor Statistics, http://data.bls.gov/PDQ/outside.jsp?survey=ce.

51
Figure 3: Principal Activity for those Out of the Labor
Force, by Gender: 1970-2002

Percent

95.0
85.0
75.0
65.0
55.0
45.0
35.0
25.0
15.0
5.0
-5.0
1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
Year

Source:Serie Histórica de Empleo y Desempleo, Años Naturales,
(varios años) Departamento del Trabajo y Recursos Humanos,
Negociado de Estadísticas, Estado Libre Asociado de Puerto

Women,
home work
Men, Home
work
Women,
disable
Men, disable

Figure 4: The Ratio of Earnings in Puerto Rico to Earnings in Mississippi,
by Decile for Occupations, May 2003

Ratio of Average Mean of Deciles
1.00
0.95
0.90
0.85
0.80
0.75
0.70
0.65
0.60
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Deciles
PR/MS All Occupations

PR/MS Same Occupations

Source: Tabulated from Bureau of Labor Statistics, Occupational Employment Survey

52

53
Figure 5. Percent of men out of the labor force,
in no productive activity: 1970 to 2000
0.40
0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05

98

96

19

94

19

92

19

90

19

88

19

86

19

84

19

82

19

80

19

19

78

76

19

74

19

72

19

19

19

70

0.00

Source: These figures w ere calculated from information on labor force status from
Series Histórica de Empleo y Desempleo, Años Naturales, 1970-2001, Negociado de
Estadísticas, Departamento del Trabajo y Recrusos Humanos, Estado Libre Asociado
de Puerto Rico

54
Appendix: Male Labor Force Participation by Age Group: 1970-2003, Puerto Rico and United States
PUERTO
16

RICO

UNITED STATES

25-34

35-44

45-54

55-64

16

25-34

35-44

45-54

55-64

1970

70.8

91.7

90.3

85.7

73.8

79.4

95.7

96.4

94.2

82.5

1975

64.6

88.7

86.2

79.6

61.0

78.2

95.2

95.6

92.1

75.7

1980

60.7

86.8

85.2

75.8

50.6

77.7

95.1

95.2

91.3

72.4

1985

58.4

85.9

84.5

77.5

50.5

76.5

94.7

95.1

91.0

68.1

1990

61.6

86.8

85.9

78.8

52.7

76.6

94.1

94.4

90.6

67.3

1995

61.2

86.6

85.2

76.1

53.8

75.3

93.2

92.4

89.0

65.6

1999

60.5

87.4

84.5

74.6

49.5

74.9

93.3

92.8

89.0

67.9

2000

59.2

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

75.0

93.7

92.6

88.7

67.1

2003

59.3

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

73.7

92.0

91.9

87.9

68.5

-10.3

-4.3

-5.8

-11.1

-24.3

-4.5

-2.4

-3.6

-5.2

-14.6

Change
1999-1971

Source: Serie Histórica de Empleo y Desempleo, Años Naturales, 1970-2001, Negociado de
Estadísticas, Departamento del Trabajo y Recursos Humanos, Estado Libre Asociado de Puerto Rico,
Data for US are from the online data services of the US Bureau of Labor Statistics,
http://data.bls.gov/PDQ/outside.jsp?survey=ce.

