                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 HOW’S THE JOB?
                 WELL-BEING AND SOCIAL CAPITAL IN THE WORKPLACE

                                             John F. Helliwell
                                              Haifang Huang

                                          Working Paper 11759
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11759


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2005




Paper presented at the 2005Annual Meetings of the Canadian Economics Association at McMaster
University and at the Centre for Positive Psychology at the University of Pennsylvania. We appreciate helpful
suggestions from participants in both places, especially Felice Martinello and Curtis Eaton in Hamilton, and
Ed Diener, Daniel Kahneman and Alan Kreuger in Philadelphia. The first draft of this paper was written
while Helliwell was Killam Visiting Scholar at the Institute for Advanced Policy Research at the University
of Calgary, and he is grateful for the interest and support of many colleagues there. We are also grateful for
invaluable access to General Social Survey and Ethnic Diversity Survey data provided through the UBC
Research Data Centre supported by Statistics Canada, the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council
of Canada, and UBC. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by John F. Helliwell and Haifang Huang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
How’s the Job? Well-Being and Social Capital in the Workplace
John F. Helliwell and Haifang Huang
NBER Working Paper No. 11759
November 2005
JEL No. J31, I31, Z13

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper takes a different tack in addressing one of the fundamental questions in economics: what
are the factors that determine the distribution of jobs and wages? In Adam Smith’s classic
formulation, and in much of the subsequent literature, wage levels have been used to estimate the
values of job characteristics (“compensating” or “equalizing” differentials). There are econometric
problems with this approach, principally caused by unmeasured differences in talents and aptitudes
that enable people of high ability to have jobs with both high wages and good working conditions,
thus understating the value of working conditions. We bypass this difficulty by estimating the extent
to which incomes and job characteristics influence direct measures of life satisfaction from three
large and recent Canadian surveys.

The well-being results show strikingly large values for non-financial job characteristics, especially
workplace trust and other measures of the quality of workplace social capital. The compensating
differentials estimated for the quality of workplace social capital are so large as to suggest that they
do not reflect a full equilibrium. Thus the current situation probably reflects the existence of
unrecognized opportunities for managers and employees to alter workplace environments, or for
workers to change jobs, so as to increase both life satisfaction and workplace efficiency.

John F. Helliwell                                      Haifang Huang
Department of Economics                                Department of Economics
University of British Columbia                         University of British Columbia
997-1873 East Mall                                     997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver B.C. V6T 1Z1 CANADA                          Vancouver B.C. V6T 1Z1 CANADA
and NBER                                               hhaiff@yahoo.ca
john.helliwell@ubc.ca
1. Introduction

Adam Smith hypothesized that five factors serve to explain why some jobs are paid more
than others: “First, the agreeableness or disagreeableness of the employments themselves;
Secondly, the easiness and cheapness, or the difficulty and expense, of learning them;
Thirdly, the constancy or inconstancy of employment in them; Fourthly, the small or
great trust that must be reposed in those who exercise them; and, fifthly, probability or
improbability of success in them”(Smith 1850, 45- Part I of Chapter 10 of Book 1). He
argued that, in the absence of policy or other impediments to mobility, wages would tend
to adjust so as to be the same for all jobs of equivalent characteristics, so that these wage
differences would reflect the relative attractiveness of different employments. This
analysis lies behind much of modern labour economics.


The first factor underlies attempts to establish the value of life as reflected in wages for
jobs of differing physical risks, to establish the amenity value of jobs and hence life in
different locations, and to assess the value of different job characteristics, mainly
disagreeable rather than agreeable features. This factor will be our main focus of attention
in this paper, although our methodology differs from previous studies, since we do not
estimate compensating differentials by comparing different assumed market equilibria (as
is implied by the usual equations using wages at the dependent variable). Instead, we
calculate the income-equivalents of different job characteristics by comparing the effects
of income and job characteristics as factors influencing life satisfaction.


2. Alternative Approaches
There have been many previous attempts to value non-financial aspects of jobs using
wages or incomes as the dependent variable. In his survey of estimates of compensating
wage variations for risk of injury or death, Viscusi (1993) notes that industry-average
data were used before large samples of individual data became available in the final
decades of the 20th century. He argues that individual-level data are likely to be superior,
not just because of the larger sample sizes, but because worker tastes and attributes, as
well as unspecified aspects of jobs, are likely to vary across industries in ways that may
be correlated with accident risks. For cross-sectional studies using individual wage or


                                              1
earnings data to estimate compensating differentials, there are other estimation problems.
The most obvious is that posed by unmeasured differences in employee ability and
training. More able or better-trained workers are in a position to choose jobs that produce
more income and more safety, making the usual assumption that safety is a normal good.
The most usual estimation form is:
(1) ln(yi)= α + βXi + γ Zi + θZui + εi


where yi is the earnings level for worker i, Xi is a vector of job characteristics, applicable
to worker i’s job, whose compensating differentials are to be estimated by the coefficient
vector β, the Zi are measured characteristics of worker i, and the Zui are unmeasured
characteristics of the worker, the job, or the market environment in which the wage is
being paid. The εi are the assumed error structure, usually taken to be normal.


Returning to the issue posed by un-measured differences in ability, suppose that the
worker’s level of training is included among the Z variables, but that his or her native
ability, or personal suitability for the job at hand, is unmeasured, and hence among the Zu
variables, which are not included in the regression. Suppose also that the safety of the job
is included among the X variables. The usual theoretical presumption is that safety is a
normal good, so that workers possessing higher than average abilities will use their extra
bargaining power to obtain jobs that are both safer and more highly paid. In the absence
of a variable measuring ability, this result would lead to an upward bias on the coefficient
measuring the effects of education (assuming ability and education to be positive
correlated) and a bias towards zero on the coefficients of variables measuring job safety.
In the absence of variables measuring worker education and training, it is presumed that
the downward bias in the estimation of the compensating variation for safety would be
even greater.


Data from one of the surveys used in this paper help to illustrate the reality of this
problem, and show also that attempts to remove the bias in the estimation of
compensating differentials by allowing for the effects of education on income are likely
to be insufficient. In the ESC survey, for example, working respondents are asked to



                                              2
measure the extent to which their jobs possess five job characteristics and one workplace
characteristic that are presumed (and subsequently found) to have a positive influence on
job satisfaction, independent of the level of income. Each respondent is asked whether
their job: allows them to make a lot of decisions on their own, requires a high level of
skill, has a variety of tasks, provides enough time to get the job done, and is free of
conflicting demands. These answers are on a four-point scale, converted to a 0 to 1 scale
for the analysis presented below. Respondents are also asked, this time on a scale of 1 to
10, to rate the level of trust that workers have in management at their workplace. Of these
six factors, three have positive correlations with income (decision scope, skill and
variety, while the other three have negative correlations. This pattern holds whether the
correlations with income are measured individually or jointly, and occur whether or not
the substantial effects of education on income are allowed for in the way depicted by
equation 11.


To further investigate whether the confounding effects of omitted ability differences
among workers were responsible for this type of result, Brown (1980) developed a panel
data set and then estimated compensating differentials with and without using fixed
effects for each individual, although thereby forcing the estimates of compensating
differentials to be based solely on job changes, which he found to be fairly frequent in his
sample. The use of individual fixed effects should have eliminated the problem caused by
stable interpersonal differences in ability, but he found only slight changes in the results.
Thus while omitted ability may be part of the story, it is not the only reason for earlier
failures to find plausible estimates of equalizing differentials.


More recently, Lang and Majumdar (2004) have developed a theoretical job search model
involving jobs with both pecuniary and non-pecuniary aspects, and used it to show that in
the presence of plausible frictions the resulting equilibrium allocation of workers to jobs
can easily be expected to produce a cross-sectional positive correlation between income
and (favourable) non-pecuniary job characteristics, even if workers are homogeneous.

1
  If a version of equation 1 is estimated using all six job characteristics and three education level variables,
the sign patterns are as described in the text, and of the ‘correctly’ (negatively) signed job characteristics,
only the workplace trust variable is significant. See the Appendix for details.


                                                       3
Despite these difficulties, there has been a range of Canadian studies producing large and
statistically significant estimates of compensating differentials for job-related injuries and
fatalities. Gunderson and Hyatt (2001) compare a number of these results, and extend the
model set in two ways. The first is to allow for the possibility mentioned above, that since
safety is likely to be a normal good, that workers of above-average abilities (or who for
some other reason have higher incomes) will use some of their potential income to obtain
safer jobs (Viscusi 1993). In the absence of correction, this would lead to an under-
estimation of the wage payment required to compensate for increased danger. Gunderson
and Hyatt adjust for this possibility by estimating a separate equation for the risks in each
workplace, and using the fitted values as instruments. This gives a significantly higher
estimate for the compensating differential for risk of death.


The second adjustment relates specifically to risk tolerance, with workers who either
prefer or are better able to minimize risks, in ways that are not possible to measure,
sorting themselves into the riskier jobs (their ‘self-selection model’), providing an
additional reason why the basic model might under-estimate the size of the compensating
differential. This would render the previously estimated risk equations insufficiently
protective against bias; using a corrective procedure suggested by Garen (1988),
Gunderson and Hyatt (2001) found it made little difference to their key results. However,
when they added industry controls (reasonably enough) to the risk equation, which left
the identification of the risk equation to depend solely on the risk experience rating
variables, the value of a fatal injury rose still further.


Yet another difficulty with the direct estimation approach was raised by Dickens (1984),
who argued that safety issues might be embodied in the wage bargaining in unionized
sectors, with the estimated results more reflective of differences in union bargains than in
individual worker preferences. This possibility is supported by the results of Cousineau,
Lacroix and Girard (1992), who find, using what Gunderson and Hyatt (2001) refer to as
the ‘basic model’, that the risk of fatal injuries takes a large and significant value in their
sample of union workers, but drops out entirely in their sample of non-union workers.



                                                4
Testing for a union interaction term with the risk variable, Gunderson and Hyatt (2001)
do not find a parallel effect in their much smaller sample, and neither did Meng (1989).


The econometric difficulties posed by using wage equations to identify compensating
differentials, along with equivalently anomalous results from our survey data on incomes
and job characteristics, suggests that it might be more promising to use subjective well-
being data as a means of estimating and comparing the well-being effects of income and
job characteristics.


3. Using Life Satisfaction Data to Value Job Characteristics
In this section we use life satisfaction and job characteristics data from three large recent
Canadian surveys to extend research in several dimensions. Our primary objective is to
estimate compensating differentials directly from a representative utility function. In this
framework, estimates of compensating differentials are provided by the ratios of the
marginal effects of job characteristics to those of income. Second, we link our results to
the emerging literature on the effects of social capital on life satisfaction, showing that
workplace trust and other aspects of life in the workplace have strong effects on life
satisfaction. Third, we test the robustness of our results by using data from three separate
recent surveys, by checking that our key results are unaffected by the inclusion of
individual-level personality variables, by excluding different clusters of unusual
observations, and by including a number of variables chosen to reduce the possibility that
our final estimates for compensating differentials are too high. Fourth, we compare the
direct effects of job characteristics on life satisfaction with those flowing indirectly via
their influence on job satisfaction.


The three survey sources include the second wave of the SSHRC-supported ESC survey
(described in more detail in Soroka et al 2005) and two Statistics Canada surveys: the
2002 post-censal Ethnic Diversity Survey (EDS), and the 2003 General Social
Survey(GSS). The scope and contents of the two latter surveys are described in detail on
the Statistics Canada website, and these data were accessed through the interuniversity
Research Data Centre located at UBC. The surveys differ in their sample size and the



                                               5
nature and number of questions asked. For the results reported in this paper, we generally
restrict our analysis to the working population, roughly 1700 for the second wave of the
ESC, 19,300 for the EDS and 9,900 for the GSS. Fortunately, the same life satisfaction
question is asked in all three surveys: “In general, how satisfied are you with your life as
a whole these days, on a scale of…” The preferred ten-point scale is used for responses in
the ESC and GSS, while a 5-point scale was used in the EDS. For closer comparability
across surveys, we have adjusted the EDS data to an approximate 10-point scale. For the
survey-ordered probit regressions we use in this paper, this rescaling has no effect on the
ratios of coefficients within the same equation, and it is these rations that provide the raw
material for our calculation of compensating differentials. Both the ESC and the GSS
asked a job satisfaction question, also on a 10-point scale. In addition, in the second wave
of the ESC survey there were a number of questions relating to job characteristics, and
we use these in two different ways, both to estimate a reduced-form equation in which
job characteristics are used directly as part of the explanation for life satisfaction, and in
the estimation of an instrumental variable for job satisfaction designed to avoid variation
due to income effects, to personality, and to issues related to the framing of questions.
The wording of the relevant questions is shown in the Appendix.


Finally, and helpfully, the GSS contains a series of questions designed to measure the
respondent’s psychological coping resources (Pearlin and Schooler 1978, 20). The
‘mastery scale’ thereby constructed may run the risk of over-correcting for the effects of
pure personality differences, since the answers document the extent to which respondents
feel they are in command of their circumstances2. These answers are more than likely to
be affected not just by underlying personality traits, but also by the current range of
problems exercising the respondent’s coping skills. We allow for these possibilities in the
GSS by also including other measures of domain satisfaction, so that the job satisfaction



2
  The mastery index is based on a principal component analysis of extent of agreement with the following
statements: I have little control over the things that happen to me; There is really no way I can solve some
of the problems I have; There is little I can do to change many of the important things in my life; I often
feel helpless in dealing with the problems of life; Sometimes I feel that I’m being pushed around in life;
What happens to me in the future depends mainly on me; I can do just about anything I really set my mind
to do.


                                                      6
coefficient should reflect only the extent to which satisfaction with the job differs from
the other forms included.


Equation 2 shows the basic structure of our estimating form for life satisfaction
equations, which we are treating as though they were direct utility functions.
(2) Lsatisi = α + δ1ln (yi) + δ2ln (yct) + βXi + γ Zi + θZui + εi
where Lsatisi is life satisfaction for respondent i, measured on a scale of 1 to 10, yi is the
level of income of the respondent’s household, yct is the average level of household
income in the respondent’s census tract, and the other variables are as in equation (1),
except that the coefficients now measure their impact on life satisfaction rather than on
wages, and the variable set is expanded to include all other determinants of life
satisfaction. When we use equation (2) to estimate the value of job characteristics, we
will do so by taking the ratio of a coefficient on one of the components of the job
characteristic vector X to δ1 , the coefficient on log income. This matches the functional
form assumptions implicit in most previous attempts to evaluate job characteristics using
wage equations. It presumes that for each worker the monetary value of a change in some
job characteristic is measured as a fraction of his or her income, which in turn implies
that higher-income households are prepared to give up more dollars to obtain a higher
level of non-financial job satisfaction. We report later on the fit and implications of
alternative functional forms; finding that this simple form performs well against more
complex alternatives. In any event, all of the versions we have considered give us similar
basic results.


Figure 1 shows the presumed underlying causal schematic. We try to control for as many
as possible of the direct determinants of utility, so that our estimates of the effects of
income and workplace characteristics should be relatively accurate, and hence useful for
constructing estimates of the income-equivalent values of various elements of workplace
social capital. We use survey-ordered probit estimation with errors presumed to be
clustered at the level of the census tract. Although the probit and linear forms give similar
results for compensating differentials, the probit form is perhaps more convincing, since
it permits us to drop the cardinality assumption required for the linear form. In fact, the



                                               7
computed cut-lines for the probit suggest that there is only slightly less at stake in moving
across the relatively unpopulated bottom half (in the ESC working sample, more than
90% of the respondents rank their life satisfaction at 6 or above on the 10 point scale)
than the top half of the life satisfaction scale.


Table 1 contains our preferred life satisfaction equations fitted separately for each of the
surveys. Table 2 shows our gradual progress towards the final GSS equation contained in
Table 1. The second and third columns of Table 2 are the two equations for the GSS, one
with and one without allowing for individual-level personality differences, as embodied
in the mastery scale. Because the previous literature has argued that the often-found
positive relation between job satisfaction and life satisfaction might be due to the
correlation with unmeasured personality differences (Arvey et al 1989, Heller et al 2002),
it is important to note some of the key consequences of including individual-level
personality variables.


The first thing to note is that personality does indeed appear to have a strong positive
relation to life satisfaction, with the significance of the mastery scale coefficient being
exceeded only by that of job satisfaction. This is consistent with numerous psychological
studies, including those of identical twins raised together or apart, that show a large
degree of heritability in happiness-determining aspects of personality. It is remarkable
that the introduction of such an important variable has such modest effects on the size
and significance of other coefficients, including those where personality differences have
been held by sceptics to underlie some frequently observed cross-sectional correlations.
For example, it has been argued that the strong positive correlation between being
married and being satisfied with life exists because marriage is to a substantial degree a
sorting device that enables those with outgoing and well-coping personalities to find and
wed equally well-found spouses, making marriage a prize rather than a causal factor. Our
results cast considerable doubt on that interpretation, as the coefficient on marriage
retains its considerable size and significance when the personality variable is included.




                                                8
Where there are changes in other coefficients, they appear where they might be expected.
Interestingly, the previously modest negative partial effects of higher education on life
satisfaction (cet. par., the simple correlation is strongly positive) become larger and more
significantly negative, as one would expect to be the case if education provided students a
chance to develop their latent coping skills. The inclusion of the mastery scale also
sharpens the rise in subjective well-being after middle age, just as was previously found
for health. Thus older age is more likely to lead to increased happiness for those who
keep their physical health and self-perceived ability to cope with whatever life throws
their way. The fact that the mastery scale itself has a negative correlation with age may
suggest either a decline in bravado as age occurs or reflect the possibility that on average
older people see themselves as having a smaller range of options for dealing with life’s
exigencies. The effects of income on life satisfaction are less when perceived ability to
cope is included in the equation. This may be because those with better coping
personalities are more able to find and hold higher-paying positions. It may also be
because those who have higher incomes, for whatever reason, may feel better placed to
deal with whatever comes their way.


The coefficient on non-financial job satisfaction is unchanged by the addition of the
mastery scale, so that making explicit allowance for individual personality differences
raises rather than lowers the estimated size of the compensating variations for job
satisfaction as a whole. Since we wish our estimates of these differentials to err if
anything on the conservative side (because they are likely to be thought surprisingly
large), we shall base our main results, as shown in Table 1, on equations that include the
mastery scale adjusted to remove its correlation with income. As shown in column 3 of
Table 2, this restores the income coefficient to what it was without the inclusion of the
mastery scale. This makes it easier to compare the results with those from the other
surveys, since the ESC and the EDS do not have personality variables. As will be
discussed later, the GSS equation in Table 1 also includes variables measuring each
respondent’s answers to three other domain satisfaction questions, to help eliminate any
risk that the high job satisfaction answers are due to question wording and placement
effects.



                                              9
We turn next to consider the effects of income on life satisfaction. In our previous work
(e.g. Helliwell 2003), we included dummy variables for each of several income classes,
so as not to constrain the all-important functional form linking income and life
satisfaction. From time to time we and others have used linear approximations (which are
fairly accurate over a broad range of middle-income classes in Canada) to calculate the
income equivalents of other variables entering the life satisfaction equation. For the
current paper, we have done further tests, and found a preferred strategy. We were
interested in testing a logarithmic form against the linear form for two main reasons, the
first being to increase comparability with earlier studies. Most previous estimates of
compensating differentials, based on wage equations like that shown as equation (1),
have used the natural log of income as the dependent variable, with job characteristics as
independent variables, and utility presumed to be constant for compensating changes.
Our equation (2) also compares log income and job characteristics, but does so by
including them all on the right hand side, along with other possible variables influencing
utility. The size of the compensating differential is then calculated as the ratio of the
selected job coefficient to that of income. Second, if a logarithmic form should prove to
be empirically defensible, it introduces in a simple way the presumed non-linearities that
reduce capacity to pay as incomes fall very low, and reveal declining marginal utility of
consumption as incomes get large.


We have done a number of tests of log income against more general specifications, and
find the log form to be an acceptable simplification. For all three surveys, an
encompassing model for life satisfaction including both household income and its
logarithm (r=.73 between these two variables in ESC) allows the linear income variable,
but not the log form, to be excluded. The pure linear form is also dominated in all three
surveys by an equation including the income class dummy variables. When log income
and the income classes are tested against one another, the choice is less clear-cut. Taking
account of the saving in degrees of freedom, the log form is nonetheless preferable.




                                              10
Another change to our treatment of income has been to consider various measures of
contextual income levels, allowing us to test absolute versus relative income models. As
a starting point, we compared personal and household income as determinants of life
satisfaction reported by the survey respondent (who, in our equations, was employed, and
was as likely to be female as male). We found in all three surveys that household income
was the stronger of the two alternative income variables in the life satisfaction equation,
with personal income being stronger in the job satisfaction equation. However, ESC and
EDS life satisfaction equations that include personal and household income have
significant positive coefficients on both, although the household income effect is always
larger as well as more significant. In the GSS life satisfaction equation, there is no
significant effect from personal income. In all three surveys, household income takes a
positive coefficient given the level of personal income. This positive spill-over from the
incomes of other household members implies that the empathy and income-pooling
effects dominate relative income effects at this closest level of aggregation, echoing the
South African results of Kingdon and Knight (2004).


However, when we turn to include the log of the average household income in the census
tract, the coefficient is negative and strongly significant in all three surveys, in each case
being large enough to make the life satisfaction effects of household income mostly
(entirely, in the case of the GSS) relative in nature. There are important implications of
this result3, and there are other contextual effects that can be assessed with our current
survey data, given the large number of census tracts represented (more than 2000 in our
EDS sample, for example). We include only average income here, since it is the only one
that has a significant effect on the estimated size of the compensating differentials for job
characteristics. Because there is a positive correlation between respondent family income
and the average family income in their census tract (e.g. +.26 in the ESC, see Appendix
Table 4), and since own-family income and average income take different signs in the
estimated life satisfaction equations shown in Table 1, it is important to include average
income in the equation to get an unbiased estimate of the family income effect. Including

3
 The negative externalities implied by the negative well-being effects of rising comparator incomes and
expenditure, have been noted by economists from Veblen (1899) on, including Easterlin 1995, Frank 1997,
Layard 2005 and Eaton and Eswaran 2005.


                                                  11
average income in the census tract raises the size and the precision of our estimates of the
positive life-satisfaction effects of household income. The resulting estimates of
compensating differentials are thus smaller and more precise than they would otherwise
be. This fits our general strategy of wishing to err if anything on the conservative side
when estimating compensating differentials.


We have discussed at some length our estimates of the effects of household and personal
income on life satisfaction. To make our results as comparable as possible with those
elsewhere in the literature, we shall generally use the personal income coefficients to
calculate compensating differentials, since personal income is closer than household
income as an indicator of the wage paid for the job under consideration. To complete our
calculations of compensating differentials, we next need to develop estimates of the life
satisfaction effects of workplace characteristics. The three surveys ask different questions
about life in the workplace, so that some issues have to be dealt with by triangulation
rather than independent parallel tests. For example, only in the GSS can we assess the
likelihood that answers to workplace questions might be affected by individual-level
personality differences. Only the ESC and the GSS include questions about job
satisfaction, and only in the ESC is there a full set of more detailed questions about job
characteristics. Fortunately, all three surveys have questions about the level of trust in the
workplace, a key determinant of job satisfaction, so we can estimate the well-being
effects of workplace trust for all three surveys.


Survey responses about job satisfaction and about life satisfaction reflect the possibility
of two-way causation, as well as the possibility that both may be influenced by excluded
variables and that both are subject to similar measurement errors. All of these risks of
positive bias have been established in other studies, and we have found some evidence of
each in our own samples. We want to eliminate, or even over-eliminate, each of these
risks of positive bias so that our estimates of the well-being effects of job satisfaction can
reasonably be thought to err on the conservative side. Three main methods are open to
make such adjustments. Where we have a suitable set of variables to provide the basis for
solid instrumental variables regression, then this should serve to eliminate the risks from



                                              12
omitted variables, question-framing and placing issues, and two-way causality. The ESC
survey provides a fairly broad set of answers to particular questions about job
characteristics. These are specific enough to remove the key risks attached to the job
satisfaction measure, while numerous enough to span the main determinants of job
satisfaction, and hence to provide an adequate information base for instrumental variables
regression.


Our two equation system for job and life satisfaction thus takes the following form:
(3) JSi = αj + δ1jln (ypi) + δ2jln (yct) + βjXi + γj Zi + θjZui + εji
(4) LSi = α + δ1ln (yi) + δ2ln (yct) + β1JSi + γ Zi + θZui + εli


These equations together suggest two alternative procedures. The first is to estimate
equation (4) by instrumental variables estimation, using the predicted values from (3) in
order to remove the presumed correlation between the unmeasured variables and error
terms in (3) and (4), whether due to personality, question framing, or other causes. The
second method is to substitute equation (3) into equation (4) and hence to estimate the
reduced form for the model directly. We have followed both procedures for the ESC, and
the two alternative life satisfaction equations are shown in Table 1.


For the instrumental variables regression we have also made a second adjustment to
remove the effects of income entirely from our measure of job satisfaction. In doing this,
a subsidiary issue arises with respect to the treatment of census-tract income. We might
expect, following earlier results by Clark and Oswald (1996) and many others, that some
measure of comparator incomes would have a significant negative effect on job
satisfaction. We did include the census-tract income in the regression of job satisfaction
in both surveys (see Appendix table 1), but CT income is statistically insignificant in
either of them. We therefore ignore census tract income in the adjustment to define non-
financial job satisfaction, which, in the case of the ESC, is thus:


(5) JSn i = αˆ j + βˆ j X i + γˆ j Z i = ĴSi - δˆ1 j ln( ypi )




                                                       13
The adjusted measure JSn in equation (5) is what we use for the ESC life satisfaction
equations shown in Table 1. JSn is to be seen as a measure of non-financial job
satisfaction. The ratio of its coefficient to that of log income thus measures the log
change in household income that would provide the same life satisfaction as a one-unit
change in non-financial job satisfaction.


For the GSS, we do not have specific measures of job characteristics, so we have
developed a third strategy involving a series of procedures designed to remove the risks
of positive bias on the job satisfaction variable. Since we have established that job
satisfaction is positively related to income, and since we want to make sure that all the
well-being effects of income flow through the income variable itself, we have two
alternative procedures to develop a measure of non-financial job satisfaction. One is to
mimic what we have done for ESC, recognizing that we have a rather limited set of
instruments. Indeed, the only job-specific variable in the GSS version of equation (3) is
trust in co-workers. The second alternative is simply to subtract the estimated income
effects from the original survey answers to the job satisfaction question. This has the
advantage of including the effects of all the additional determinants of non-financial job
satisfaction, but at the expense of some possible bias caused by positive correlation
between the error terms in equations (3) and (4). The first column of Table 2 embodies
the first alternative, while the right-hand column of Table 1, our preferred equation, uses
the second. This alternative, which uses measured job satisfaction net of the income
effect, gives a better-fitting life satisfaction equation. This is to be expected, since it
includes more job-related information and possibly correlated error terms. However, we
find that this better-fitting equation also gives a smaller estimated income-equivalent
value of job satisfaction, so it is to be preferred as part of our strategy of keeping our
estimates on the low side.


However, there still remains in our GSS equations the possibility of framing effects,
reverse causality or spill-over effects, and some remaining risk that variations in
optimism through time and across individuals might skew answers to all satisfaction
equations in ways not fully accounted for by the inclusion of the mastery scale.



                                               14
Fortunately, the GSS includes other domain satisfaction questions, each of which is likely
to have a direct effect on life satisfaction but also to be subject to the possible biases
outlined above. We have therefore included the GSS responses to three key domain
satisfaction questions, one related to health satisfaction, a second measuring satisfaction
with the way that non-work time is spent, and the third measuring financial satisfaction.
The financial satisfaction variable is purged of the influence of income, so as to keep all
income effects flowing through the main income variable. These satisfaction questions
were asked at the same place in the GSS as the life satisfaction and job satisfaction
questions, and are scaled in exactly the same way. If framing effects were pervasive, then
there would be substantial multi-collinearity among the domain satisfaction variables,
and imprecise coefficients as a result. In fact, each of the domain satisfactions has a
highly significant coefficient in the life satisfaction equation. However, including the
additional domain satisfaction variables does provide extra insurance against the
possibility that our job satisfaction results are driven by correlated errors, and in the
process also reduces substantially the coefficient on non-financial job satisfaction. We
have also undertaken experiments to ensure that our results are robust to the exclusion of
groups of respondents whose answers suggest the risk of measurement error, for example,
those who give nearly identical answers to all of the satisfaction questions.


The GSS life satisfaction equation in Table 1 represents our most conservative estimate
of the life satisfaction effects of job satisfaction. It includes job satisfaction measured net
of the Appendix Table 1 estimate of the effects of income, other non-financial domain
satisfaction answers, and the effects of personality, as represented by the mastery scale,
again net of income effects. This equation thus gives us, compared to the alternatives
shown in Table 2, the smallest estimate of the value, expressed in log of household
income, of non-financial job satisfaction. This is given by the ratio of the job satisfaction
coefficient to the coefficient on the log of household income. These estimated ratios are
shown in Table 4, along with their estimated standard errors. For both ESC and GSS we
calculate standard errors using the delta method and the relevant parts of the parameter
variance-covariance matrix. In the case of the GSS (and later the EDS) we are also able
to use bootstrapping procedures designed to provide more accurate estimates of standard



                                              15
errors in the context of complex survey designs. As a by-product, this permits us to
calculate the standard errors for the ratios as the standard deviations of the distribution of
the estimated ratios from 200 bootstrap replications, multiplied by a factor of 54.


The estimated compensating differentials for non-financial job satisfaction are very large
in both samples. The log income value of a one-point change in job satisfaction, on a ten-
point scale, is estimated to be .681 in the ESC and .704 in the GSS. Taking .500 as a
fairly extreme lower bound to these two estimates, to reduce job satisfaction from 9 to 8
on the ten-point scale (a move that would cover about 10% of the ESC respondents)
would, for a family with $65,000 income (about the mode for families with at least one
person in full-year full-time employment), have to be matched an income increase of
more than $30,000 per year. Even at the more crowded centre of the distribution of job
satisfaction responses, as shown in Table 8, moving from the middle to the 75%
percentile in job satisfaction would have a personal income equivalence, for someone of
median income, of $17,000 per annum. These dollar amounts would be correspondingly
lower for families with lower incomes, and vice versa. These results are from our
preferred equations, chosen to make all available adjustments to avoid over-statement of
the effect. In the case of the ESC, the equation is based on an instrument driven from
specific job characteristics, while the GSS equation includes the mastery scale and three
other measures of domain satisfaction. In both cases the effects of income on job
satisfaction have been removed to ensure that all income effects flow through the income
variable, so that the ratio should measure the income value of change in non-financial job
satisfaction.


The ESC also permits us to assess the importance of specific job characteristics, and to do
so in two ways. One way is simply to estimate the reduced form, so as to reveal the net
effects of job characteristics on life satisfaction. The second method is to estimate the
effects of job characteristics on job satisfaction, and then to calculate their effects on life
satisfaction as mediated through the estimated effect of job satisfaction on life


4
 This adjustment is necessary because the GSS uses means bootstrap weights from groups of 25. On the
use of bootstrapping in GSS, See Phillips (2004).


                                                  16
satisfaction. These two procedures (which are compared in Table 6) are not expected to
give the same answers, since they are measuring interestingly different things. The
biggest difference relates to the well-being consequences of having a job involving lots of
decision-making. Decision-making has a significantly positive effect on job satisfaction
(and hence on life satisfaction as mediated through the effect of job satisfaction in the life
satisfaction equation), but in the reduced form the net effect is insignificantly negative, as
shown in Tables 4 and 6. Thus the gains on the job are offset by losses on the home front.
The reverse is true for the skill, variety, time available and freedom from conflicting
demands, all of which have greater effects in the reduced-form life satisfaction equation
than where their impact is limited to that flowing through job satisfaction. This suggests
positive spillovers from these job characteristics, in contrast to the negative ones from
decision-making.


These results suggest some re-interpretation of the famous Whitehall study (Marmot et al
1991) showing that those at the higher levels in the UK civil service have better health
outcomes. This result has been interpreted by some (e.g. Wilkinson 1996) by reference to
animal studies showing worse health among those in non-dominant positions in
hierarchical societies. Our evidence suggests, on the contrary, that the features of jobs
that give greater life satisfaction (and by extension, better health outcomes) do not relate
to control (as measured by decision-making content of the job) but instead to trustworthy
management, variety, and demand for skills, features that may well be found in higher-
level jobs in the Whitehall hierarchy.


As can be seen from the job satisfaction equations in Table 3, the extent of workplace
trust is by far the strongest determinant of job satisfaction. This provides our key measure
of social capital in the workplace.


4. Valuing Workplace Social Capital
Although job satisfaction has long been known to have predictive power for absenteeism,
illness, and productivity, there has been less study of the role of trust and social capital as
contributors to job satisfaction. In a parallel way, most studies of social capital and its



                                              17
effects have concentrated on the influence of family, friends, and community groups,
with much less attention thus far paid to either the causes or consequences of workplace
social capital (Halpern 2005). Given the large fraction of waking hours spent in the
workplace, it should perhaps be expected that workplace social capital might be strongly
linked to life satisfaction.


The ESC, GSS and EDS surveys all contain some measure or measures of workplace
trust. The ESC asks about the extent to which management can be trusted in the
respondent’s workplace, while the GSS and EDS ask to what extent there is trust among
colleagues. The resulting ratios for the values of workplace trust are shown in Table 5,
and Table 4 shows the ESC-based estimates of the values of other specific job
characteristics.


The social capital literature (see Halpern 2005 for a recent review) gives a central place
to trust, with high levels of trust being positively related to measures of social capital
(and sometimes being used themselves as either proxy or direct measures of social
capital), with causation likely to flow both ways (Putnam 2000). The well-being
equations in this paper suggest that several different sorts of trust have direct effects on
well-being. The fact that a variety of domain-specific trust measures have even greater
well-being effects than the classical general trust responses gives us confidence that the
large effects of trust on well-being are not simply due to influence of congenital optimism
on both trust and reported well-being. Another demonstration that the measured effects of
trust are not simply due to personality differences is provided by the GSS job satisfaction
equations in Table 3. The coefficient on the trust variable drops only from 1.02 to .97
when the mastery scale is added, and its standard error remains below .06.


The preferred well-being equations in Table 1 show that trust in neighbours, trust in the
police and trust in the workplace are all independently strong determinants of
respondents’ subjective well-being in both the ESC and GSS. The size and significance
of the workplace trust effects are even larger than for the other domains. In both surveys,
inclusion of the specific trust measures renders the general trust measure insignificant.



                                              18
Thus it is no surprise to see in Table 5 that there are very large compensating differentials
for workplace trust. The lowest estimate we can obtain is from the GSS equation
including mastery and other domains of satisfaction. We also include the GSS estimates
without these variables for comparison with the ESC and EDS results, which cannot
make these extra adjustments. The adjusted (lowest) GSS estimate for the ratio is 1.75,
measured as the log change in income corresponding to a move from the bottom to the
top of workplace trust (which is converted from the 10-point scale to a zero to 1.0 scale
so as to have the same scale as the other trust variables). In ESC, the mean workplace
trust response is 6.5 on the ten-point scale, with a standard deviation of 2.5. The modal
answer is 8. To move up one point on the 10-point scale, using the lowest GSS estimate,
has a log income value of .175, almost $13,000 for a modal family income of $65,000.


Our estimates are among the first using measures of life satisfaction to estimate
compensating variations for job characteristics, and are the first we know of to provide
estimates of the value of workplace trust. Our results are very large, and remain so even
when we make a number of adjustments designed to remove risks of over-estimation. Our
workplace trust results are independently estimated from three different large Canadian
surveys, using different samples, and different question wording. That all three surveys
should show such consistently large effects convinces us of the likely importance of our
results. The estimated life satisfaction effects of workplace trust are so large as to suggest
that there are large unexploited gains available for trust-building activities by managers,
shareholders and employees. Although current levels of workplace trust in Canada are
already fairly high (almost two-thirds of employed ESC respondents rate workplace trust
at 7 or better on a ten-point scale), even small improvements promise large returns, and
there also a significant number of employers and employees trapped in an environment of
very low trust.

                                         References

Arvey, R.D., T.J. Bouchard, N.L. Segal, and L.M. Abraham (1989) “Job Satisfaction:
       Environmental and Genetic Components.” Journal of Applied Psychology 74:
       187-92.


                                             19
Birdi, Kamal, Peter Warr and Andrew Oswald (1995) “Age Differences in Three
        Components of Employee Well-Being.” Applied Psychology: An International
        Review 44(4): 345-73.

Brown, Charles (1980) “Equalizing Differences in the Labor Market.” Quarterly
      Journal of Economics 74(1): 113-34.

Clark, Andrew E., and Oswald, Andrew J. (1995) “Satisfaction and Comparison
       Income.” Journal of Public Economics 61: 359-81.

Costa, P.T. and R.R. McRae (1980) “Influence of Extraversion and Neuroticism on
       Subjective Well-Being.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 338:
       668-78.

Cousineau, Jean-Michel, Robert Lacroix, and Anne-Marie Girard (1992) “Occupational
      Hazard and Wage Compensating Differentials.” Review of Economics and
      Statistics 74(1): 166-9.

De Jonge, Jan, Christian Dormann, Peter P.M. Janssen, Maureen F. Dollard, Jan A.
      Landeweerd and Frans J.N. Nejhuis (2001) “Testing Reciprocal Relationships
      Between Job Characteristics and Psychological Well-Being: A Cross-Lagged
      Structural Equation Model.” Journal of Occupational and Organizational
      Psychology 74: 29-46.

Dickens, William T. (1984) “Differences between Risk Premiums in Union and Non-
      Union Wages and the case for Occupational Safety Regulation.” American
      Economic Review 74(2): 320-23.

Easterlin, Richard (1995) “Will Raising the Incomes of All Raise the Happiness of All?”
        Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 27(1): 35-47.

Eaton, B. Curtis, and Mukesh Eswaran (2005) “The Evolution of Leisure, Consumption,
       and Community in the Presence of a Consumption Externality.” (Paper presented
       at the Annual Meetings of the Canadian Economics Association, McMaster)

Falk, Armin, and Markus Knell (2004) “Choosing the Joneses: Endogenous Goals and
       Reference Standards.” Scandinavian Journal of Economics 106(3): 417-35.

Frank, Robert (1997) “The Frame of Reference as a Public Good.” Economic Journal
       107:1832-47.

Garen, John (1988) “Compensating Wage Differentials and the Endogeneity of Job
       Riskiness.” Review of Economics and Statistics 70(1): 9-16.




                                          20
Gunderson, Morley, and Douglas Hyatt (2001) “Workplace Risks and Wages: Canadian
      Evidence from Alternative Models.” Canadian Journal of Economics 34(2):
      377-95.

Halpern, David (2005) Social Capital (Cambridge: Polity Press)

Hart, Peter M. (1999) “Predicting Employee Life Satisfaction: A Coherent Model of
       Personality, Work and Non-work Experiences, and Domain Satisfactions.”
       Journal of Applied Psychology 84(4): 564-84.

Heller, Daniel, Timothy M. Judge, and David Watson (2002) “The Confounding Role of
        Personality and Trait Affectivity in the Relationship between Job and Life
        Satisfaction.” Journal of Organizational Behavior 23: 815-35.

Judge, Timothy A., D. Heller and M.K. Mount (2002) “Personality and Job Satisfaction:
       A Meta-analysis.” Journal of Applied Psychology 87: 530-41.

Judge, Timothy A., and S. Watanabe (1993) “Another Look at the Job Satisfaction-Life
       Satisfaction Relationship.” Journal of Applied Psychology 78(6): 939-48.

Kingdon, Geeta G. and John Knight (2004) “Community, Comparisons and Subjective
      Well-Being in a Divided Society.” CSAE Working Paper 2004-21 (Oxford:
      Centre for the Study of African Economies)

Lang, Kevin, and Suman Majumdar (2004) “The Pricing of Job Characteristics When
       Markets Do Not Clear.” International Economic Review 45(4): 1111-28.

Layard, Richard (2005) Happiness: Lessons from a New Science. (London and New
       York: Penguin).

Lepine, Jeffrey R., Amir Erez, and Diane E. Johnson (2002) “The Nature and
       Dimensionality of Organizational Citizenship Behavior: A Critical Review and
       Meta-Analysis.” Journal of Applied Psychology 87(1): 52-65.

Marmot, M.G., G. Davey Smitth, S. Stansfield, C. Patel, F. North and J. Head (1991)
     “Health Inequalities among British Civil Servants: the Whitehall Study II” Lancet
     337:1387-93.

Meng, Ronald (1989) “Compensating Differences in the Canadian Labour Market.”
      Canadian Journal of Economics 25: 413-22.

Near, J.P., C.A. Smith, R.W. Rice, and R.GT. Hunt (1983) “Job Satisfaction and Non-
        Work Satisfaction as Components of Life Satisfaction.” Journal of Applied
        Social Psychology 13: 126-44.




                                          21
Organ, D.W. (1988) Organizational Citizenship Behavior: The Good Soldier
       Syndrome. (Lexington MA: Lexington Books.

Penner, L.A., J.F. Dovidio, J.A. Piliavin, and D.A. Schroeder (2005) “Prosocial
       Behavior: Multilevel Perspectives.” Annual Review of Psychology 56: 365-92.

Pearlin, L.I. and C. Schooler (1978) “The Structure of Coping”. Journal of Health and
        Social Behavior 19(1):2-21.

Phillips, Owen (2004) “On the use of bootstrap weights with Wes Var and SUDAAN”.
        Research Data Centres Technical Bulletin 1(2): 7. (Statistics Canada No. 12-
        002-XIE).

Putnam, Robert D. (2000) Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American
      Community (New York: Simon and Schuster).

Rosen, Sherwin (1986) “The Theory of Equalizing Differentials.” Handbook of Labor
       Economics, Vol 1. edited by Orley Ashenfelter and Richard Layard. (North-
       Holland: Amsterdam) 641-92.

Saleh, Shoukrey D., and Jay L. Otis (1964) “Age and Level of Job Satisfaction.”
        Personnel Psychology 7: 425-30.

Smith, A. (1850) An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations.
       (4th edition, edited by J. R. McCulloch, Edinburgh: Adam and Charles Black; first
       edition 1786)

Soroka, Stuart, John F. Helliwell and Richard Johnston (2005) “Measuring and
       Modelling Trust.” In Fiona Kay and Richard Johnston, eds., Diversity, Social
       Capital and the Welfare State (Vancouver: UBC Press). On
       http://upload.mcgill.ca/politicalscience/MeasureModelTrust.pdf

Veblen, Torsten (1899) The Theory of the Leisure Class. (New York: Macmillan)

Viscusi, Kip (1993) “The Value of Risks to Life and Health.” Journal of Economic
       Literature 31: 1912-46.

Wilkinson, R.G. (1996) Unhealthy Societies: The Afflictions of Inequality (London:
       Routledge)




                                           22
     Figure 1: An overview of potential biases
  Personality;
                                    Life Satisfaction
Framing issues;
   Spillovers

                                                        Total Family Income

                       Trade-offs        Personal
    Job satisfaction                   income from
                                      Labor Market                   Other Family
                                                                    Members’ Income


               Total Earning Potential


                                              Un-observed
      Observed
                                              Productivity
      Productivity
                                          (Source of Skill-Error)
Table 1: Preferred Well-Being Equations in ESC and GSS, Survey Ordered Probit
                                                                           ESC Sample                                  GSS Sample
D.V: Life satisfaction                        Number of obs=1739            Number of obs=1748 Number of obs=1758 Numberof obs = 9949
                                              F( 28, 888)=9.97              F( 33, 886)=9.75 F( 27, 895)=10.02 F(37, 3532) = 66.00
                                                     Coef.        Std. Err.     Coef. Std. Err.                           Coef. Std. Err.
Mastery net of income                                                                                                     1.056    0.102
Non financial job satisfaction                       0.156          0.022                          0.152     0.022        0.151    0.009
Log of personal income                               0.229          0.044       0.200    0.047
Log of other family members' income                  0.056          0.017       0.065    0.018
Log of total household income                                                                      0.248     0.046        0.215    0.029
Log of average household income in the CT           -0.161          0.085      -0.167    0.085    -0.176     0.083       -0.194    0.042
Satisfaction with health                                                                                                  0.203    0.015
Satisfaction with the way other time spent                                                                                0.204    0.010
Satisfaction with financial situation                                                                                     0.161    0.010
Job: Makes own decision                                                        -0.156    0.115
Job: Requires skill                                                             0.340    0.120
Job: Have enough time                                                           0.210    0.094
Job: Free of conflicting demand                                                 0.139    0.091
Job: Has variety of tasks                                                       0.377    0.131
Job: Trust toward management                                                    0.619    0.121
Health status                                        0.253          0.036       0.266    0.036     0.254     0.036        0.036    0.021
Gender: Male                                        -0.110          0.054      -0.126    0.054    -0.080     0.051       -0.104    0.025
Age Group: 25~34                                    -0.261          0.104      -0.291    0.104    -0.221     0.103       -0.179    0.059
Age Group: 35~44                                    -0.096          0.109      -0.157    0.108    -0.072     0.105       -0.279    0.060
Age Group: 45~54                                    -0.166          0.113      -0.197    0.113    -0.124     0.111       -0.307    0.064
Age Group: 55~64                                     0.082          0.149       0.081    0.148     0.130     0.144       -0.274    0.069
Age Group: 65 up                                    -0.059          0.293       0.013    0.295     0.071     0.306       -0.076    0.154
Marital Status: Married                              0.272          0.084       0.264    0.084     0.299     0.083        0.320    0.037
Marital Status: As Married                           0.384          0.103       0.345    0.103     0.411     0.101        0.215    0.044
Marital Status: Divorced                            -0.091          0.168      -0.092    0.167    -0.072     0.163       -0.123    0.071
Marital Status: Separated                           -0.267          0.152      -0.216    0.156    -0.245     0.148       -0.056    0.053
Marital Status: Widowed                             -0.444          0.361      -0.440    0.356    -0.413     0.360       -0.221    0.111
Education: High school                              -0.033          0.117      -0.044    0.117    -0.045     0.116       -0.180    0.059
Education: Between                                  -0.022          0.106      -0.044    0.107    -0.032     0.106       -0.154    0.052
Education: University Degree                        -0.020          0.110      -0.043    0.111    -0.011     0.110       -0.234    0.057
Contacts with family member outside household        0.079          0.096       0.098    0.096     0.104     0.095        0.169    0.044
Contacts with friends                                0.212          0.106       0.206    0.107     0.213     0.105        0.009    0.056



                                                                   24
Contacts with neighbours                                      -0.013              0.093       0.001      0.094       0.011     0.091            -0.036   0.046
Number of membership or extend of activeness                  -0.013              0.017      -0.012      0.016      -0.014     0.016            -0.013   0.033
Trust in general                                               0.057              0.062       0.070      0.062       0.056     0.062            -0.074   0.030
Trust in neighbours                                            0.179              0.083       0.167      0.084       0.161     0.082             0.071   0.017
Trust in police / Confidence in police                         0.298              0.110       0.254      0.113       0.290     0.109             0.238   0.063
Importance of religion                                         0.132              0.109       0.147      0.110       0.139     0.109             0.097   0.048
Frequency of attending religious services                     -0.024              0.116       0.002      0.117      -0.039     0.114            -0.061   0.054
Immigrant                                                                                                                                       -0.019   0.040
Ethnic: Aboriginal                                                                                                                               0.133   0.094
Ethnic: Chinese                                                                                                                                 -0.090   0.080
Ethnic: South Asia                                                                                                                              -0.203   0.103
Ethnic: Others (not from major European countries)                                                                                               0.014   0.041
Living in non-tracted area                                                                                                                      -0.022   0.032
/cut1                                                          0.883              0.968       0.971      0.971       0.669     0.938            -0.417   0.528
/cut2                                                          1.009              0.969       1.096      0.973       0.788     0.941             0.112   0.507
/cut3                                                          1.136              0.971       1.224      0.976       0.909     0.942             0.607   0.501
/cut4                                                          1.344              0.968       1.434      0.973       1.111     0.941             0.934   0.501
/cut5                                                          1.842              0.970       1.945      0.977       1.610     0.945             1.873   0.500
/cut6                                                          2.162              0.971       2.265      0.977       1.924     0.946             2.453   0.502
/cut7                                                          2.843              0.972       2.949      0.979       2.596     0.948             3.503   0.504
/cut8                                                          3.754              0.975       3.866      0.983       3.508     0.951             4.778   0.507
/cut9                                                          4.370              0.977       4.481      0.984       4.115     0.952             5.704   0.510
* All satisfaction variables are in the scale of 1~10, while all other variables are in the scale of 0~1, where 1 represent the highest level
  permitted by the survey questions and responses




                                                                               25
Table 2: Experiments performed before reaching the final GSS equations in Table 1,
          Survey Ordered Probit
D.V: Life satisfaction                                                                 GSS Sample
                                              of obs = 9949                 #obs = 9949         of obs = 9949        of obs = 9949
                                              F(37, 3532) = 64.90           F(33,3536) = 59.03 F(34,3535) = 60.34 F(36,3533) = 69.57
                                              Coef.         Std. Err.           Coef. Std. Err.      Coef. Std. Err.          Coef. Std. Err.
Mastery net of income                                 0.893           0.119                          1.207    0.101           1.110   0.101
JSN instrumented by trust in co-workers               0.264           0.049
Non financial job satisfaction                                                  0.240     0.009      0.232    0.009           0.182   0.009
Log of total household income                         0.211           0.029     0.167     0.029      0.174    0.029           0.187   0.029
Log of average household income in the CT            -0.182           0.041    -0.171     0.040     -0.182    0.040          -0.189   0.041
Satisfaction with health                              0.161           0.022                                                   0.218   0.015
Satisfaction with the way other time spent            0.193           0.011                                                   0.235   0.010
Satisfaction with financial situation                 0.129           0.015
Health status                                         0.045           0.022     0.321     0.016      0.302    0.016           0.039   0.021
Gender: Male                                         -0.099           0.026    -0.070     0.025     -0.065    0.025          -0.115   0.025
Age Group: 25~34                                     -0.185           0.060    -0.242     0.057     -0.223    0.057          -0.161   0.059
Age Group: 35~44                                     -0.275           0.061    -0.397     0.057     -0.365    0.058          -0.260   0.059
Age Group: 45~54                                     -0.311           0.064    -0.454     0.061     -0.396    0.062          -0.272   0.063
Age Group: 55~64                                     -0.297           0.070    -0.376     0.066     -0.316    0.067          -0.234   0.069
Age Group: 65 up                                     -0.144           0.150    -0.199     0.151     -0.126    0.152           0.039   0.147
Marital Status: Married                               0.306           0.037     0.276     0.035      0.285    0.035           0.307   0.036
Marital Status: As Married                            0.189           0.045     0.159     0.042      0.159    0.042           0.199   0.043
Marital Status: Divorced                             -0.139           0.070    -0.244     0.065     -0.252    0.065          -0.194   0.069
Marital Status: Separated                            -0.063           0.053    -0.078     0.051     -0.098    0.051          -0.111   0.052
Marital Status: Widowed                              -0.237           0.111    -0.180     0.109     -0.182    0.109          -0.142   0.110
Education: High school                               -0.152           0.061    -0.208     0.057     -0.215    0.057          -0.186   0.059
Education: Between                                   -0.122           0.053    -0.189     0.050     -0.227    0.050          -0.170   0.052
Education: University Degree                         -0.208           0.057    -0.271     0.055     -0.324    0.055          -0.209   0.057
Contacts with family member outside household         0.160           0.043     0.209     0.043      0.212    0.043           0.181   0.044
Contacts with friends                                -0.028           0.057     0.132     0.053      0.121    0.053           0.009   0.055
Contacts with neighbours                             -0.043           0.046    -0.001     0.046     -0.005    0.046          -0.022   0.046
Number of membership or extend of activeness          0.001           0.034     0.042     0.032      0.005    0.032          -0.020   0.033
Trust in general                                     -0.075           0.030    -0.025     0.029     -0.068    0.030          -0.080   0.030
Trust in neighbours                                   0.061           0.017     0.126     0.017      0.120    0.017           0.083   0.017
Trust in police / Confidence in police                0.199           0.064     0.311     0.061      0.287    0.061           0.282   0.063
Importance of religion                                0.077           0.048     0.105     0.048      0.120    0.048           0.119   0.048



                                                                     26
Frequency of attending religious services           -0.070   0.053   -0.089   0.053   -0.078   0.054   -0.064   0.054
Immigrant                                           -0.031   0.042   -0.033   0.038   -0.007   0.038   -0.027   0.040
Ethnic: Aboriginal                                   0.110   0.095    0.147   0.085    0.127   0.084    0.129   0.092
Ethnic: Chinese                                     -0.058   0.080   -0.087   0.082   -0.028   0.082   -0.011   0.082
Ethnic: South Asia                                  -0.167   0.100   -0.182   0.109   -0.126   0.111   -0.186   0.102
Ethnic: Others (not from major European countries    0.016   0.041   -0.016   0.041   -0.003   0.041    0.007   0.041
Living in non-tracted area                          -0.022   0.032   -0.001   0.031    0.009   0.031   -0.021   0.032
/cut1                                               -0.045   0.543   -1.233   0.505   -1.192   0.505    0.518   0.516
/cut2                                                0.481   0.527   -0.803   0.492   -0.748   0.491    1.030   0.502
/cut3                                                0.955   0.525   -0.438   0.487   -0.372   0.486    1.501   0.497
/cut4                                                1.274   0.524   -0.195   0.488   -0.122   0.486    1.817   0.498
/cut5                                                2.177   0.522    0.540   0.487    0.630   0.487    2.720   0.497
/cut6                                                2.738   0.524    1.009   0.489    1.108   0.488    3.274   0.499
/cut7                                                3.759   0.525    1.888   0.491    2.001   0.491    4.284   0.501
/cut8                                                5.003   0.527    2.979   0.494    3.106   0.494    5.520   0.504
/cut9                                                5.906   0.529    3.783   0.496    3.917   0.495    6.424   0.507




                                                             27
Table 3: Job Satisfaction Equations of ESC and GSS with and without mastery scale
         Survey Ordered Probit
                                              ESC Sample                                                GSS Sample
D.V. Job satisfaction                         Number of obs=2032            D.V. Job Satisfaction obs# 11085;         obs# 11085;
                                              F( 18, 937)=45.62                                   F( 12, 3793)=64.15 F( 13, 3792)=66.74
                                                     Coef.        Std. Err.                           Coef. Std. Err.         Coef. Std. Err.
                                                                            Mastery net of income                             0.829    0.090
Log of personal income                               0.187           0.042 Log of total household     0.102    0.021          0.077    0.021
Log of other family members' income                  0.016           0.015
Job: Makes own decision                              0.190           0.087
Job: Requires skill                                  0.307           0.105
Job: Have enough time                                0.425           0.087
Job: Free of conflicting demand                      0.299           0.082
Job: Has variety of tasks                            0.222           0.113
Job: Trust toward management                         3.491           0.150 Trust in co-workers        1.017    0.056          0.949    0.057
Gender: Male                                         0.062           0.032 Gender: Male              -0.036    0.025         -0.029    0.025
Health status                                       -0.151           0.049 Health status              0.237    0.014          0.216    0.014
Age Group: 25~34                                    -0.165           0.105 Age Group: 25~34          -0.039    0.052         -0.015    0.052
Age Group: 35~44                                    -0.289           0.101 Age Group: 35~44          -0.089    0.052         -0.055    0.052
Age Group: 45~54                                    -0.139           0.106 Age Group: 45~54          -0.080    0.055         -0.030    0.055
Age Group: 55~64                                     0.069           0.137 Age Group: 55~64           0.026    0.058          0.084    0.059
Age Group: 65 up                                    -0.019           0.276 Age Group: 65 up           0.325    0.119          0.391    0.119
Education: High school                              -0.111           0.105 Education: High scho      -0.273    0.051         -0.281    0.051
Education: Between                                  -0.153           0.094 Education: Between        -0.322    0.041         -0.354    0.041
Education: University Degree                        -0.251           0.093 Education: University     -0.340    0.045         -0.382    0.045
/cut1                                                1.808           0.443 /cut1                     -0.002    0.207          0.172    0.205
/cut2                                                2.289           0.444 /cut2                      0.251    0.205          0.427    0.203
/cut3                                                2.746           0.441 /cut3                      0.496    0.206          0.674    0.204
/cut4                                                3.225           0.435 /cut4                      0.694    0.206          0.874    0.204
/cut5                                                3.817           0.441 /cut5                      1.165    0.206          1.350    0.204
/cut6                                                4.291           0.442 /cut6                      1.503    0.207          1.690    0.205
/cut7                                                5.146           0.444 /cut7                      2.098    0.207          2.289    0.205
/cut8                                                6.258           0.452 /cut8                      2.881    0.208          3.077    0.206
/cut9                                                6.897           0.454 /cut9                      3.454    0.210          3.653    0.208




                                                                     28
Table 4: Estimated Compensating Differentials and Standard Errors
Panel a: Compensating differentials for non-financial job satisfaction            Estimate Std. error    Std Error of the ratio $ Equivalents Std error
                                                                                                         Delta      Bootstrap for per unit     in $ value
                                                                                                         Method     Method change of JSn*
ESC-preferred                                  Ratio                                 0.681                    0.162                    $31,231     $7,434
                                                 Non financial job satisfaction      0.156       0.022
                                                 Log of personal income              0.229       0.044
ESC-Estimated with total                       Ratio                                 0.614                   0.136                     $55,052       $12,208
household Income                                 Non financial job satisfaction      0.152       0.022
                                                 Log of household income             0.248       0.046
GSS-preferred                                  Ratio                                 0.704                   0.103      0.097          $66,420        $9,693
                                                 Non financial job satisfaction      0.151       0.009
                                                 Log of household income             0.215       0.029
GSS-Estimated using JSn                        Ratio                                 1.249                   0.275      0.257         $161,716       $35,545
instrumented by trust in co-workers              Non financial job satisfaction      0.264       0.049
                                                 Log of household income             0.211       0.029
Panel b: Compensating differentials for specific job characteristics in ESC                                                     $ Equivalents
                                                                                                                                from bottom to top
ESC, from the reduced-form regression             Ratio                                 -0.778                0.578              not significant
                                                  Job: Makes own decision               -0.156     0.115
                                                   Log of personal income                0.200     0.047
                                                  Ratio                                  1.701                0.797               $143,365
                                                  Job: Requires skill                    0.340     0.120
                                                   Log of personal income                0.200     0.047
                                                  Ratio                                  1.048                0.517                $59,270
                                                  Job: Have enough time                  0.210     0.094
                                                   Log of personal income                0.200     0.047
                                                  Ratio                                  0.697     0.492      0.492             not significant
                                                  Job: Free of conflicting demand        0.139     0.091
                                                   Log of personal income                0.200     0.047
                                                  Ratio                                  1.884                0.823               $178,517
                                                  Job: Has variety of tasks              0.377     0.131
                                                   Log of personal income                0.200     0.047
                                                  Ratio                                  3.093                0.889               $673,479
                                                  Job: Trust toward management           0.619     0.121
                                                   Log of personal income                0.200     0.047
* The monetary equivalents are for a one-unit change in non-financial job satisfaction, which in ESC ranges from 0.16~7, they are estimated based on



                                                                          29
 median personal income of $32,000, and median household income of $65,000. Table 8 has the monetary equivalents
 based on movements in the distribution of non-financial job satisfaction.


Table 5: Compensating Differentials for Workplace Trust
                                                                                    Estimate   Std Error Std Error of the ratio Monetary equivalents:
GSS                                                                                                      Delta      Bootstrap from 75% to top
                                                                                                                                in distr. of work trust
 step1, EDS-                                      Ratio                                4.259                  0.841      0.804           $60,804
  -like equation                                   Trust in co-workers                 0.653      0.065
                                                   Log of household income             0.153      0.027
 step2, Add                                       Ratio                                3.678                  0.746      0.742           $48,257
 mastery_n                                         Trust in co-workers                 0.596      0.066
                                                   Log of household income             0.162      0.029
 step3, add                                       Ratio                                1.754                  0.381      0.370           $17,616
 other domains                                     Trust in co-workers                 0.380      0.070
 of satisfaction                                   Log of household income             0.216      0.029
EDS                                               Ratio                                6.546                  1.208      1.263         $132,389
                                                   Trust in co-workers                 0.811      0.064
                                                   Log of household income             0.124      0.022
ESC                                               Ratio                                2.519                  0.637                      $28,076
                                                  Job: Trust toward management         0.595      0.120
                                                   Log of household income             0.236      0.046

Table 6: Comparing Direct and Indirect Effects of Job Characteristics in ESC
                                                     In reduced form regression*               Implied by instrument regression through jobsat_n**
Job: Makes own decision                                     -0.156                                  0.044
Job: Requires skill                                          0.340                                  0.061
Job: Have enough time                                        0.210                                  0.070
Job: Free of conflicting demand                              0.139                                  0.049
Job: Has variety of tasks                                    0.377                                  0.015
Job: Trust toward management                                 0.619                                  0.742
* can also be found in Table 1
** Essentially these are products of job attributes' own coefficients on JSn and JSn's coefficient on life satisfaction




                                                                            30
Table 7: Redo Table 1's GSS regression, excluding respondents whose answer to satisfaction questions lacks variation
                                                      Full Sample                        Variation*>2      Variation*>3
Non financial job satisfaction                                 0.151 [0.009]                 0.128 [0.009]       0.124 [0.009]
Log of total household income                                  0.215 [0.029]                 0.188 [0.032]       0.185 [0.033]
sample size                                                     9949                          7721               6871
                                                      Variation*>4                       VarCoef**>0.1     VarCoef>0.15
Non financial job satisfaction                                 0.107 [0.009]                 0.135 [0.009]       0.097 [0.010]
Log of total household income                                  0.175 [0.033]                 0.184 [0.031]       0.168 [0.039]
sample size                                                     5613                          6482               4202
* Variation = Variation of Lsatis and the four domian satisfactions
** VarCoef =Standard deviation of the five satisfaction measures / Mean of the five measures
Table 8: Monetary Equivalence of a movement in distribution of job satisfaction
a). Distribution of self-reported job satisfaction and calculated non-financial job satisfaction           b). Estimated Monetary Equivalence
   that is instrumented by job characteristics and workplace trust, ESC                                    of a movement of non-financial J.S.
              Actual Reported Jobsatis                 Cumlative %       Calculated     Cumlative          from the 50th to the 75th percentile
                                                                          Jobsat_n           %               In Units of JSn                 0.84
                           1                               1.31             0.17             0               Monetary Equivalence
                           2                               2.37             1.69             5                 Estimated using
                           3                               4.63             2.39            10                 Personal Income           $24,720
                           4                               8.09             2.85            15
                           5                               15.49            3.20            20                 Estimated using
                           6                               24.74            3.47            25                 Household Income          $43,856
                           7                               46.9             3.73            30
                           8                               75.95            3.93            35             from the 75th to the 90th percentile
                           9                               87.61            4.11            40               In Units of JSn                 0.70
                           10                               100             4.29            45               Monetary Equivalence
                                                                            4.44            50                 Estimated using
                                                                            4.63            55                 Personal Income           $19,555
                                                                            4.78            60
                                                                            4.95            65                 Estimated using
                                                                            5.12            70                 Household Income          $34,884
                                                                            5.28            75
                                                                            5.44            80
                                                                            5.67            85
                                                                            5.98            90
                                                                            6.32            95
                                                                            6.99            100



                                                                            31
Appendix Tables
A-1: First Stage Regression on Job satisfaction in ESC and GSS, Survey Linear Regression

                                                                 ESC Sample                        GSS Sample
D.V: Job satisfaction                           Number of obs=1739           Number of obs=1758 Numberof obs = 9949
                                                R-squared=0.5122             R-squared=0.5088 F(37, 3532) = 51.70
                                                       Coef.       Std. Err.     Coef. Std. Err.    Coef. Std. Err.
Mastery net of income                                                                               1.028    0.159
Log of personal income                                 0.287         0.058
Log of other family members' income                    0.034         0.022
Log of total household income                                                    0.243    0.067     0.236    0.044
Log of average household income in the CT             -0.192         0.103      -0.174    0.104    -0.028    0.067
Satisfaction with health                                                                            0.303    0.021
Satisfaction with the way other time spent                                                          0.043    0.013
Satisfaction with financial situation                                                               0.225    0.014
Job: Makes own decision                                0.284         0.136       0.312    0.135
Job: Requires skill                                    0.393         0.148       0.445    0.147
Job: Have enough time                                  0.449         0.125       0.421    0.126
Job: Free of conflicting demand                        0.317         0.114       0.317    0.114
Job: Has variety of tasks                              0.096         0.166       0.163    0.167
Job: Trust toward management                           4.761         0.172       4.727    0.173
Health status                                          0.035         0.043       0.031    0.043    -0.084    0.031
Gender: Male                                          -0.155         0.068      -0.069    0.065    -0.019    0.039
Age Group: 25~34                                      -0.213         0.144      -0.130    0.143     0.102    0.092
Age Group: 35~44                                      -0.343         0.152      -0.245    0.148     0.051    0.093
Age Group: 45~54                                      -0.179         0.157      -0.085    0.153     0.098    0.097
Age Group: 55~64                                       0.024         0.181       0.112    0.173     0.216    0.103
Age Group: 65 up                                       0.189         0.356       0.275    0.337     0.484    0.179
Marital Status: Married                               -0.025         0.106       0.002    0.105     0.032    0.054
Marital Status: As Married                            -0.179         0.141      -0.140    0.138     0.154    0.069
Marital Status: Divorced                              -0.045         0.176       0.061    0.172     0.116    0.116
Marital Status: Separated                             -0.057         0.184      -0.005    0.186     0.088    0.087
Marital Status: Widowed                               -0.316         0.463      -0.204    0.469     0.142    0.162
Education: High school                                -0.205         0.137      -0.209    0.135    -0.235    0.084
Education: Between                                    -0.177         0.133      -0.174    0.132    -0.257    0.068
Education: University Degree                          -0.295         0.131      -0.261    0.128    -0.228    0.074
Contacts with family member outside household          0.083         0.116       0.096    0.116     0.019    0.068



                                                                     32
Contacts with friends                                 0.414   0.137    0.430   0.135    0.274   0.084
Contacts with neighbours                              0.098   0.123    0.080   0.122    0.124   0.070
Number of membership or extend of activeness          0.016   0.021    0.014   0.021   -0.123   0.050
Trust in general                                      0.029   0.074    0.042   0.075   -0.093   0.044
Trust in neighbours                                   0.008   0.110    0.022   0.109   -0.070   0.027
Trust in police / Confidence in police               -0.163   0.141   -0.203   0.141    0.215   0.093
Importance of religion                                0.247   0.132    0.243   0.132    0.178   0.073
Frequency of attending religious services            -0.087   0.128   -0.095   0.127    0.067   0.075
Immigrant                                                                               0.141   0.063
Ethnic: Aboriginal                                                                      0.186   0.120
Ethnic: Chinese                                                                        -0.258   0.119
Ethnic: South Asia                                                                     -0.247   0.151
Ethnic: Others (not from major European countries)                                     -0.005   0.059
Living in non-tracted area                                                             -0.009   0.049
Constant                                             1.956    1.125   2.191    1.168    1.816   0.780




                                                              33
A-2: Regressing Personal Income on workplace variables, ESC and GSS
    Survey Linear Regression

             ESC                                          GSS
Number of obs              2520              Number of obs              11427
F( 16, 1100)                 74              F( 11, 3837)             237.500
R-squared                 0.317              R-squared                   0.285
lninc_p   Coef.      Std. Err.               lninc_p   Coef.        Std. Err.
j_owndec       0.283      0.051
j_skill        0.499      0.055
j_time        -0.115      0.042
j_free        -0.087      0.045
j_varie        0.169      0.064
emp_tr        -0.266      0.058              tr_col         0.022       0.029
male           0.367      0.024              male           0.403       0.014
health         0.050      0.018              health         0.063       0.008
age2534        0.360      0.052              age2534        0.538       0.034
age3544        0.526      0.048              age3544        0.742       0.035
age4554        0.619      0.047              age4554        0.789       0.035
age5564        0.659      0.061              age5564        0.733       0.038
age65up        0.537      0.102              age65up        0.753       0.079
zedu1          0.132      0.045              zedu1          0.173       0.030
zedu2          0.190      0.040              zedu2          0.301       0.025
zedu3          0.470      0.042              zedu3          0.644       0.028
_cons          8.884      0.112              _cons          9.038       0.050

A-3: Correlation Tables
a. ESC

           lsatis      lninc_p    lninc_h    g_lninca jobsat_1 j_owndec j_skill    j_time
lsatis               1
lninc_p        0.1108           1
lninc_h        0.1851      0.5773          1
g_lninca       0.0356      0.1821     0.2637          1
jobsat_1       0.0955      0.3468     0.2658     0.0312         1
j_owndec       0.0623      0.4422     0.3473     0.1201    0.7392       1
j_skill        0.0833      0.4838     0.3592     0.1116    0.7384  0.8354        1
j_time            0.06      0.248     0.2046     0.0607     0.688  0.6448   0.6136           1
j_free         0.0766      0.2245     0.1678     0.0182    0.6245  0.5603   0.5555     0.7104
j_varie        0.0728      0.4355     0.3335     0.0994    0.7709  0.8444   0.8632     0.6817
emp_tr         0.0989       0.317     0.2491      0.067    0.8408  0.7518   0.7234     0.7069
health         0.1038     -0.0241     0.0135    -0.0374    0.1733 -0.0496  -0.0462      -0.027
male           0.0048      0.2204     0.0843     0.0093    0.0424   0.082   0.0789        0.08
           j_free      j_varie    emp_tr     health     male

j_free              1
j_varie        0.5928           1
emp_tr         0.6483      0.7745        1
health        -0.0062     -0.0551   0.0137           1
male           0.0625      0.0481   0.0366      0.0004          1




                                                       34
b. GSS
           lsatis       jobsatis     mastery     lninc_p     tr_col       health      male       age

lsatis          1.000
jobsatis        0.433        1.000
mastery         0.241        0.135       1.000
lninc_p         0.045        0.080       0.158       1.000
tr_col          0.211        0.252       0.149       0.061        1.000
health          0.330        0.211       0.201       0.106        0.121       1.000
male           -0.016        0.004      -0.002       0.267       -0.023      -0.006      1.000
age            -0.051        0.037      -0.123       0.240        0.136      -0.109      0.007         1.000
mem_act         0.057        0.022       0.161       0.141        0.094       0.105      0.014         0.010
trust           0.092        0.068       0.173       0.147        0.339       0.104      0.011         0.100
tr_nei          0.172        0.138       0.117       0.117        0.482       0.103      0.004         0.222

           mem_act trust       tr_nei
mem_act       1.000
trust         0.147      1.000
tr_nei        0.101      0.370      1.000




                                                           35
A-4: Some distributions

Distribution of reported life satisfaction, GSS        Distribution of reported life satisfaction,
                                                       ESC
Job Satisfaction       % distribution                  Job Satisfaction      % distribution

1                            0.68                      1                            0.8
2                            0.52                      2                           0.44
3                            0.83                      3                           0.51
4                            1.14                      4                           1.38
5                            5.72                      5                           4.63
6                            5.78                      6                           5.14
7                           17.54                      7                          18.22
8                           31.56                      8                          31.78
9                           19.27                      9                          17.71
10                          16.95                      10                         19.39

Distribution of reported job satisfaction, GSS         Distribution of reported job
                                                       satisfaction, ESC
Job Satisfaction       % distribution                  Job Satisfaction      % distribution

1                            1.33                      1                           1.31
2                               1                      2                           1.06
3                            1.62                      3                           2.26
4                            1.93                      4                           3.46
5                            7.44                      5                            7.4
6                             7.6                      6                           9.26
7                           18.49                      7                          22.16
8                           28.39                      8                          29.05
9                              16                      9                          11.66
10                           16.2                      10                         12.39


Distribution of reported trust in colleagues           Distribution of reported trust in
GSS                                                    management, ESC
trust in               % distribution                  trust toward          % distribution
colleagues                                             management
0                             3.69                               0                 3.02
0.25                          5.96                            0.11                 2.29
0.5                         24.91                             0.22                 4.54
0.75                          37.7                            0.33                 5.74
1                           27.73                             0.44                 9.99
EDS                                                           0.56                10.94
trust in               % distribution                         0.67                17.91
colleagues                                                    0.78                20.71
0                             2.21                            0.89                12.32
0.25                          5.21                               1                12.54
0.5                         24.76
0.75                        38.46
1                           29.39




                                                  36
Distribution of other job characteristics in ESC

a)..job requires a high level of skill                  b)..job has a variety of tasks

   j_skill |     Freq. Percent               Cum.          j_varie |      Freq. Percent               Cum.
------------+-----------------------------------        ------------+-----------------------------------
         0|       108        3.45         3.45                   0|        66       2.11         2.11
       .33 |       298        9.51        12.96                .33 |       170        5.43         7.54
       .67 |     1,100        35.12        48.08               .67 |       796       25.42         32.95
         1|     1,626        51.92        100.00                 1|     2,100        67.05        100.00
------------+-----------------------------------        ------------+-----------------------------------
     Total |      3,132       100.00                         Total |      3,132       100.00


c)..job is free from conflicting demands                d)..You have enough time to get the job done

    j_free |      Freq. Percent               Cum.          j_time |      Freq. Percent               Cum.
------------+-----------------------------------        ------------+-----------------------------------
         0|       540       17.26         17.26                  0|       299        9.55         9.55
       .33 |       963       30.78         48.03               .33 |       514       16.41         25.96
       .67 |     1,002        32.02         80.06              .67 |     1,193        38.09        64.05
         1|       624       19.94        100.00                  1|     1,126        35.95        100.00
------------+-----------------------------------        ------------+-----------------------------------
     Total |      3,129       100.00                         Total |      3,132       100.00

e)..job allows you to make a lot of decisions on your own

   j_owndec |        Freq. Percent               Cum.
------------+-----------------------------------
         0|       148        4.73         4.73
       .33 |       306        9.77        14.50
       .67 |       938       29.95         44.44
         1|     1,740        55.56        100.00
------------+-----------------------------------
     Total |      3,132       100.00




                                                                 37
A-5: Exact Wording in the Survey
                       Vairble Name             Scale              Variable Names in raw data
ESC2
            Life Saisfaction
                       lsatis                   1~10                 lifesat1
                       Now a question about life satisfaction. On a scale of 1-10 where ONE means
                       dissatisfied and TEN means satisfied, all things considered how satisfied are
                       you with your life as a whole these days?
            Job Satisfaction
                       jobsat_1                 1~10               jobsat_1

                     On a scale of 1 to 10, where 1 means very poor and 10 means very good, on
                     average, how would you rate job satisfaction for workers at your workplace?
            Workplace Trust
                     emp_tr                   zero to one            jobsat_3
                     Using the same scale, how would you rate the level of trust that workers have
                     in management at your workplace?
            Job Characteristics
                     j_owndec                 zero to one            jobdes_6
                     Your job allows you to make a lot of decisions on your own. Do you strongly
                     agree, somewhat agree, somewhat disagree or strongly disagree?
                     j_skill                  zero to one            jobdes_7
                     Your job requires a high level of skill. Do you strongly agree, somewhat agree,
                     somewhat disagree or strongly disagree?
                     j_varie                  zero to one            jobdes_8
                     Your job has a variety of tasks. Do you strongly agree, somewhat agree,
                     somewhat disagree or strongly disagree?
                     j_time                   zero to one            jobdes_9
                     You have enough time to get the job done. Do you strongly agree, somewhat
                     agree, somewhat disagree or strongly disagree?
                     j_free                   zero to one            jobdes10
                     Your job is free from conflicting demands. Do you strongly agree, somewhat
                     agree, somewhat disagree or strongly disagree?
GSS
            Life Satisfaction
                       Lsatis                   1~10
                       Please rate your feelings about them, using a scale of 1 to 10 where 1 means
                       “Very dissatisfied” and 10 means “Very satisfied”. What about:
                       ...your life as a whole right now?
            Job Satisfaction
                       jobsatis                 1~10
                       Please rate your feelings about them, using a scale of 1 to 10 where 1 means
                       “Very dissatisfied” and 10 means “Very satisfied”. What about
                       ...your job or your main activity?
            Other Domains of Satisfaction
                       Please rate your feelings about them, using a scale of 1 to 10 where 1 means
                       “Very dissatisfied” and 10 means “Very satisfied”. What about:



                                                   38
                satis_h                   …your health?
                satis_ot                  …the way you spend your other time?
                satis_fn                  …your finances?
      Workplace Trust
                tr_col                    zero to one
                Using a scale of 1 to 5 where 1 means ‘Cannot be trusted at all’ and 5 means
                ‘Can be trusted a lot’, how much do you trust
                people you work with or go to school with?
      Mastery Scale
                mastery                   zero to one
                Please tell me if you strongly agree, agree, neither agree nor disagree,
                disagree, or strongly disagree that:
                …you have little control over the things that happen to you.
                …there is really no way you can solve some of the problems you have.
                …there is little you can do to change many of the important things in your life.
                …you often feel helpless in dealing with problems of life
                …sometimes you feel that you are being pushed around in life .
                …what happens to you in the future mostly depends on you.
                …you can do just about anything you really set your mind to.

EDS
      Life Satisfaction
                  Lsatis                                       Ts_Q010
               All things considered, how satisfied are you with your life as a whole these
               days? 1 measures not satisfied at all and 5 means very satisfied
      Workplace Trust
                 tr_col                                        Ts_Q050
                 Using a scale of 1 to 5 where 1 means cannot be trusted at all and 5 means
                 can be trusted alot, how much do you trust each of the following group of
                 people:
                 ...People that you work with or go to school with




                                             39
