NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE IMPLICATIONS OF AN ENDOGENOUS MONEY SUPPLY FOR
MONETARY I1EUTRALITY

Robert

G. King

Bharat Trehan

Working Paper No. 1175

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge W 02138
August 1983

The research reported here is part of the NBERtS research program
in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1175
August 1983

The Implications of an Endogenous Money Supply

for Monetary Neutrality
ABSTRACT

This paper examines the implications of an endogenous money supply for the
perceived

(by econometricians) and actual nonneutrality of money in rational

expectations models of the class put forward by Lucas (1972, 1973) and Barro
(1976, 1980) that stress incomplete information. First, if there is contempo-

raneous policy response (e.g., to interest rates), then a simultaneous equa-

tions bias produces inconsistency in tests that use contemporaneous monetary
statistics such as those proposed by King (1981) and Boschen-Grossman (1983).
Thus, an econometrician might erroneously conclude that money is nonneutral in

a fully classical model. Second, if money acts as a 'signal' about economic
conditions then autonomous (policy induced) changes in the money stock can
have real effects.

In contrast to the nonneutrality of money in the Lucas-

Barro analysis, which arises due to incomplete information about monetary
aggregates, this nonneutrality requires that monetary information be utilized
by economic agents.

Robert G. King
Bharat Trehan
Department of Economics
University of Rochester

Rochester, NY 14627
(716) 275-3895

1

The Implications of an Endogenous Money Supply

for Monetary Neutrality

The nonneutrality ot exogenous monetary changes in the rational expectations/monetarist models of Lucas (1972,1973) and Barro (1976,1980) arises as a

consequence of imperfect information. In these setups, economic agents do not
directly observe the quantity of money and, consequently, mistakenly perceive

changes in nominal prices as reflecting altered relative opportunities.
However, as King (1981) points out, if a monetary statistic is contemporaneously observable (even with some noise) then the Lucas-Barro models predict a

zero correlation between output and monetary statistics, as perceived varia-

tions in money are neutral in these models. Using quarterly post-war U.S.

data, Boschen and Grossman (1982) find a significant non-zero correlation
between output and contemporaneous monetary statistics, which leads to a
rejection of the Lucas-Barro model if agents are (plausibly) assumed to posess
such statistics.

If money is endogenous and observable, however, then important modifica-

tions of both theory and econometric procedures are necessary, as we demon-

strate in this paper. First, even if money is fully neutral, endogeneity
implies that the zero-correlation hypothesis tested by Boschen-Grossman is not

an implication of the rational expectations/monetarist models of Lucas and

Barro. We describe an econometric procedure that can handle some forms of
this 'simultaneous equations' bias, producing a valid test of the neutrality
hypothesis. Second, if money serves as a 'signal' about economic conditions-

-say, because agents do not observe some other aggregate state variable with
'

discussions with John F. Boschen, Michael Dotsey, and Charles I.
Plosser are acknowledged. Herschel Grossman has contributed substantially
to clarifying the empirical implications of the model developed in Section

Helpful
III.

2

which money is correlated- -then autonomous movements in money can have
effects.

real

This nonneutrality requires that money be observed by economic

agents, a polar opposite assumption to that made by Lucas and Barro. However,

for this nonneutrality to arise, it is still central that information is
imperfect, in the sense that agents are unable to observe all the shocks that
impact upon the system.

The organization of the remainder of the paper is as follows.

In section

I, we review the basic relationship between money and economic activity in
equilibrium models, using Barro's (1980) model as our organizing framework.
In section II, we look at neutrality tests under some alternative assumptions

about monetary information and the money supply process, working within a
model in which the contemporaneously perceived component of money is actually

neutral. We discuss some spurious rejections of the neutrality hypothesis
that may emerge when money is endogenous and suggest an econometric procedure
that deals with one class of these problems. In section III, our focus shifts
to an equilibrium model with a substantially different economic mechanism, in
which autonomous movements in a partly endogenous money aggregate are nonneu-

tral because they are a valuable, but imperfect, 'signals about economic
conditions. Section IV is a brief summary and conclusions.

I.

Equilibrium Models, Expectations, and Money

The analysis
cycle

in

parts II

and III below

employs a variant

of

the business

model constructed by Barro (1980). Here, we give a brief review of this

model and describe the special features that are important for our paper.

In common with the general class of models put forward by Lucas (1977),
there is a single final product that is traded in a large number of decentralized exchange locations (z1,2,.. . ,Z).

In each location, the commodity supply

and demand schedules are given by the following log-linear specifications:

3
(1)

y(z) =

k(z)

+ a5 rt(z) -

S a(z)

+

8m

(2)

y(z) =

k(z)

-

ad rt(z) +

S at(z)

+

o

+ 82 E

+

+

where the parameters a, , and 0 are all taken to be positive. As in Barro's
models (1976, 1980), commodity supply depends on a systematic component

(k(z)), the relevant rate of return from the perspective of market z
(r(z)), a local supply disturbance ((z)), and on a wealth term, a(z).
Commodity demand is specified with symmetric, though opposfte influences.

The model also incorporates a permanent aggregate disturbance

which

affects both supply and demand in the current period. In addition, commodity
demand is assumed to depend positively on the locally perceived future value

of this disturbance (E11+i).2 One rationalization of such a specification
represents shifts in the marginal efficiency of capital. The

would be that

resulting investment responses would generally be larger if they are foreseen

_d

(02 > 81 = 01

+

s

01

>

0).

However, a complete analysis of capital accumula-

tion would involve many issues that are tangential to the main issues of this
paper.

Local commodity market equilibrium determines a real rate of return and

quantity of output as functions of the various shift variables discussed
above.

Throughout our discussion, we use the shorthand notation Ext to denote the

rational expectation of the variable x, based on the information set I(z)
possessed by agents in market z.

Lucas (1975), King (1981), and Trehan (1982) discuss aspects of incorporating capital accumulation into this sort of model.

(3)

r(z) =

-

-

k(z)

- k(z)

0s6d

11

+

s
yt(z) = .—

(4)

+

.-

a(z)

+ id
;

2

+

a

4

is

- —

d

k(:)
+

&

+

t

where a = as + ad,

+ a(:)
+

a2a

s +

d

E11+1
H =

d

+

tt(z)
-

d

+

—

£t(Z)

Sad and G = aO +

The market clearing value of output
y(z) depends positively on locally

perceived wealth if
•

positively

H

a

sd sd
a >
-

•
0, which will be assumed below, 4 and
.

on the perceived value of the future disturbance

E11+1.

The

discussion below will center on a(z) and Ent+1 as channels of influence for
monetary variables on real activity.

Since there is a nominal inside bond in Barro's model, the relevant real
rate of return from the perspective of market z is Rt +

P(z)

-

EPt+1,

where

P(z) is the logarithm of the price in market z at date t and l+1 is the
logarithm of the general price level at date t+l.
The aggregate portfolio balance condition (5) specifies that the logarithm

of the nominal money stock equals the logarithm of nominal money demand.
Nominal money demand depends positively on the general price level and the
level of economy-wide average real balances T, which depends on economy-wide

average real income

and the nominal interest rate (R) in conventional

ways.

(5)

"

Barro and King (1982) point out that time separable preferences imply that
H0, so that this channel may not be relevant. Yet, for our general purposes this mechanism for monetary effects on real output is as good as any
other.

5

d.

s.

where M is the nominal money supply, Mt i nominal molley demand and

is a

shift term. This condition and economy-wide averages of (3) and (4) determine
the price level and the nominal interest rate.
Following Archibald and Lipsey (1958) and Barro (1980), it is assumed that

money is wealth only to the extent that there is a gap between real balances

held and those desired for transactions purposes, which neglects the income

effects of the flow of transactions services derived from money holding.
Specifically, we assume that a(z) = (Mt

+ EM+i - EZPt+i)

-

ETt+i.

Impos-

ing the expected future version of the monetary equilibrium condition (5) on
-

the model, it then follows that a(z) = Mt

EMt

(for a detailed discussion

and alternative derivation, see Barro (1980)).

Consequently, economy-wide average output depends on the money stock only
to the extent that variations in this quantity are not generally recognized to

be taking place. Now, assuming that

=

-1 + v, where V iS serially

independent and distributed N(0,o2), we obtain economy-wide average output
as:

=; +(Mt

(6)

—

s

with y = -s--- k

-

+EM) +02 Evt
G+aSO

d
+ 2....

+

v

2

where k is the economy-wide average value of k(z), etc. (Ext denotes an
economy-wide average expectation, here and below).

The expression for aggregate output (6) derived from our particular model

shares key features with other members of the class of equilibrium business
cycle models put forward by Lucas, Barro and others. In particular, perceived

monetary disturbances--changes affecting Mt and EMt equally--are irrelevant
for output determination. Our model also incorporates a role for the actual

6

and perceived value of the aggregate disturbances,
suggested a technological interpretation.

v, for which we have

It should be pointed out that for

the bulk of our analysis, it is (6) that is key, rather than the particular
structural model from which it is derived.

The Money Supply Process and Monetary Information

To close the model, it is necessary to specify how the quantity of money

evolves over time. We assume that the money stock is the outcome of two
components, the money multiplier and the monetary base, so that the growth
rate of money may be divided into multiplier growth

(7)

+

Mt M1 =

()

and base growth (hr).

ht

We make the following assumptions about the evolution of these components.

Each has a portion that is predictable on the basis of previous information,

which we denote E

and E h .

t-l

growth we denote m =

The unpredictable component of money

t-l

-E

+ (h -

t-l

E hr). In the discussion below,

t-l

we consider the following alternative assumptions about the exogeneity and
observability of m:

(8a)

mt is not observable and is an independent, normal variable

(8b)

is observable and is an independent, normal variable

(8c)

m is the sum of two independent normal variables.
=

is

(h

mt =

is

observable and the second, x. =

t-l
not.

(8d) m = P1v
(8e)

- E h ),

Tp2(Rt

+ w and is observable

-

E Rt) + w and is observable
t-l

The first,

-E

t-l

7

where, in both (8d) and (8e), wt is an independent, normal variable.

In the former three specifications, the money supply is an exogenous
variable with respect to output, although three contrasting assumptions about

its observability by economic agents are made.

First, (8a) represents the

Lucas-Barro hypothesis that agents do not posess contemporaneous monetary
statistics. Alternatively, as in King (1981) and Boschen-Grossman (1982),
(Sb) assumes that agents have contemporaneous monetary information.. Specifi-

cation (8c) represents an intermediate case where agents are assumed to
observe high powered money but not the monetary multiplier within the decision
period.

In the latter two specifications, we allow the money supply to be endogenous and assume that it is observable by economic agents.

In (8d) the money

supply reacts to the aggregate shock, v. Below, we discuss two alternative

interpretations for v and the reasons such a response may be observed.
Finally in (8e), this dependence is assumed to derive from a response to
nominal interest rate movements, a pattern of behavior that is frequently
asserted to describe central bank operating policies (see, for example, Poole
(1975)).

In our setup, this dependence might plausibily derive from either

reserve management activities of banks that affect the growth of the multi-

plier () or central bank operating policies that lead to a dependence of the
growth in the monetary base (hr) on the interest rate.

II. Neutrality

Tests

The basis for neutrality tests ii the observation that perceived monetary
growth does not affect output in Lucas-type business cycle models. However,
the elements of money that are unperceived depend in an essential way on the
information structure of the model. In this section we discuss some neutral-

8

ity tests employing a output specification that is a special case of (6), in

that perceptions of real variables are irrelevant to output determination
(02=0).

Anticipated Money Growth

Barro and others have tested the neutrality of anticipated money growth,
which is one implication of the sort of model we discuss here. If we maintain

that money is not contemporaneously observable, it is necessary to decompose
money into its anticipated and unanticipated components, because unanticipated

money can have real effects if it is also unperceived. Testing is complicated

because the construct unperceived money (Mt -

EMt

=

- Em)

depends in

complicated ways on the elements of information sets. However, if money is
not directly observable but agents do observe local prices and interest rates,

then it can be shown that unanticipated monetary events typically exert

positive but less than one-to-one impact on unperceived money (mt -

a

Em)

because agents learn about monetary shocks from the available price signals
(see Barro (1980) and King (1983) for some detailed discussions). Thus, under
our informational assumption (8a), there will be a causal, positive influence
of unanticipated money growth on output, which Lucas and Barro have stressed.
Anticipated money growth, which is perceived, will not have this property.

Contemporaneous Monetary Information

When contemporaneous monetary information is available, however, matters

are altered substantially. If money is accurately observable, as under our

assumption (8b), then the gap m -

Em

will necessarily be zero if economic

agents use information efficiently. King (1981) discussed how this result
extends to models in which money is not accurately observed but, instead, is

9

corrupted by a temporary measurement error. Essentially, since unperceived
money takes the form of an 'expectation error,' it should not be correlated
with any information variable that economic agents use to form expectations.
Thus, output should be uncorrelated with contemporaneously observed monetary

statistics, even if these are imperfect indicators of the stock of money.
That is, given that output depends on real variables and unperceived money, in
restricted

the
=

+

-

of

form

Em) +-

that

(6)

we

are

using,

v, then it follows that a test of the neutral-

ity proposition may be obtained by a regression of output on contemporaneous
monetary statistics. The twin hypotheses of (i) neutrality of perceived money

growth and (ii) rational expectations based on contemporaneous information
imply a zero regression coefficient in this case.

Boschen (1981) and Boschen-Grossman (1982) employ such tests on quarterly

post-war data for the United States.5 Using a variety of specifications,
measures of money, and real activity, they document that estimated regression
coefficients typically differ from zero at conventional statistical levels.

One potential explanation of these results is that the relevant monetary

aggregate is only partly observed, which could correspond to our case (8c).
In this case, variations in the monetary base would be neutral--because they

were rapidly perceived--while variations in the money multiplier would be

In this quick summary of the Boschen-Grossmafl work, we gloss over the
important contribution that their theoretical analysis makes to formulating
the neutrality test in an empirically tractable manner. The difficulty is

that actual money growth, Mt - Mt_l,

involves both an anticipated and

unanticipated component. In principle, spurious rejection of the neutrality hypothesis could emerge if there were a correlation between

ipated output) and E

(anticipated

-

(antic-

money) through the operation

t-1

of a feedback policy rule by the monetary authority. Two solutions to this
potential problem appear available. The first is to 'hold fixed' separately the elements of

in the regression. The second is to purge money

of its anticipated component.

Boschen-Grossmafl opt for the former proce-

dure, which they implement empirically by viewing
of past

as a distributed lag

10

nonneutral.6 Hence, the correct formulation of the neutrality test using
contemporaneous monetary information would use the base rather than a broader

monetary aggregate. John Boschen has suggested to us that such tests would
not result in rejection of the neutrality hypothesis, at least for the second

half of the post-war period, based on some preliminary empirical results that

obtained in his thesis research (1981).

This distinction is clearly worth

exploring in future empirical research.

Endogenous Unexpected Money
If the unpredictable movements in money, m, are endogenous--in the sense
of being correlated with autonomous determinants of output, v, in the struc-

tural model above--then spurious rejections of the neutrality hypothesis may

occur even if it is actually true.

To discuss this point and econometric

procedures that may be appropriate, we consider in turn the policy specifica-

tion (8d,e), each of which involves the assumption that agents accurately
observe the money stock. Consequently, unperceived money will be zero in each
case. For (8d) we take an alternative interpretation of v, and let it repre-

sent government spending. This specification then implies that part of government spending is financed by printing new money.

It is assumed that gov-

ernment spending is determined exogenously and that all spending is temporary,
so that

=

Vt here. Notice that the issue of whether the

spending is perma-

nent or temporary serves only to determine the size of the 8 coefficients in
the supply and demand equations above.

Under these assumptions, (6) becomes

=

yt

+

v. A regression of

output on money will produce a positive coefficient even when both money and
government spending are perfectly observable due to the 'common effect' of

v.

G Boschen (1981, pp. 26-28) discusses the changing reporting procedures used
by the Federal Reserve System over the post-war period.

11

Specification (8e) differs from the preceeding case in that money is
assumed to react to unpredictable changes in the nominal interest rate, which

is endogenous in the model considered above. In the present case, v can be
interpreted either as a technological shock or a shock to government spending.

Then a simple regression of output on the contemporaneous monetary statistic
will generally yield a non-zero regression coefficient, i.e.,

and

=

(9)

where c =

''2

+

c(m),

G
—
a cov(R

-

E

Rt, v)/var (mr).

Thus, changes in money supply and

output

will be positively correlated

(recall that the money supply reacts positively to interest rate changes) as
long as the technological disturbance leads to a higher interest rate. From

(3) above, this will be the case as long as

>

O.

Even if this is not

the case, the example above clearly brings out the potential for spurious
rejections of the neutrality hypothesis.

If the parameters of the policy reaction function are

known, then it is

easy to correct for the correlations discussed in the two examples above. In
these cases all that is required is to make an adjustment for that part of the

change in money supply which is endogenous.

(m -

2(Rt

-

A regression of y on

E Rt)) would then be the correct method of testing for neu-

t-l

trality. More generally, the parameter b2

could be estimated if we had one or

more exogenous variables that affected the nominal interest rate. A second
stage test of the neutrality hypothesis could use the estimated valu3 of

It bears emphasizing that in both the examples above money is fully neutral, i.e., variations in money supply have no effect on output. The positive

correlation between observed money and output occurs

solely as a result of

12

permitting money to be endogenous. Further, endogeneity may provide an alternative explanation for Boschen's finding that the neutrality hypothesis cannot

be rejected if the monetary base is used as the relevant aggregate. To the
extent that the multiplier is 'more' endogenous than the base, the discussion

indicates that it would be more highly correlated with output than the latter.

Ill.

Money as a Signal

In

this section, we introduce the possibility that autonomous monetary

disturbances are nonneutral because agents view monetary statistics as convey-

ing valuable information about economic conditions.

In principle, the sig-

nalling role could arise either because the monetary authorities had access to

superior information or, more plausibly, because the money supply responds
endogenously to aggregate state variables that are not directly observable.

For the present purposes, it is key that the money stock is observable
(though it need not be observed without noise) and endogenous, so that we
employ specification (8d) above. Further, we maintain the imperfect information assumption in the sense that agents cannot observe the aggregate distur-

bances w and v that hit the system. For concreteness, we interpret v as
the current shock to technology, so that the current state of technology is
given by

=

t-l

+ v. Under the policy rule (8d), money reacts directly to

the technology shock v, i.e., m =

+ w, and also involves an autonomous

component w. Such a positive endogenous response (4 > U) may occur, for
example, if a sudden realizatio.-i of profitable investment opportunities

The bulk of the business cycle correlation between output and monetary
magnitudes is with banking system measures.
For example, Friedman and
Schwartz (1963, Chapter 7) stress that changes in the money multiplier
represent the major source of monetary change throughout the Great Contraction. Working from a different perspective, King and Plosser (1981) show
that high powered money is weakly correlated with output fluctuations while
deposits are significantly positively correlated over the post war period.

13

induces firms to borrow from banks.

As previously, output 'determination is influenced by unperceived money
-

Em),

the technology shock v and the economy-wide average perceived

value of the technology shock CE vt), as shown in (6) above. However, under

our assumption that money is accurately observable, it is direct that

m = Em,

so that aggregate output takes the form
S9

(10)

'

=

+

- ____ +
Evt

This expression emphasizes that the expectational channel by which money can
be nonneutral is Evt, the perceived value of the technology shock.
The nature of the rational expectations solution for Evt as a function of
information variables depends on the information set, which in principle would

involve the current money supply, the nominal interest rate and the local
price. However, a full-blown solution for Ev becomes extremely complicated
in this model if several signals are used (see, for example, Barro (1980) in
which there are two signals). Therefore, for illustrative purposes, we first
discuss expectation formation under the assumption that the only signal that
agents possess is the current money stock.

Given the linear normal structure of the model, it follows that agents'
one signal rule will take the following simple form.

(11) Evt =
where

v + w)

2 22+ 0)2.is the population coefficient for a regres-

= t1 °v'i

.

sion of v on m. Further, given that the monetary signal is assumed to be
the only source of information, expectations do not differ across markets.

Thus, it follows that average expectations Ev respond by less than one-to-

14

one with v (since 0 <

< 1) and positively to autonomous monetary shocks

if there is a positive relationship between money and technology shocks
In this case, random increases in the money supply raise output,

> 0).

according to (10) above, because agents treat these fluctuations as signalling

positive movements in v, e.g., indicating an increase in the future profitability of investment.

The fact that the output effect of autonomous movements in money (we) is

positive (given 4 > 0) is easily seen.

Substituting (11) in (10) gives a

reduced form expression that links output to the fundamental shocks v and

w.

S

(12)

-

2

Vt + Wt] + vt

Further, using policy specification (8d), we obtain

(13)

Cov[(y -

y)(M

-

Mi)]

=-

{a

02 + G) l 0v

which is unambiguously positive for *1 > 0.

Therefore, the coefficient

obtained from regressing output on money will be positive.

Thus, in the present model, (12) demonstrates that there is a true causal

relationship that exists between autonomous monetary movements (wv) and output, with a positive influence existing so long as agent's perceptions of the
unobservable real aggregate shock (vt) are positively related to the observed

aggregate (i.e., Z =

2 22
p o/(4l

2

+ o) > 0). Further, there is a posi-

tive covariance between output and measured money under the same conditions
> 0), in view of (13).

However, the covariance calculated in (13) is not informative about the
empirical relevance of the key element of this model, which is the nonneutrality mechanism.8 Specifically, suppose that one adopts the alternative hypothe-

8 We thank Herschel Grossman for pointing out this equivalence to us and
stressing its implications.

15

sis--advanced, for example, by King and Plosser (l98l)--that attributes the
comovements of money and output to the fact that these variables both respond

to aggregate real shocks that are observable by economic agents.

In the

current setup, this implies that output is simply given by

t

—
-

(10)

=

a

v

which follows from (10) above by replacing Ev with v. This model also
generates the covariance (13), which in fact will be produced by any model in

which money is a common component of the information set on which Evt is
based.9

That this covariance is silent on the predictions of our model implies
that empirical strategies must isolate contemporaneously unperceived components of autonomous money growth (our w) to test the key predictions of our
model, i.e., the expectational nonneutrality displayed in (10) versus alterna-

tive theories (such as (10)'). We are presently investigating the feasibility
of some alternative empirical strategies.

One attractive possibility1° is to

examine the implications of money supply

previously

by Cornell (1983), Engel and Frankel (1982) and others--in the context of our

theory, particularly investigating implications for interest rates, commodity
prices and production.

To see this, note that (10) may be written as

t

a56

Eve).
a w - — (Vt
A basic property of rational expectations is that the expectation error
will always be uncorrelated with elements of I(z), such as
(Vt -

=

Ev)

money growth in our setup.

10 Suggested to us by Michael Dotsey, who points out that Cornell finds
statistically significant interest rate effects of Ml surprises and
insignificant base impacts over several recent intervals.

16

The above discussion proceeded under the maintained hypothesis that money

was the only source of contemporaneous information. Although we have not
worked out a solution to the complete model with three signals, we provide

some speculations based on results of parallel studies. First, it will be
necessary for there to be at least three aggregate shocks if the money stock
and interest rate are to be prevented from fully revealing all relevant infor-

mation. Thus, for example, temporary supply or demand shocks would have to be
added to the model.

Second, when there are more signals, it is likely that the extent of
agents' reliance on the money supply ()

will

be reduced.

Intuitively, this

is because the additional information reduces the reliance on any one signal

(subject to certain restrictions on the covariance matrix of v and the signals). Further, agents' expectations will be more precise as more information

is added.11 However, it is unlikely that these considerations will alter the

direction of the channel outlined above, although the magnitude of money
supply effects may be reduced.

Thus, we have provided an example of the general idea that money may be
nonneutral because it acts as a signal.

In contrast to Lucas and Barro, a

positive correlation of autonomous money (we) and output emerges as a result

of contemporaneous monetary information rather than in the absence of such
data.

IV.

Summary and Conclusions
Previous studies of the nonneutrality of money (Lucas, Barro) have made

the critical assumption that the current money supply cannot be observed.
Further, these studies have also assumed that the money supply is determined

'

Notice that this argument overlooks difficulties arising from the fact
that the information content of signals is endogenous in setups such as
those discussed above.

17

exogenously. In this paper, we have shown that relaxing the second assumption

has important consequences for the neutrality of money- -both perceived (by
econometricians) and actual. Once money is permitted to be endogenous, positive comovements in money and output can be obtained even if the current money
stock is known to agents.

Above, we analyzed two different situations.

In the first case, money

reacts to variables which are themselves directly observable. Money is neu-

tral in this case, yet regressions of output on money can produce positive
coefficients.

In the second case, money acts as a signal for some variable

which is itself not directly observable.

Here, money is no longer neutral.

Changes in the money supply bring about changes in real activity, with a
positive comovement being a plausible occurrence.

18

References

Archibald,

G. C. and R. A. Lipsey, "Monetary and Value Theory: A Critique of

Lange and Patinkin," Review of Economic Studies, 26, October 1958, 1-22.
Barro, R. J., "Rational Expectations and the Role of Monetary Policy," Journal
of Monetary Economics, 2, January 1976, 1-52.

__________

"A Capital Market in an Equilibrium Business Cycle Model,"

metrica, 1980.

__________

and R. G. King, "Time Separable Preferences and Intertemporal

Substitution Models'of Business Fluctuations," NBER working paper 888,
May 1982.

Boschen, J. F., "Contemporaneous Monetary Information in the Equilibriuni
Macroeconomic Model: Theoretical Analysis and Empirical Tests," unpublished Brown University dissertation, June 1981.

_________ and H. I. Grossman, "Tests of Equilibrium Macroeconomics Using
Contemporaneous Monetary Data," Journal of Monetary Economics, 10,
November 1982, 309-334.

Cornell, B., "Money Supply Announcements and Interest Rates: Another View,"
Journal of Business, 56, January 1983, 1-23.

Engel, C. and J. Frankel, "Why Money Announcements Move Interest Rates: An
Answer From the Foreign Exchange Market," NBER working paper no. 1049,
December 1982.

Friedman, M. and A.

I. Schwartz, A Monetary History of the United States,

1867-1960, New York:Princetori University Press, 1963

King, R. G., "Investment and Equilibrium Business Cycle Theory," unpublished,
July 1980.

19

_________

"Monetary Information and Monetary Neutrality," Journal of
Economics, 3, March 1981, 145-206.

__________

"Interest

Rates, Aggregate Information, and Monetary Policy,"

Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming 1983.

_________ and C. I. Plosser, "The Behavior of Money, Credit and Prices in a
Real Business Cycle," NBER working paper 853, November 1981.

Lucas, R. E., "Expectations and the Neutrality of Money," Journal of Economic
Theory, 4, April 1972, 103-124.

__________

"Some

International Evidence on Output-Inflation Tradeoffs,"

American Economic Review, 64, June 1973, 326-334.

__________

"An Equilibrium Model of the Business Cycle," Journal of Political

Economy, 83, December 1975, 1113-1144.

_________

"Understanding Business Cycles," in Stabilization of the Domestic

and International Economy, Carnegie-Rochester Series on Public Policy.

Poole, W. W., "The Making of Monetary Policy:

Description and Analysis,"

Economic Inquiry, June 1975, 253-265.

Trehan, B., "Money, Business Cycles, and the Ralative Price of Capital,"
unpublished working paper, May 1982.

