                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          THE TRANSFORMATION OF HUNGER:
                     THE DEMAND FOR CALORIES PAST AND PRESENT

                                            Trevon D. Logan

                                         Working Paper 11754
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11754


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2005




I thank Raj Arunachalam, Andrea A. Cann, Dora L. Costa, William A. Darity, Jr., J. Bradford DeLong,
Ronald D. Lee, Thomas Logan, Sr., Edward A. Miguel, Muna S. Meky, Martha L. Olney, James L. Powell,
Steven Raphael, Christina D. Romer, Kenneth W. Wachter, and numerous seminar participants for extremely
helpful discussions and comments on various aspects of this work. Dora L. Costa, Michael R. Haines, and
Richard H. Steckel alerted me to data sources. Portions of this research were supported by the National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development. All views expressed herein and errors, both of omission
and commission, are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Trevon D. Logan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Transformation of Hunger: The Demand for Calories Past and Present
Trevon D. Logan
NBER Working Paper No. 11754
November 2005
JEL No. D12, I12, I31, J10, N31

                                           ABSTRACT

According to conventional income measures, nineteenth century American and British industrial
workers were two to four times as wealthy as poor people in developing countries today.
Surprisingly, however, today's poor are less hungry than yesterday's wealthy industrial workers. I
estimate the demand for calories of American and British industrial workers using the 1888 Cost of
Living Survey and find that the estimated calorie elasticities for both American and British
households are greater than calorie elasticity estimates for households in present day developing
countries. The results are robust to measurement error, unreported food consumption, and indirect
estimation bias. This finding implies substantial nutritional improvements among the poor in the
twentieth century. Using the Engel curve implied by the historical calorie elasticities, I derive new
income estimates for developing countries which yield income estimates that are six to ten times
greater than those derived using purchasing power parity or GDP deflators.

Trevon D. Logan
The Ohio State University
410 Arps Hall
1945 North High Street
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
logan.155@osu.edu
I. Introduction

         The goal of this paper is to bring together the work of economic historians, who have

produced a vast literature on health, nutrition, and economic growth, and development

economists, who have also been concerned with such matters but tend to concentrate on different

measures. Hunger continues to plague many developing nations and the poorest segments of

developed nations. If the past is prologue, developing nations may be well served by studies that

explore the dimensions of hunger and malnutrition in the past. In particular, this paper explores

how the relationship between income and nutrition for industrial workers in the United States

and Great Britain in the late nineteenth century compares to the situation in today’s developing

countries.

         To make comparisons of living standards across time one must adopt a metric that is both

consistent over time and that quantifies a meaningful dimension of human life whose

relationship to living standards is straightforward and easily understood. Given the long human

struggle with subsistence, calorie elasticities are an excellent way to quantify the demand for

food and to do so in a unit free manner. While looking at the average number of calories per

person or the share of the budget devoted to food over time may be suggestive, such analysis

must be qualified by changes in human physiology, dietary tastes, food quality, and prices over

time and space. Indeed, knowing only the average number of calories per person or the fraction

of the budget devoted to food in two different populations would not establish which population

was hungrier without additional information or assumptions.1 Elasticities, however, quantify the



1
 Many of the problems that may be present in the level of calories will not be present in demand elasticities, which
are more robust than calorie averages. For example, the lack of information about the home production of calories
for historical households is shown to have very little effect on the historical elasticities presented here, but such an
omission would lead to biased estimates of average caloric intake. Also, our estimates of calories per capita for
historical populations are rarely based on microeconomic evidence—they are usually based on nutritional balance
sheets, and as such are not directly comparable to calorie per head estimates from developing countries.


                                                            1
demand for goods in the same way across both time and space, and underlying their use is

textbook microeconomic theory. While food elasticities will not be comparable if people

purchase more and more expensive food as their incomes grow, calorie elasticities are an

intuitive and straightforward way to estimate hunger.

        I compare late nineteenth century estimates of income and expenditure elasticities of

calories for industrial workers in the United States and Great Britain to those from developing

countries today. These calorie elasticities estimate the responsiveness of calorie demand given a

change in income. The calorie elasticities discussed here measure the percentage increase of

calories in the diet given a one percent increase in income or expenditure. While calorie

elasticity estimation is standard in development economics, the size of the elasticity in historical

populations is unknown, and we therefore know very little about how calorie demand has

changed over time.

        Using the microeconometric techniques of contemporary development economics to

analyze living standards in the past is important in two ways. First, this methodology allows us

to look at living standards today and in the past in the same way. This gives us a common

measure for living standards and eliminates the need to heavily qualify our comparisons of the

past and present. Secondly, this methodology allows us to ask and answer the question of how

living standards have changed over time, and this is one of the fundamental questions in

economics. Calorie elasticities can only be estimated with detailed microeconomic data, and not

all historical household survey data is appropriate for this purpose. The historical data used in

this paper, the 1888 Cost of Living Survey, is one of the few historical household surveys that

allow us to derive precise estimates of historical nutrition, which are necessary to estimate

calorie elasticities.




                                                  2
           I find that the estimates of calorie elasticities for both British and American households in

the late nineteenth century are greater than contemporary calorie elasticity estimates in the

developing world today. When I compare my estimates with calorie elasticity estimates from

developing countries I find that my estimates are outliers—the historical elasticity estimates are

at the highest end of calorie elasticity estimates. More concretely, the hypothesis that the

historical expenditure elasticity of calories estimates are equal to or less than Subramanian and

Deaton’s (1996) estimates for rural India in 1983 is strongly rejected in every econometric

specification. When one considers that American and British industrial workers in the late

nineteenth century, using conventional income measures, are at least twice as wealthy as a

household in rural India in 1983, this result is surprising.2 This finding implies an extraordinary

improvement in nutritional well-being among the poor in the last century. I also discover that

the validity of the comparison across time is strengthened by historical narrative evidence. In

particular, the findings here are robust to estimation bias, the failure to capture home produced

calories in the 1888 Cost of Living Survey and measurement error.

           Using the Engel curve implied by the calorie elasticities for both American and British

households, I construct an expenditure elasticity of calories-aggregate income relationship.

Using the calorie elasticity estimates for developing countries, I derive new aggregate income

estimates for developing countries based upon the Engel curve. Traditional income estimates

imply that those in developing countries today are many times poorer than American and British

workers in the late nineteenth century. Unlike the aggregate income estimates derived from

GDP deflators or purchasing power parity (PPP), the Engel based estimates imply that those in

developing countries are wealthier than American or British households in the late nineteenth

century. In particular, the Engel-based income estimates are six to ten times greater than

2
    For more on historical income measures see Maddison (1995).

                                                         3
traditional income estimates. While the Engel curve may or may not be the optimal way to

derive estimates of income, the fact that the income estimates are many times greater than the

traditional estimates shows another dimension upon which our traditional income measures may

be flawed.

       In total, these facts lead to two related conclusions. The first is that the press of hunger

has transformed dramatically over time and in a way not captured by our income estimates.

These new income estimates also imply that economic growth may be understated. Either those

in the past were much poorer than previously thought or those from developing countries are

wealthier than our income estimates predict. In both cases the conclusion is the same—living

standards have increased dramatically over time, and our current estimates of economic growth

are too low.



II. Data and Summary Dietary Measures

       The historical calorie elasticities presented in this paper come from a unique and rich

household survey from the late nineteenth century. The survey, called the “Cost of Living of

Industrial Workers in the United States and Europe 1888-1890” (henceforth 1888CEX), was

conducted by the United States Department of Labor to asses the living standards of American

and European industrial workers in the late nineteenth century. The 1888CEX contains a sample

of 8,544 families working in industrial sectors in both Western Europe and the United States.

The majority of the households in the survey, 6,809, are from the United States. The European

sub-sample comes from Germany, Switzerland, Belgium, Great Britain, and France, although the

majority of the European households, 1,024, come from Great Britain. Since the survey was

designed to investigate the living standards of industrial households, the geographic distribution




                                                 4
of households in the United States is not even, but both the American and British samples appear

to be broadly representative of industrial households at the time.3

        The survey contains detailed annual expenditure information for both food and non-food

items and annual income information for all members of the household (father, mother, and

children). In addition, demographic information on the household’s age and sex composition, as

well as a detailed recording of the household head’s occupation, is included in the survey.

Calorie conversions were created in conjunction with the Aldrich Report on retail prices in a

methodology described by Logan (2005). Throughout the paper, per capita calories (PCC) are

defined as the total annual quantity of calories available to a household divided by household

size. Income and expenditure are also standardized by household size, and per capita income

(PCI) and per capita expenditure (PCE) are calculated by taking total annual income and

expenditure and dividing them by the total number of people in the household, respectively.

        Before turning to calorie elasticity estimates, it may be useful to present other measures

of nutrition that can be derived from the survey. In particular, average calories per head, the

percent of the budget devoted to food, and the average price of calories as a percent of a day’s

wage are all useful ways of measuring nutritional well-being. While these measures do not have

the straightforward economic interpretation of calorie elasticities and may not be strongly related

to hunger per se, these measures should be brought into the analysis as a motivation for using

calorie elasticities as the economic quantification of hunger. To foreshadow the case study

presented in the next section, I will compare the historical summary measures with those for

India in 1983 as given by Subramanian and Deaton (1996).



3
 See Haines (1979), Lees (1979), and Modell (1978) for more on the types of households sampled, sampling
methodology, and the representativeness of the 1888CEX. For more on the use of household surveys in economics
see Stigler (1954) and Deaton (1997).


                                                      5
       The most obvious summary measure of nutrition is the average number of calories per

person. Table 1 shows the average calories per head for the American and British samples of the

1888CEX as well as those for India in 1983. As the table shows, those in the late nineteenth

century had far fewer calories per head than those in India. The Indian households in 1983 had

40% more calories than British industrial households, and 20% more calories than American

industrial households. By this measure, it would appear that those in the past were nutritionally

worse off, and this directly contradicts the conclusions one would draw from the income

comparisons. At a minimum, the calorie levels suggest that we look deeper at the nutritional

well-being of these households.

       But can we make inferences about hunger based on calories per head? Yes and no.

While it is easy to conjecture that more calories are better, it is harder to say who is hungrier. In

order to make the case that one group was hungrier than another we would need answers to the

following questions: What are the calorie requirements of the two groups? Are there differences

in calorie wastage between the two groups? Would technology differences effect the preparation

of food? How is food, in general, distributed in this culture, and what manipulations to the data

must be performed in order to capture those features of food distribution? Since so much

additional information is needed, the issue of hunger, or demand for nutrition, cannot be known

from average calories alone. While the implication of the calorie levels reported here suggest

that those in developing countries are doing much better nutritionally than nineteenth century

industrial workers, we need more information to make such a conjecture a conclusion.

       The share of the budget devoted to food has been a measure of well being since Engel

first noted the proposition that wealthier families devoted a smaller share of their budget to food

than poorer families. Since that time it has been regarded as a measure of well-being. Table 1




                                                  6
lists the fraction of the budget devoted to food for the American and British samples of the

1888CEX as well as those for India in 1983. As the table shows, American and British families

in the late nineteenth century devoted at best 50% of expenditure to food, while those in India

devoted more than 60% of expenditure to food. The budget shares suggest that those in India are

slightly worse off than industrial families in the United States and Great Britain in the late

nineteenth century. From this measure of nutritional well-being we would reach the opposite

conclusion from that obtained with calorie levels.

       The open question is whether the share of the budget devoted to food is the appropriate

quantification of hunger. There are several problems with budget shares as the measure of

hunger. Budget shares take no account of the trade-offs between home production and direct

purchases of food, differences in calorie price, or differences in the price of other necessities

such as heating fuel and shelter. Budget shares also tell us nothing about diet quality, and it

could be true that equal fractions of the same budget could yield very different bundles of food

with highly dissimilar quality and subsequently large differences in nutritional well-being. As

such, it is unclear how we should interpret differences in the budget share devoted to food,

particularly over time.

       The third measure of nutrition would be the price of calories. Economists such as

Mirrlees (1975) and Stiglitz (1976) have described the situation in which people are so wasted

that they cannot work, and this leads to very low wages and continued malnourishment. In this

way, a person is trapped in a malnourishment and poverty feedback loop—poor nutrition

produces low income, and this low income produces further poor nutrition. There is little

evidence that these sorts of poverty traps exist in present day populations. Fogel (1994b) has

asserted that such traps did exist well into the eighteenth century, although he too concedes that




                                                  7
these sorts of poverty traps, where nutrition feeds back to wages, were non-existent in western

populations after the middle of the nineteenth century.

        If these sorts of poverty traps did exist the demand equations estimated later in this paper

and by others would be endogenous, so it is useful to analyze the price of calories before

estimating the elasticity. Endogeneity would only be a problem, however, if one could produce

evidence that a day’s worth of calories (both calories needed for sustenance and for a day’s

worth of labor) were far out of reach of the general population. As Table 1 shows, a day’s worth

of calories (using 2,300 calories as a lower bound) cost around ten percent of a typical day’s

wage among industrial workers in the United States, and around thirteen percent of an industrial

worker’s daily wage in Great Britain. Subramanian and Deaton (1996) find that a day’s worth of

calories, namely 2,600 calories a day—more than needed for sustenance and a day of hard labor,

cost less than five percent of a typical day’s wage in Maharastra, India in 1983. By this measure

those in India are better off than the industrial workers in the late nineteenth century. Even when

looking by industry, which helps control for calorie price and income differentials, the variation

in the percentage is slight, and even households in the highest paid industries would have to

devote a larger fraction of their daily wage to obtain 2,600 calories than those in India today.

While these percentages of the daily wage imply that it is doubtful that nutrition fed back to

income in the late nineteenth century, they are still much greater than the low values calculated

for India.

        It is surprising that calories cost less than a 20th of a day’s wage in rural India in 1983 and

more than a 10th of a day’s wage in both the United States and Great Britain. Certainly one

conclusion that could be drawn from such a fact is that the price of calories has declined

dramatically in the last century. The fraction of the nineteenth century industrial workers wage,




                                                  8
in today’s income, is many times larger than the value of the low wages earned in India, which

could be used as a rough way of measuring the decline in calorie prices over time.

        These summary measures are informative, and yet they do not all point in the same

direction. While average calories and calorie prices tell us that those in the past were worse off,

the budget share tells us that both groups were nearly equally well off. While these results by

themselves conflict with inferences based on income estimates, it is not clear if any of these

measures capture living standards and quality of life, at least on their own. Additionally, these

measures do not survive time and space transformations well. A more economic approach,

where we quantify the demand for nutrition, would allow us to quantify hunger in such a way

that we could compare demand over time and space. The most intuitive candidate is the calorie

elasticity, a straightforward quantification of nutritional demand that has a direct economic

interpretation.

        Given that calories are necessities, we should expect them to be income and expenditure

inelastic. Furthermore, we would generally say that households with large calorie elasticities are

hungrier than households with small calorie elasticities. This follows from our intuition that if

one is hungry they will devote a large share of their marginal income to securing more calories.

Following basic principles, demand for calories, x, can be thought of as a function of prices and

income, xi ( p1 ,..., p n , I ) or prices and expenditure, xi ( p1 ,..., pn , E ) . The income elasticity of

calories is defined to be

                                       ∂ ln xi ( p1 ,..., p n , I )
                                      ηi =
                                                ∂ ln I
The expenditure elasticity is defined analogously. Since elasticities are unit-free measures of

demand responsiveness, they can be compared over time and space without the qualifiers,

caveats, and conjectures needed when using the other measures mentioned above. Additionally,


                                                       9
calorie elasticities reflect demand for nutrition, not a predescribed measure of nutritional

adequacy. As such, calorie elasticities allow us to compare demand for nutrition and infer which

group is hungrier than another.

       In the following sections I compare my historical estimates of the calorie elasticity to

those from developing countries today. While there is no general agreement on the size of the

calorie elasticity in developing countries an upper bound has been established in the literature.

As will be shown, the historical calorie elasticities presented here are above the upper bound

seen for developing countries today. To make the comparison concrete, I first compare the

historical estimates to the range advanced by Subramanian and Deaton (1996), who find that the

expenditure elasticity of calories is between .3 and .5 for families in rural Indian villages in 1983.

I compare my results to their estimates as a case study for three reasons. First, my methodology

is similar to theirs, and it is important to have similar methodologies if the results are to be

comparable.4 Secondly, Subramanian and Deaton’s work is concerned with a rural population in

the developing world, and as such it serves as an example of the sorts of space and time

comparisons one may do when using caloric elasticity estimates. Third, their work is concerned

with the plausible range of calorie elasticities for developing countries, and their findings have

been influential for development economists concerned with crafting economic policies that will

be effective in eliminating hunger. I then compare the historical elasticity estimates with a broad

sampling of calorie elasticity estimates from the developing world, and also explore how the

conclusions drawn from the calorie elasticity comparisons are similar to and different from the

conclusions drawn from comparing other measures of well-being.




                                                  10
III. Comparing Calorie Elasticities – A Case Study

A. Calorie Elasticity Estimates

        Following convention, I estimate the elasticity with the log linear equation

                                     ln(xi ) = α + β ln(Ii ) + ΓZ + ε
                                                                 i i


where β is the elasticity and Z a vector of controls. The log linear functions presented here were

estimated using ordinary least squares (OLS). Since taking the logs of both income and calories

produces an approximate joint normality, OLS is indeed appropriate for estimating the elasticity.

The OLS regression estimates presented here are taken as summary measures of each respective

population’s demand for calories.

        Table 2 shows the OLS regressions of the calorie elasticities for American and British

households in the late nineteenth century. As the table shows, the American calorie elasticities

are ten to forty percent lower than the corresponding British calorie elasticities. These

differences suggest a large gap in the nutritional well-being of the British and American

industrial classes in the late nineteenth century in favor of American households. When one

considers Lees’ (1979) description of the British households in the 1888CEX these results may

well understate that differential. Narrative evidence confirms British industrial families were

more malnourished than American industrial households in the late nineteenth century, so we

would expect the British calorie elasticities to be greater than the American calorie elasticities.5

Given their congruence with the historical record, a comparison of these historical elasticities

with those from contemporary countries seems appropriate.



4
 Our sample sizes are also similar, which enhances the comparison.
5
 See Shergold (1982) for more on comparative living standards in the late nineteenth century, and Logan (2005) for
more on the calories elasticity differential between the US and Great Britain.


                                                       11
         Subramainian and Deaton (1996) estimate the expenditure elasticity of calories in rural

India. Their data come from the thirty-eighth round of the National Sample Survey (NSS) in

1983. They have a total sample of 5,630 households, 10 from each of 563 villages. Using both

parametric and non-parametric techniques, they conclude that “the range of estimates that we

have established for the expenditure elasticity of calories, from .3 to .5, is the right one for this

part of rural India,” (p. 161).

         Before turning to features of the case study it is important to note that comparing like

calorie elasticity estimates is best, and this will only be true if the measures of calorie availability

are similar. While constructing the NSS data to be similar to the 1888CEX and then estimating

the caloric elasticities would be an attractive research strategy, it would not be as informative as

the results presented below.6 Constructing the NSS as if it were the 1888CEX would create

biased caloric availability measures in the Indian data. It is well known that in Indian villages

poor families consume many meals outside of the home and wealthy families serve many meals

in their homes that are not consumed by household members.7 With this being true, simply

taking household measures of calories would systematically understate the calories available to

poor households and overstate the calories available to wealthy households in the NSS. For this

reason, Subramanian and Deaton construct their measure of caloric availability based on

information about where the meal was consumed in order to capture calories consumed by

household members outside of the household. Indeed, one of the reasons that the NSS collects

information about where calories are consumed is to overcome this potential problem. For the

1888CEX, however, such information is unnecessary. It is well known that members of



6
  As will be shown, the historical calorie estimates are greater than all of the estimates for developing countries, so
doing such a comparison of one country would not explain why the finding holds for other countries.
7
  See Subramanian and Deaton (1996) for a discussion.


                                                           12
industrial families in the late nineteenth century consumed nearly all their meals in their own

households, where guests were infrequent and the diet monotonous.8

           In Table 2, I reject the hypothesis that the historical expenditure elasticity of calories

estimates fall within the range noted by Subramanian and Deaton in every specification of the

expenditure elasticity of calories. In Subramanian and Deaton’s first specification, a regression

of the log of per capita calories on the log of per capita expenditure, they obtain a point estimate

near .5.9 In the historical regression of the log of per capita calories on the log of per capita

expenditure the American point estimate is .61, and the British point estimate is .68, and I reject

the hypothesis that either of the historical expenditure elasticities is less than or equal to .5. Even

controlling for family size and the share of the household in five year age categories in the

regression, where the American elasticity estimate is .55 and the British estimate is .62, I reject

the same hypothesis.

           In Subramanian and Deaton’s fullest parametric specification of the model, they regress

the log of per capita calories on the log of per capita expenditure, the log of family size, shares of

the family by sex and age, and other covariates such as religion, caste, and geographic location.

When I run a regression similar to theirs in Table 3 I continue to reject the hypothesis that the

historical expenditure elasticities of calories are less than or equal to .5. When Subramanian and

Deaton estimate the same regression their point estimate of the elasticity is .37, while for the

United States the elasticity is .54 and for Great Britain it is .67. Not only are the historical

estimates greater than Subramanian and Deaton’s estimates, but they are, in the fullest model,

greater than the largest of Subramanian and Deaton’s elasticity estimates. Even in the fullest




8
    See Kertzer and Barbagli (2002), Byington (1910), and Chapin (1909).
9
    They in fact use a non-parametric technique and their global slope is close to .45.


                                                            13
model, I continue to reject the hypothesis that the historical expenditure elasticity of calories

estimates are less than or equal to .5.

       An important caveat in this case study is measurement error. If there were only

traditional measurement error in the 1888CEX it would imply that the historical elasticities are

biased downward, and the strength of my conclusions would be enhanced since attenuation bias

would imply that the historical estimates are too low. If, however, both calories and expenditure

are measured with error, and if these errors are correlated, I will overstate the true expenditure

elasticity of calories if the correlation between the errors dominates the attenuation bias. Bouis

and Haddad (1992) have shown that when both types of measurement errors are present in a

linear model of calorie demand the correlated measurement error dominates the attenuation bias.

Subramanian and Deaton show, however, that if the log of non-food expenditure is used as an

instrument for the log of per capita expenditure the resulting elasticity estimate is guaranteed to

be biased downward even if there is correlated measurement error.

       While OLS may be biased upwards depending on which type of measurement error

dominates, and therefore constitutes an upper bound on the elasticity, the instrumented estimates

will with certainty understate the expenditure elasticity of calories. Table 4 shows the upper and

lower bound estimates of the expenditure elasticity of calories. As the table shows, the lower

bound estimates for the historical elasticities, which fall to .45, are greater than Subramanian and

Deaton’s upper bound estimate for their calorie elasticity, which at it highest is .38. This result

confirms that these historical estimates of the expenditure elasticity of calories are much larger

than Subramanian and Deaton’s estimates for India in 1983. The historical elasticities are out of

the range of the elasticities for these Indian households in 1983.




                                                 14
B. Calorie Price Elasticities

        Another measure to compare, that is related to calorie elasticities, is the expenditure

elasticity of calorie price. Earlier, I noted that the food elasticity is not a good quantifier of

hunger since even well-fed people may have high food elasticities if they have high demand for

expensive foods. Note, however, that the reverse should also hold. People who are very hungry

should have relatively low expenditure elasticities of calorie price since they would desire

increased quantity over quality. Also note that each household faces a unique price of calories

based upon the quantity and types of foods that they consume, and this is easily estimated from

the 1888CEX. Further, when one considers that the expenditure elasticity of food can be

decomposed into the expenditure elasticity of calories (which we can take as a diet quantity

measure) and the expenditure elasticity of calorie price (which we can take as a diet quality

measure), the share of the food elasticity that is devoted to quantity will be larger for those who

are hungry.

        To see how this is achieved we can decompose the food expenditure elasticity. First,

consider the expenditure elasticity of food, which is

                                E[ln( foodbudget i )] = α F + β F ln ( y i )

where y is expenditure per capita and β F is the expenditure elasticity of food expenditure. Note

that total food expenditure is also total calorie expenditure, and it is the product of the price of

the calories consumed by the household and the quantity of the calories consumed by the

household. This gives the identity


                                         foodbudget i ≡ P Q
                                                         i i




                                                    15
where P is the price of calories and Q is the quantity of calories. Note also that calorie price has

an expenditure elasticity (E[ln( Pi )] = α P + β P ln( y i ) ) and that the calorie quantity has an

expenditure elasticity (E[ln(Qi )] = α Q + β Q ln( y i ) ) . Taking the log of food identity and

substituting the calorie price and calorie quantity elasticties into the food elasticity equation

gives


                     E [ln ( foodbudget      i   )] = α F + (β P + β Q )ln ( y i )
where the slope of the food expenditure elasticity is simply the expenditure elasticity of calorie

price added to the expenditure elasticity of calorie quantity and where α F = α P + α Q . As noted

earlier, truly hungry people will increase the quantity of their calories more than those who are

well fed, and this is why the size of the calorie elasticity, rather than the food elasticity, is the

more appropriate measure of hunger. In looking at the share of the food elasticity devoted to

calorie quantity, β Q (β P + β Q ) , we can control for the overall size of the food elasticity. While

it may be true that nearly all people will increase the price they pay for calories somewhat as

their income increases, the share of the food elasticity devoted to increased quantity is a

standardized way of looking at hunger that is very closely related to calorie elasticities and

retains the calorie elasticity’s intuitive appeal.

        The price elasticities of calories further confirm the finding that workers in the late

nineteenth century were worse off nutritionally than households in rural India in 1983. Table 5

shows the expenditure elasticity of calorie price for the American, British and Indian data. As

we can see, the American and British price elasticities are much lower than the Indian price

elasticities. While the Indian price elasticity is .32, the American price elasticity is .13, and the

British price elasticity is .15. Also, note that the hypothesis of price elasticity equality between


                                                      16
the American and British households cannot be rejected. While Subramanian and Deaton find

that the food elasticity is equally divided between the price elasticity and the calorie elasticity (so

that roughly 50% of the food elasticity is due to increased quality), less than 25% of the food

elasticity is due to the price elasticity for American and British industrial households in the late

nineteenth century. More than 75% of the food elasticity for American and British households

was devoted to increasing the size of the diet, and less than a quarter to increasing the quality of

the diet. Obviously, American and British households in the late nineteenth century were much

more concerned with increasing the quantity of their calories than the quality of their calories.

       While this comparison of calorie elasticities has established that those in contemporary

India are better fed than American and British industrial workers in the late nineteenth century,

this finding runs counter to the conclusions that economists have drawn about historical living

standards from conventional income estimates. That a person in rural India in 1983 was better-

fed than an American industrial worker a century before is surprising when one considers that

American industrial workers were among the highest paid in the world at the time. If it is true

that an American industrial worker in 1889 had nearly twice the purchasing power parity of a

rural Indian in 1983, which is what our traditional income estimates tell us, then this result is

truly astounding.10 In less than a century some of the poorest people in the world are better fed

than some of the wealthiest workers in the world were a century ago. From this case study I

conclude that the press of hunger has undergone a significant transformation in the last century.



IV. Evidence from the General Pattern of Calorie Elasticities

       While the case study showed that the historical calorie elasticity estimates are greater

than those living in Indian villages, the general pattern reveals that the historical estimates are




                                                  17
indeed at the highest end of what is seen today for developing countries. In Table 6 I have listed

the calorie elasticity estimates compiled by Strauss and Thomas (1995) that use a methodology

similar to my own. Namely, each of the estimates in the table come from an OLS or two-stage

least squares (2SLS) estimate of the calorie elasticity where the caloric unit is the number of

calories available to the household and income and expenditure are the measures of household

resources. Both the income and expenditure elasticity estimates for both Great Britain and the

United States are among the highest estimates when compared to those compiled by Strauss and

Thomas. Even when I instrument for expenditure using income, as Deaton (1997) has suggested

in order to purge the expenditure elasticity of endogeneity, I find that an American worker in

1888 was as well-fed as a rural Indonesian, and only marginally better-fed than someone in Sri

Lanka. The British worker is worst off of all-- they have the largest estimate of the expenditure

elasticity of calories.

           In looking at the general pattern it is important to note the role that urban and rural

locations play in calorie elasticities.11 The households in the 1888CEX are generally urban

households, while contemporary calorie elasticities are usually estimated for rural populations.

In contemporary developing nations those in urban locations generally have lower caloric

elasticities. Economic historians have established that rural households were better off than

industrial, urban households in the past. Steckel (2001) notes that increasing urbanization has

been blamed for the decline in living standards in the middle of the nineteenth century. In a

broader survey, Steckel (1999) analyzed eight developed countries and finds that health was

negatively correlated with urbanization throughout the industrialization process. Cuff (2005) has

shown that those in remote locals in the antebellum period enjoyed a significant health advantage

10
     This estimate of PPP comes from the estimates of Officer (2001, 2002, and 2003) and McCusker (2003).




                                                         18
over their urban contemporaries. With these considerations in mind, we can say that, a priori,

urban households in late nineteenth century developed countries and rural households in

developing countries will have the largest calorie elasticities for their times.

         Demographic measures such as infant mortality and life expectancy support the notion

that those in the late nineteenth century were worse off than those in developing countries today.

Returning to the case study, we can note that while 90% of children born in 1983 Maharastra,

India lived to see their fifth birthday, 80% did so in the United States, and only 75% did so in

Great Britain. Similarly, life expectancy was also much shorter in the past. While males aged

ten in the United States and Great Britain in the late nineteenth century could expect to live

another 50 years, males aged ten in India in 1983 could expect to live another 55 years.12 In

general, both infant mortality and life expectancy are much better today in developing countries

than they were in the late nineteenth century.

         When considering other estimates of well-being, such as height, the comparison between

the past and present is more nuanced. Historically, the country with the taller population had

greater per capita GDP and lower calorie elasticities. In the contemporary developing world,

however, the relationship is not as straightforward. Development economists generally agree

that, as a region, Sub-Saharan Africa has the lowest per capita GDP and highest calorie

elasticities, and yet stature in many Sub-Saharan African nations is greater than many nations

with much higher per capita GDP.13 There are several nations in Sub-Saharan Africa with

statures that would make them taller than American and British industrial workers in the late



11
   Of course, what exactly is meant by “urban” and “rural” has changed over time, and even today their meaning can
only be derived from context.
12
   While a five year life expectancy differential may appear small, changes in life expectancy at age ten require large
reductions in later-life mortality that are much more difficult to achieve than reductions in infant mortality.
13
   It must be noted that ethnic and cultural differences in diet (namely, the propensity to eat significant amounts of
animal protein) may explain the lack of a GDP-height relationship in developing countries today.


                                                          19
nineteenth century, and others with shorter statures.14 South Asians, despite their better

economic performance, are shorter than late nineteenth century industrial workers.

          Due to the inherent problems of comparing point estimates of height, a look at the

growth rate of average stature in centimeters per year would be more appropriate.15

Unfortunately, it is difficult to calculate a growth rate due to the lack of a general upward height

trend in the developing world. Moradi (2002) analyzes height trends in Sub-Saharan Africa and

South Asia from 1950 to 1980. He finds that South Asians were making steady but slow height

gains, but Sub-Saharan Africa had two nations where the height trend was increasing, nine with

decreasing stature, one with a U shaped trend, and nine with inverted U shaped trends. These

types of dissimilarities are not found in historical height trends. Indeed, A’Hearn (2003) and

others have shown that the height trends of European nations moved very closely together even

though they were at different stages in the industrialization process. Additionally, Steckel (2001)

has shown that when height and per capita GDP diverged in the nineteenth century, they did so

in nearly every nation of Western Europe and the United States. Since stature varies greatly

from country to country toady without a clear short-run trend it is difficult to extend the

comparison to stature.



V. Considering the Validity of the Comparison

        The lessons and conclusions that we draw from the comparison of calorie elasticities are

only as valid as the comparison itself. Here, I consider three objections to the comparisons of

caloric elasticities across time and space. The comparisons made above would not be

14
 This comparison is made through the evidence presented by Moradi (2002) on heights, and assumes that industrial
women in the late nineteenth century were 158 centimeters tall.




                                                      20
appropriate if the estimates of calorie elasticities in the past are contaminated with indirect

estimation bias, the failure to report home production of calories, or measurement error. In the

end, we see that these objections, while potentially damaging, do not apply to the calorie

elasticity comparisons made in this paper.



A. The Indirect Estimates Objection

        The first objection to the comparison would be that the historical elasticity estimates are

more indirect than the other estimates presented in Table 6. Indirect estimates of calorie

elasticities are calculated by computing the income and/or expenditure elasticity of food for each

respective food group and then converting that measure to calories. The problem with indirect

estimates is that they miss the substitution that households make between foods within particular

food groupings. Elasticity estimates derived using the indirect methods are usually greater than

those that use the direct (calorie) method.

        I do not believe that the historical estimates are contaminated with “indirect bias” for four

reasons. First and foremost, Strauss and Thomas (1995) note that there is, a priori, nothing

inherent in the indirect methodology that necessarily creates larger estimates-- in some studies a

bias appears while in others it does not. While empirically caloric elasticities estimated with

indirect estimates tend to be greater than direct estimates, this does not hold for every study.

Secondly, food groups in the 1888CEX are fairly well detailed for the time of the survey, and I

therefore capture a large amount of substitution between calorie groups. It is well established in

the historical record that the diet of the working classes in the late nineteenth century was

monotonous (Kertzer and Barbagli 2003). Third, for food groupings that were fairly broad (fruit,

15
  Comparing height at a point in time is analogous to comparing GDP at a point in time—it would be unreasonable
to expect people who have only had fifty years of a stature transition to achieve the same heights as those whose


                                                       21
for example), the calorie price of the foods in that group did not vary significantly by food group

(calorie price of oranges versus calorie price of apples, for example). This means that

substitution between goods within a food group were largely not substitutions towards more or

less expensive calories, as far as we can calculate for the time. Lastly, looking at changes in

food groups across the income distribution strongly suggest a great deal of substitution away

from and towards different food groups. If the vast majority of the substitution was within a

food group then the expenditure shares devoted to particular food groups would remain nearly

constant from the top to bottom deciles of the income distribution, and this was clearly not the

case. In fact, I find more substitution between food groups for industrial workers in the late

nineteenth century than Subramanian and Deaton (1996) report for Indian households in 1983;

this would not be true if the historical estimates were more indirect than their elasticity estimates.

These four facts establish that the historical estimates are at least no more indirect than estimates

from developing countries today.



B. The Home Production of Calories Objection

        The second objection to the validity of the comparisons made in Table 6 has to do with

the home production of calories.16 A home production objection notes that home-produced

calories are not captured in the 1888CEX. Furthermore, if the distribution of home-produced

calories is skewed towards the poorest families in the survey my estimates of available calories

are too low for poor households. This yields calorie elasticity estimates that are too high in that

they have systematically underestimated the total calories available to poorer households. I



statures have been growing for more than a century.
16
   This is attributed to Martha L. Olney, who reminded me that even in very urban locations it was not uncommon to
have live animals, in particular chickens, in the backyard.


                                                       22
should not, therefore, compare the 1888CEX calorie elasticity estimates to estimates that account

for home production, as most studies in the developing world attempt to do.

       It is true that the 1888CEX does not include home produced calories. I also agree that the

distribution of home-produced calories is skewed towards poorer families, but only in the total

population. The distribution within the 1888CEX, however, is not likely to be as skewed as the

distribution in the general population. Furthermore, if the home production objection is valid,

poor families would have food expeditures whose caloric content would be biased away from

calories that are easily produced in the home (e.g. fruits and vegetables), and this is simply not

found in the data. Finally, this argument implicitly assumes that the error in calories is correlated

with income or expenditure, and we saw earlier that the result was robust to this sort of

measurement error.

       Narrative historical evidence cast doubt on the home production objection. In an

insightful monograph, Byington (1910) conducted intensive interviews of nearly 100 families in

a mill town near Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania near the turn of the century. She found that poor

families lacked the income necessary to partake in significant home production, which runs

counter to the assumption of the home production objection. In particular, Byington found that

the poor families she studied bought their food in the market on a daily basis, while the wealthier

families were able to buy in bulk and to buy whole animals (including chickens and pigs) since

they had the income to provide for their storage.17 Furthermore, she found that dinner guests

were infrequent in the households, indicating that calorie slippage (a significant number of

available calories being provided to people who are not members of the household) is not a

serious concern. In short, home production in the late nineteenth century required planning and




                                                 23
savings which poor families could not afford. Furthermore, there is nothing in Byington’s

evidence that suggests that poor industrial families produced calories in their homes in a way that

wealthier industrial families could not or did not.

        Additional narrative evidence supports Byington’s conclusions. Streightoff (1911) notes

a study by Forman which found that very poor families in Washington “spend what little they

have unwisely…these people never bought their own flour for breadmaking…and they seemed

to ignore the value of such a cheap wholesome food as corn meal” (p. 99). He goes on to say

that “some of the economies practiced among working families of the lowest rank are pitiful” (p.

100). He also found that perishables were rarely purchased far in advance since poor families

could not afford ice. Chapin (1909) similarly found that “most families buy their supplies from

day to day in very small quantities, partly from lack of facility for storing and keeping food, and

partly from the lack of money enough at one time to enable them to buy any large amount” (p.

132). These studies strengthen Byington’s claims about poor families and home production, and

cast further doubt on the home production objection. The narrative evidence implies that any

home production bias in the 1888CEX would lead to higher estimates of the caloric elasticities

than those I have presented since it would be wealthy families whose calories are understated.

        Additional evidence that speaks to the home production argument is found in the

1888CEX itself. Within the 1888CEX interviewers commented on the general condition of the

home and noted items that the family owns, including gardens, poultry, cows, and fruit trees.

The comments were not uniform, however, and comments were not made for all households.

Nevertheless, the comments can be used to identify the income distribution of home producing



17
  Byington also found that poor families lacked the money to buy ice by which they could store food. She also
noted that these were the families who would be most helped by buying in bulk. Instead, these families were forced
to live day to day and nearly all of the food they consumed was purchased in the market.


                                                       24
households, and to learn if the income distributions of home producing and non-home producing

households are similar.18

         In a close analysis of the comments the results point in the opposite direction of the home

production objection.19 The means of the log of per capita income and the log of per capita

expenditure for both home producing and non-home producing households are very close to one

another, and households with home production, as indicated in the comments, are found at all

points of the income and expenditure distributions. Also, the income and expenditure

distributions of home-producing and non-home producing households were very similar. In

looking at the comments of the enumerators, I find no evidence that home production of calories

is concentrated in low income households.

         The strongest argument against the home production objection is as follows. Suppose

that the poorest households—for convenience let us say the poorest third-- all participated in

home production. I would therefore understate the total calories available to those households

and overstate their expenditure elasticity of calories. Yet even if this were true the finding would

hold. Estimates for the wealthier two thirds of households will be correct, and certainly for the

top half they will be. Non-parametric expenditure elasticity estimates (not reported), which are

based on small local neighborhoods of the log of per capita expenditure, will not be influenced

by the failure to capture home production in the bottom third of households.20 Those results

show that the average of the expenditure elasticity for the wealthier two-thirds of households still

yields an estimate above .5 for the United States, and above .6 for the British. Therefore, even if

I were to exclude the poorest third of households from the 1888CEX the historical elasticity

18
   It is important to note that the comments mentioned several types of household items, and occasionally made
observations about the family and its organization and well-being. Given their detail, it is unlikely that comments
systematically under-counted home production.
19
   Of course, these results are not decisive since the comments were not uniform.



                                                         25
estimates would still be greater than what is seen in the developing world today. Indeed, to

refute this point one would have to argue that nearly all households participated in home

production, but this in turn would imply that the failure to capture home production is merely a

level (in logs) effect which would not change the elasticity estimates. Given such strong

narrative evidence and the lack of evidence from the comments of the interviewers, I do not see

the home production objection as applying to the historical calorie elasticity estimates.



C. The Measurement Error Objection

           The final objection to be considered is that the larger calorie elasticity for historical

populations is primarily due to measurement error of income in contemporary developing

countries. Essentially, this argument follows from the belief that household resources are poorly

measured in developing countries today, and income measures are much worse than the

measures available in the 1888CEX. As Deaton (1997) has noted, however, surveyors in

developing countries have taken great pains to ensure that their measures are accurate. For

example, the NSS does not ask for household income, as that question appeared to seriously

hamper the response rate, and is difficult to measure for poor rural households. Indeed, one

reason that expenditure, rather than income, is taken as the measure of household resources is

that expenditure has less errors than income.

           Turning to the particulars of this objection, measurement error could explain a small part

of the results presented here, but to assert that they explain any significant portion of the

differences in the elasticities one would have to take two contradictory positions. It could be true

that expenditure is measured with more error in developing countries, but that would also mean

that the greater errors in expenditure in developing countries would be (potentially) correlated

20
     For the non-parametric results see Logan (2005).

                                                        26
with the errors in calories, resulting in even higher calorie elasticity estimates. As noted earlier,

Bouis and Haddad (1992) have shown that in a linear model the correlated measurement error

will usually be greater than the attenuation bias, leading to upwardly biased estimates of calorie

elasticities when both types of errors are present. 21 This implies that asserting that there is

greater measurement error in contemporary developing countries is equivalent to stating that the

calorie elasticity estimates for developing countries presented in Table 6 are too high. Section III

showed that even the estimates for the United States and Great Britain that were too low by

construction were greater than the estimates from India that may be plagued with correlated

measurement error.

           We can construct a reasonable bound for this measurement error with a simple

calculation. First, consider the traditional errors-in-variables problem where the equation to be

estimated is y = βx + ε where y, x, β and ε are vectors and further assume that x = x + υ where

υ is orthogonal to the true x . In reality, we would like to estimate y = βx + ε but the well-

                                                          ⎛ σ2 ⎞
known result is that the probability limit becomes b = β ⎜⎜ 2 x 2 ⎟⎟ .
                                                          ⎝ σ x + συ ⎠

           Using the case study for illustration, and noting that the relative variance is the important

feature we can further assume that the variance in properly measured expenditure can be

normalized to one so that σ x2(US ) = σ x2( GB ) = σ x2( India ) = 1 . Also, we can assume that the true

elasticity, β in the probability limit given above, is either the American or British expenditure

elasticity of calories. Using the results of Table 3 we can use the probability limit to bound the

measurement error to find how much measurement error there would have to be in the Indian

data to explain the differences in the calorie elasticity estimates. Formally, what this measures is

21
     An important caveat here is that linearity appears to be a very good approximation to the actual relationship


                                                            27
the proportional variance of the measurement error, σ υ2 , relative to the variance of expenditure

properly measured, σ x2 , since we have normalized the variance of properly measured

expenditure.

        The arithmetic shows that the variance of the Indian measurement error must be almost

half of properly measured expenditure variance ( σ υ2( India ) = .5σ x2( India ) ) for the true calorie

elasticity in India to be equal to the American elasticity estimate, and the variance of the error

must be nearly 85% of the properly measured expenditure variance ( σ υ2( India ) = .85σ x2( India ) ) for the

British elasticity to be the true elasticity for India. Similarly, if we use the results of Table 4 and

compare the lowest bound estimates of the historical expenditure elasticity of calories (which by

construction are too low) to the upper bound of the Indian elasticities (which may be too high)

we find that the variance of the Indian measurement error must be almost 20% of properly

measured expenditure for the true elasticity in India to be equal to the American estimate, and

the variance of the error must be nearly 35% of the properly measured expenditure variance for

the British elasticity to be the true elasticity. Obviously, such an objection implies such

implausibly high measurement error that it essentially argues that expenditures should not be

measured at all in developing countries. Given the arithmetic, the objection is valid only if our

methods of collecting microeconomic data at the household level have seriously deteriorated in

the last one hundred years.

        As this section has shown, the comparisons made in this paper are robust to indirect

estimation bias, the failure to capture home production of calories, and measurement error. I

therefore believe that the comparison advanced here is valid, legitimate, and useful. Even if my



between calories and expenditure.


                                                       28
estimates were equal to what we observe in the developing world today the implication would be

the same—the press of hunger has undergone a magnificent transformation in the last century.



VI. Calorie Demand, Engel Curves and New Income Estimates

       Moving beyond hunger, the findings in this paper tell us something about income

estimates that may lead us to reexamine the reliability of our traditional estimates. In this section

I return to Engel curves, and use the Engel curve suggested by the historical elasticity estimates

to derive new income estimates for developing countries today based upon their calorie

elasticities. The 1888CEX is unique in this regard because the survey allows us to specify a

relationship between the calorie elasticities and aggregate income at a single point in time for

two nations whose calorie elasticities are estimated in the same way.

       The calorie elasticity-GDP per capita relationship is derived in the following way. First, I

take the expenditure elasticity of calories estimates from Table 2 as our elasticity estimates for

the United States and Great Britain.22 Secondly, I take the real 1889 GDP per capita estimates

given by Ward and Devereux (2003). Since Ward and Devereux employ the use of an updated

price index, their historical GDP estimates are more reliable than those that use long-span

measures. Taking the elasticities and the income estimates gives us two points in calorie

elasticity-real GDP per capita space. Using these two points in expenditure calorie elasticity-real

GDP per capita space we can derive a linear Engel function relating the expenditure elasticity of

calories to real GDP per capita in 1889. The income and elasticity values determine the line

given by ξ D = 1.324 − .0035(GDP1889 ) . Figure 1 shows the line that fits the American and British

elasticities and aggregate income estimates. It is noteworthy that this line is entirely plausible.




                                                 29
Greater GDP per capita gives us lower calorie elasticities, and at very low levels of income the

calorie elasticity will be very large, implying that food is a luxury at very low income levels.23

         Since we know the expenditure elasticity of calories for developing countries in Table 6,

we can place those calorie elasticities on the line given above to derive estaimates of real GDP

per capita. This assumes that all of these elasticities lie on the same Engel curve, and from that

we can derive income measures. The point of this exercise is not to argue that these real GDP

estimates are the most accurate, but instead to stress the magnitude of the difference between

traditional income estimates and those derived from this Engel curve. Table 7 reports both the

traditional and the Engel derived estimates of GDP per capita for these nations whose

expenditure elasticity of calories is reported in Table 6. The traditional GDP estimates listed in

Table 7 are made by taking the real 1983 GDP per capita of the developing nations expressed in

1997 dollars and then dividing this by the purchasing power of a 1997 US dollar relative to that

of a 1889 US dollar.24 As the table shows, there is a marked difference between the traditional

and Engel based estimates of real GDP per capita. For example, Sri Lanka’s 1983 GDP per

capita, under traditional estimates, is $19.20 in 1889 US dollars. With the Engel derivation,

however, their GDP per capita is $218.29 in 1889 US dollars.

         The factor of convergence reported in Table 7 is the amount that the traditional income

estimates must be multiplied by to equal the new Engel based income estimates. Given the large

factors of convergence in the table, it is safe to say that the Engel and purchasing power parity


22
   If one were to use the other historical elasticity estimates presented in this paper the income estimates for
developing countries derived from the Engel curve would be even greater.
23
   This equation would also be consistent with an argument that before the Industrial Revolution caloric elasticities
were close to one, assuming that real GDP grew at .5% per year every year since 1740.
24
   Another method would be to divide the real GDP expressed in 1997 dollars by the GDP deflator, and if those
results were used the qualitative implications would be the same. The value of the deflator comes from Officer
(2003). Also, the use of 1983 is to set the estimates of income at a point in time for specificity, and since it is a
midpoint of the 1980-1985 GDP estimates. Similar income numbers are found when using the average of 1980-
1985 real GDP and the average of 1975-1985 real GDP.


                                                          30
(PPP) based estimates of real GDP per capita are not in line with one another. As the table

shows, traditional income estimates understate the Engel income by a factor of more than six.

The lowest factor of convergence in Table 7 is 6.93, for the Philippines, and the largest is 11.36,

for Sri Lanka, with an average factor of convergence of more than 8.5. Note also that this same

factor could be used to argue that historical income numbers for the United States and Great

Britain are overstated by the same factor.

        The traditional income estimates presented in Table 7 are not the only income estimates

that the Engel-derived estimates can be compared to. Angus Maddison has produced the salient

study of income estimates from the modern past to the present. The Engel derived income

estimates are also greater than Maddison’s income estimates. For example, Maddison (1983)

estimates that real GDP per capita in the Philippines in 1980 was $430 in 1965 US dollars. The

Engel derived estimates find that real 1980 GDP per capita in the Philippines was $778 1965 US

dollars, more than 80% greater than Maddison’s estimates.25 While this difference is not as large

as the factor of convergence values in Table 7, it is still a substantial revision of the real GDP per

capita estimate for the Philippines in 1980.

        Even further, the Engel-based income estimates yield income estimates for poor countries

that are out of the range of real GDP estimates produced using a number of traditional methods.

Keeping with the example of the Philippines, Maddison (1983) gives the real GDP per capita of

the Philippines in 1965 as a percentage of American real GDP in 1965 under a number of

different weighting schemes.26 None of the schemes give 1965 Philippino GDP as more than

12.6% of American GDP in 1965. Engel-income, however, estimate that Philippino real GDP


25
   I took the Engel based 1983 real GDP estimate and used Maddison’s (1983) estimates of real GDP growth for the
Philippines to compute Engel derived real GDP estimates for the Philippines for 1965, 1975, and 1980.
26
   These include using the official exchange rate, 1965 US prices, 1975 multilateral weights, and 1970 multilateral
rates.


                                                        31
was more than 19% of American GDP per capita in 1965. Similarly, while various methods

estimate Philippino real GDP per capita in 1975 as no more than 15.9% of American GDP in

1975, the Engel estimates find that Philippino GDP was 17.7% of Americn GDP in 1975.27

        What does this mean for estimates of economic growth? If the Engel based income

estimates are correct then economic growth has been understated. Understatement could occur

in two ways, although neither is exclusive of the other. Either American and British economic

growth from the late nineteenth century to the present or the economic growth of developing

countries since the end of the Second World War has been seriously understated. Both of these

types of misestimates would drive the type of anomalies described here, assuming that

contemporary estimates of GDP per capita are estimated properly.

          What does this mean for estimates of well-being? There is a fundamental difference

between calorie elasticities, which quantify hunger, and GDP, which is the value of all goods and

services produced in the economy. As such, GDP tells us something very different about the

economy than calorie elasticities. GDP tells us how productive the labor (population), capital

and technology are in the economy, while calorie elasticities give us a summary measure of the

demand for one of life’s most basic necessities. Since these two measures purport to tell us

different, but related, things, we should not be surprised when they do not agree. The open

question, however, is how far apart the measures should be if we are to hold to the belief that

they are related to one another.

        The basic conclusion from the Engel analysis is that our measures of living standards

should be consistent, and when marked inconsistencies occur we should re-evaluate what our

measures purport to tell us. Calorie elasticities give us a microeconomic way of assessing living


27
  The weighting schemes for 1975 real GDP include exchange rates, own-country weights, United States weights,
and multilateral weights.


                                                      32
standards over time and space wholly within the economic apparatus. If the elasticities are not in

line with our PPP estimates, we should not be surprised. At a minimum, this Engel analysis

suggests that our PPP based estimates need to be revised. While one objection to such a

conclusion would be that there are different prices, different bundles, and different taste over

time and space, PPP has been advanced as a method to deal with such differences. This Engel

analysis also suggests that our PPP estimates perform very poorly over time. Indeed, the way

that our PPP estimates are constructed, as an interconnected web of between-country

comparisons, certainly give rise to large discrepancies across space. When one combines this

with the traditional methodology used to derive historical GDP estimates, where the price index

is set at a point in time and then GDP is regressed on growth rates to derive historical real GDP,

we are bound to get estimates that may be off by large factors over time. Calorie elasticities may

not be the best estimate, but the conclusions drawn from the Engel curve suggest that they may

be a better estimate than our PPP estimates if our goal is to quantify changes in human living

standards over time.



VII. Conclusion

       In his Nobel Address, Robert Fogel (1994a) suggested that economists use the insights of

economic historians as they devise economic policy.

       Failure to take account of economic history...has often led to a misunderstanding of
       current economic problems by investigators who have not realized that their
       generalizations rested upon transient circumstances. Nowhere is the need to recognize
       the role of long-run dynamics more relevant than in such pressing current issues as
       medical care, pension policies, and development policies (p. 1).

This paper furthers the case that economic history has important implications for contemporary

economic problems and for the way that we measure economic well-being over time and space.




                                                 33
That the dynamics of the increasing quality of human life fail to be captured in conventional

growth estimates adds further impetus to the recent suggestions that quality of life measures be

incorporated into discussions of growth. Indeed, Deaton (2005) has recently argued that current

growth estimates overstate economic growth and understate poverty reduction in poor countries.

       The empirical results in this paper establish a number of facts. First and foremost, people

in developing countries today are well fed in comparison to yesterday’s industrial workers.

Secondly, calorie elasticities have an intuitive appeal and their interpretation is robust to a

number of objections that would seriously damage comparisons of other measures of nutritional

well-being. Lastly, hunger-based estimates of aggregate income tell us a very different story

about the well-being of people in developing countries today, and also imply that economic

growth has been understated.

       I have argued in this paper that calorie elasticity differentials are real and meaningful, and

that there has been a magnificent transformation of hunger over time. Some of the poorest

people in the developing world today are better off, by this nutritional estimate, than industrial

workers a century ago, even though these late nineteenth century industrial workers are wealthier

than those in the developing world today. Indeed, the question now is not “Why are caloric

elasticities in the developing world so high?” but “How did caloric elasticities in the developing

world get so low?” To that end, more historical microeconomic measures of nutrition would be

helpful, and when they are absent analytic narratives may help us understand the historical

dynamics of hunger in developing nations.

         What are we to make of the finding that the poor of today are quite well fed when

compared to the relatively wealthy only a century ago? A rapidly declining price of calories may

be the answer to the empirical puzzle presented here. Indeed, some rough estimates presented in




                                                  34
this essay suggest that the price of calories has declined dramatically over the last century.

Given the Green Revolution, transportation innovations, and increasing technological

sophistication of agriculture in developing countries in the second half of the last century, we

should expect the price of calories to be relatively low in developing nations when compared to

the price of calories faced by the historical households analyzed in this paper.

       Even with this open question these findings give us hope that the defeat of hunger is

closer than many have previously thought, and they are in line with the calls to eliminate extreme

poverty in twenty years (Sachs 2005). Both the American and British economies grew quickly

between 1890 and 1920, and strong economic growth played a significant role in filling hungry

stomachs during that time. While this paper has painted an optimistic picture of hunger in

developing countries, it must be made clear that hunger continues to exact a devastating toll on

the world. In 2002 the World Health Organization listed hunger as the number one health risk in

the world, accounting for an estimated 3.4 million deaths in 2000, nearly all of which occurred in

poor countries. The open question is what policies will eliminate hunger once and for all.

History provides some clues as to which track to take, but it is up to contemporary policy makers

to use the lessons of economic history effectively.




                                                 35
                                           References

A’Hearn, Brian. (2003) “Anthropometric Evidence on Living Standards in Northern Italy, 1730-
      1860.” Journal of Economic History 63: 351-381.
Bouis, Howarth E. and Lawrence J. Haddad (1992). “Are Estimates of Calorie-Income Elasticities
       Too High? A Recalibration of the Plausible Range.” Journal of Development Economics 39:
       333-364.
Byington, Margaret F. (1910). Homestead: The Households of a Mill Town. Philadelphia: W.M. Fell
       Co.
Chapin, Robert Coit. (1909). The Standard of Living Among Workingmen’s Families in New York
      City. New York: Charities Publication.
Cuff, Timothy (2005). The Hidden Cost of Economic Development: The Biological Standard of
       Living in Antebellum Pennsylvania. Burlington, VT: Ashgate.
Deaton, Angus. (1997). The Analysis of Household Surveys: A Microeconometric       Approach to
      Development Policy. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins.
______. (2005). “Measuring Poverty in a Growing World (or Measuring Growth in a Poor World.)”
      The Review of Economics and Statistics 87: 1-19.
Fogel, Robert W. (1994a). “Economic Growth, Population Theory, and Physiology: The Bearing of
       Long-Term Processes on the Making of Economic Policy.” NBER Working Paper No. 4638.
______. (1994b). “Economic Growth, Population Theory, and Physiology: The Bearing of Long-
      Term Processes on the Making of Economic Policy.” American Economic Review 84: 369-
      395.
Fogel, Robert W. and Stanley L. Engerman. (1974). Time on the Cross: Evidence and Methods.
       Boston: Little, Brown and Co.
Haines, Michael R. (1979). “Industrial Work and the Family Life Cycle.” Research in Economic
       History 4: 289-356.
Johnston, Louis and Samuel H. Williamson. (2003). "The Annual Real and Nominal GDP for the
       United States, 1789 - 2002." Economic History Services, URL : http://www.eh.net/hmit/gdp/.
Kertzer, David, I. and Marzio Barbagli, eds. (2002). The History of the European Family, Volume 2
       Family Life in the Long Nineteenth Century. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Lees, Lynn H. (1979). “Getting and Spending: The family Budgets of English Industrial Workers in
       1890.” in John Merriman, ed. Consciousness and Class Experience in Nineteenth Century
       Europe. New York: Holmes and Meier: 169-186.
Logan, Trevon D. (2005). “Nutritional and Well-Being in the Late Nineteenth Century.” Mimeo,
       The Ohio State University.
Maddison, Angus (1983). “A Comparison of Levels of GDP Per Capita in Developed and
      Developing Countries, 1700-1980.” Journal of Economic History 43: 27-41.
______. (1995). Monitoring the World Economy 1820-1992. Paris: Development Centre of the
      OECD.



                                              36
McCusker, John J. (2003). “Comparing the Purchasing Power of Money in the United States (or
     Colonies) from 1665 to 2002.” Economic History Services, URL:
     http://www.eh.net/hmit/ppowerusd
Mirrlees, James A. (1975). “A Pure Theory of Underdeveleoped Economies.” in Lloyd G. Reynolds,
       ed. Agriculture in Development Theory. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Modell, John. (1978). “Patterns of Consumption, Acculturation, and Family Income Strategies in
      Late Nineteenth-Century America.” in Tamara K. Hareven and Maris A. Vinovskis, eds.
      Family and Population in Nineteenth Century America. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
      Press: 206-240.
Moradi, Alexander. (2002). “Height and Health of Women in Sub-Saharan Africa and
      South-Asia 1950-1980.” Mimeo, University of Tuebingen.
Nutribase (2001). The Nutribase Complete Book for Food Counts. New York: Avery.
Officer, Lawrence H. (2001), "Exchange Rate Between the United States Dollar and the British
       Pound, 1791-2000." Economic History Services, URL:
       http://www.eh.net/hmit/exchangerates/pound.php
______. (2002). “Exchange Rate Between the United States Dollar and Forty Other Countries 1913-
      1999.” Economic History Services, URL: http://www.eh.net/hmit/exchangerates
______. (2003). "The Annual Real and Nominal GDP for the United Kingdom, 1086 - 2000."
      Economic History Services, URL: http://www.eh.net/hmit/ukgdp/
Ruiz-Arranz, Marta, et. al. (2002) “More Calories or More Diversitry? An Econometric Evaluation
      of the Impact of the PROGRESA and PROCAMPO Transfer Programs on Food Security in
      Rural Mexico.” Mimeo, Harvard University.
Sachs, Jeffrey G. (2005). The End of Poverty: Economic Possibilities for Our Time. New York:
       Penguin Press.
Shergold, Peter R. (1982). Working-Class Life: The “American Standard” in Comparative
       Perspective 1899-1913. Pittsburgh, PA: Pittsburgh University Press.
Steckel, Richard H. (1986). (1999). “Industrialization and Health in Historical Perspective.” NBER
       Working Paper No. h0118.
______. (2001). “Health and Nutrition in the Preindustrial Era: Insights from a Millenium of
      Average Heights in Northern Europe.” NBER Working Paper No. 8542.
Stigler, George J. (1954). “The Early History of Empirical Studies of Consumer Behavior.” Journal
        of Political Economy 42: 95-113.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1976). “The Efficiency Wage Hypothesis, Surplus Labour, and the Distribution
        of Income in L.D.C.s.” Oxford Economic Papers 28: 185-207.
Strauss, John and Duncan Thomas. (1995). “Human Resources: Empirical Modeling of Household
       and Family Decisions.” in Jere Behrman and T.N. Srinivasan, eds., Handbook of
       Development Economics. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1883-2023.
______. (1998). “Health, Nutrition, and Economic Development.” Journal of Economic Literature
      36: 766-817.



                                               37
Streightoff, Frank Hatch. (1911). The Standard of Living Among the Industrial People of America.
       New York: Houghton Mifflin.
Subramanian, Shankar and Angus Deaton. (1996). “The Demand for Food and Calories.” Journal of
      Political Economy 104: 133-162.
U.S. Department of Labor. “Cost of Living of Industrial Workers in the United States and Europe
       1888-1890.” Study No. 7711. Ann Arbor, MI: ICPSR.
U.S. Senate Committee on Finance. (1892). “Retail Prices and Wages: A Report by Mr. Aldrich.”
       U.S. Senate Report No. 986. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
Ward, Marianne and John Devereux (2003). “Measuring British Decline: Direct Versus Long-Span
      Income Measures.” Journal of Economic History 63: 826-851.
World Health Organization. (2002). The World Health Report 2002. Geneva: WHO Publications.




                                              38
                                         Table1
                             Summary Dietary Measures

                            Number of Calories Per Head

                                      US                     GB                   India*
                                     1888                   1888                   1983

  Calories Per Head                  1,646                  1,390                 2,098




            Percent of Total Household Expenditure Devoted to Food

                                      US                     GB                   India*
                                     1888                   1888                   1983

  Percent of Budget
   Devoted to Food                  44.50%                50.10%                 67.40%




     Price of a Day's Worth of Calories as a Percentage of a Day's Wage

                                      US                     GB                  India**
Industry                             1888                   1888                  1983

Pig Iron                            11.25%                16.96%                     -
Bar Iron                             8.26%                14.49%                     -
Steel                                9.98%                12.97%                     -
Bitminous Coal                      13.53%                16.88%                     -
Coke                                11.18%                19.70%                     -
Iron Ore                            17.88%                   -                       -
Cotton Textile                      15.92%                16.66%                     -
Wool Textile                        12.18%                20.01%                     -
Glass                                7.45%                14.97%                     -

Average                             11.15%                16.04%                  < 5%
The percentage is the proportion of a husband's daily wage, in each industry, that would
purchase 2,300 calories at the average calorie price faced by households in each industry.

* Results come from Subramanian and Deaton (1996), pg. 140, Table 1

* Results come from Subramanian and Deaton (1996) p. 155, and are for 2,600 calories
at average prices for Maharastra, India in 1983.
                                                   Table 2
            Log-Log Transformation OLS Estimates of Caloric Elasticities, 1888 Cost of Living Survey
                          (Dependent Variable = Log of Per Capita Calories (lnPCC))


                     I           II          III        IV          V          VI         VII            VIII
                    GB          GB          GB          GB         US          US         US             US
Intercept         7.555       6.779       8.477       7.289      8.836       7.478      10.057         8.140
                  (.203)      (.229)      (.328)      (.388)     (.067)      (.067)     (.094)         (.097)

lnPCI             0.595                   0.502                  0.465                   0.358
                  (.022)                  (.032)                 (.007)                  (.009)

lnPCE                         0.684                   0.624                  0.613                     0.550
                              (.025)                  (.039)                 (.007)                    (.009)

lnFamSize                                 0.020       0.086                              -0.078        0.016
                                          (.034)      (.036)                             (.012)        (.011)

Share 0-4*                                -0.330     -0.311                              -0.358        -0.339
                                          (.076)     (.075)                              (.025)        (.022)

Share 5-9*                                -0.271     -0.272                              -0.256        -0.243
                                          (.079)     (.078)                              (.028)        (.025)

Share 10-14*                              -0.095     -0.126                              -0.197        -0.211
                                          (.085)     (.083)                              (.032)        (.028)

Share 15-19*                              -0.048     -0.026                              0.052         0.003
                                          (.085)     (.087)                              (.034)        (.030)

Share 20-24*                              0.060       0.046                              0.086         0.033
                                          (.050)      (.049)                             (.023)        (.022)

R-Square           0.48        0.50        0.50       0.52        0.44        0.56        0.49         0.58

N = 6809 for all US Regressions, 1024 in all Great Britain Regressions
Mean of lnPCC = 13.2049 in US, 13.0739 in Great Britain
Each column is a separate OLS regression in which lnPCC was the dependent variable.
Robust standard errors are listed under coefficient estimates in parentheses.
* Share x-y is the share (proportion) of the household aged x to y.
                                                Table 3
                      Log-Log Transformation OLS Estimates of Caloric Elasticities
                         1888 United States, 1888 Great Britain, and 1983 India

                        US             GB                US            GB           India*     India*
                       1888           1888              1888          1888           1983       1983
                         I              II                III          IV              V         VI
Intercept             10.239         8.184             8.014         6.814          6.028
                      (.109)         (.323)            (.119)        (.378)         (.077)
lnPCI                  0.325         0.535
                       (.010)        (.032)
lnPCE                                                  0.543         0.674          0.366      0.341
                                                       (.011)        (.038)         (.013)     (.013)
lnFamSize              -0.135        0.009             -0.033        0.090         -0.157      -0.163
                       (.013)        (.047)            (.011)        (.048)        (.011)      (.008)
Male 0-4               -0.271        -0.226            -0.225        -0.212        -0.097      -0.146
                       (.041)        (.146)            (.038)        (.144)        (.044)      (.036)
Male 5-9               -0.178        -0.182            -0.114        -0.183         0.049      0.032
                       (.043)        (.156)            (.039)        (.155)         (.041)     (.032)
Male 10-14             -0.098        -0.052            -0.087        -0.102         0.089      0.061
                       (.042)        (.158)            (.039)        (.156)         (.047)     (.032)
Male 15-55             0.198         -0.040            0.162         -0.057         0.164      0.163
                       (.045)        (.138)            (.040)        (.140)         (.032)     (.028)
Male 55+               0.083         0.063             0.120         0.084          0.141      0.121
                       (.042)        (.161)            (.038)        (.152)         (.047)     (.043)
Female 0-4             -0.266        -0.260            -0.219        -0.248        -0.136      -0.187
                       (.040)        (.143)            (.036)        (.142)        (.044)      (.038)
Female 5-9             -0.159        -0.255            -0.131        -0.274         0.018      -0.004
                       (.043)        (.147)            (.038)        (.147)         (.044)     (.040)
Female 10-14           -0.117        -0.037            -0.121        -0.065         0.114      0.068
                       (.047)        (.157)            (.042)        (.155)         (.041)     (.034)
Female 15-55           0.098         0.032             0.054         0.023          0.042      0.051
                       (.039)        (.132)            (.036)        (.131)         (.026)     (.025)

R-Square               0.58          0.54              0.64          0.57           0.55       0.67
N                      6,809         1,024             6,809         1,024          5,624      5,624

Industry Dummies?       Yes           Yes               Yes           Yes            Yes        Yes
State/Region Dumm       Yes           No                Yes           NA**           No         Yes

* Results come from Subramanian and Deaton (1996) Table 2, p. 153.
**Note: Geographic detail is not available for the British sample
Male/Female x-y is the share (proportion) of the household that is in that age-sex category.
Each column is a separate OLS regression in which lnPCC was the dependent variable.
Robust standard errors are listed under coefficient estimates in parentheses.
                                                 Table 4
                      Upper and Lower Bound Expenditure Elasticity of Calories Estimates


                       Dependent Independent      Instrumental
                        Variable   Variable         Variables        Upper Bound            Lower Bound

Great Britain, 1888       lnPCC       lnPCE       lnNFE, lnTIF     0.722      (.031)       0.512     (.031)
United States, 1888       lnPCC       lnPCE       lnNFE, lnTIF     0.594      (.009)       0.450     (.009)
India, 1983*              lnPCC       lnPCE           lnNFE        0.439      (.006)       0.334     (.009)
India, 1983*              lnPCC       lnPCE       lnNFE, lnTIF     0.378      (.006)       0.281     (.008)



* Results come from Subramanian and Deaton (1996) Table 3, p. 160.
lnNFE is the log of total non-food expenditure, and lnTIF is the log of household size. lnTIF was used as an
instrument for itself. Standard errors are in parentheses.

Upper bounds come from OLS estimates of lnPCC on lnPCE, lnTIF regressions. Lower bounds are IV
regressions with the same variables as OLS, with lnNFE as the instrument for lnPCE.
                                                 Table 5
      Log-Log OLS Estimates of Elasticity of Calorie Price for United States, Great Britain, and India
                            (Dependent Variable = Log of Calorie Price)

                              US            GB            US            GB          India*         India*
                             1888          1888          1888          1888          1983           1983
                               I             II           III           IV             V             VI
Intercept                   -3.828        -3.995        -3.401        -3.588        -1.593
                            (.056)        (.207)        (.087)        (.291)        (.089)

lnPCE                        0.156         0.187         0.126         0.147         0.380         0.322
                             (.006)        (.022)        (.008)        (.028)        (.015)        (.014)

lnFamSize                                               -0.012        -0.077         0.084         0.066
                                                        (.009)        (.036)         (.012)        (.008)

Male 0-4                                                 0.010         0.091         0.102         0.101
                                                         (.027)        (.112)        (.045)        (.031)

Male 5-9                                                -0.052         0.171        -0.047         -0.033
                                                        (.029)         (.116)       (.039)         (.028)

Male 10-14                                              -0.024         0.136        -0.112         -0.084
                                                        (.030)         (.125)       (.049)         (.029)

Male 15-55                                              -0.151         0.113        -0.170         -0.135
                                                        (.030)         (.111)       (.039)         (.027)

Male 55+                                                -0.046         0.019        -0.157         -0.107
                                                        (.029)         (.104)       (.044)         (.037)

Female 0-4                                              -0.013         0.120         0.046         0.074
                                                        (.027)         (.113)        (.042)        (.034)

Female 5-9                                               0.055         0.197        -0.064         -0.048
                                                         (.029)        (.113)       (.046)         (.034)

Female 10-14                                            -0.054         0.058        -0.111         -0.087
                                                        (.031)         (.124)       (.041)         (.029)

Female 15-55                                            -0.110         0.107         0.009         -0.002
                                                        (.025)         (.104)        (.028)        (.021)


R-Square                      0.10          0.09          0.34          0.23          0.43          0.64
N                            6,809         1,024         6,809         1,024         5,624         5,624

Industry Dummies?             No            No            Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes
State/Region Dummies?         No            No            Yes          NA**           No            Yes


* Results come from Subramanian and Deaton (1996) Table 2, p. 153.
**Note: Geographic detail is not available for the British sample
Male/Female x-y is the share (proportion) of the household that is in that age-sex category.
Robust standard errors are listed under coefficient estimates in parentheses.
                                                 Table 6
                 Comparison of 1888 Estimates of Caloric Elasticities With Estimates From
                     Household Surveys Conducted in the Developing World Today


   Expenditure Elasticity of Calories                            Income Elasticity of Calories
        Nation             Method     Estimate                    Nation            Method      Estimate
   Indonesia-Urban          OLS         0.26                      Mexico              OLS         0.01
      Philippines           2SLS        0.32                    Philippines           OLS         0.11
      Philippines           OLS         0.34                       Brazil             OLS         0.24
      Philippines           OLS         0.43                    Philippines          2SLS         0.28
         India              2SLS        0.44                     Thailand             OLS         0.33
   Indonesia-Rural          OLS         0.51               United States - 1888       OLS         0.36
 United States - 1888      2SLS/IV      0.51                Great Britain - 1888      OLS         0.50
 United States - 1888       OLS         0.55                       Brazil            2SLS         0.53
      Sri Lanka             OLS         0.56
  Great Britain -1888      2SLS/IV      0.62
 Great Britain - 1888       OLS         0.62


Note: All non-1888 estimates are taken from Table 34.1 of Strauss and Thomas (1995, pp. 1894-1895)
except those of Mexico, which come from Ruiz-Arranz, et. al. (2002)

For methodological consistency, only OLS and 2SLS estimates based upon caloric availability are
reported in this table. For a discussion of the heterogeneity introduced by the estimation procedure
and type of caloric unit see Strauss and Thomas (1995) and Deaton (1997).
                                            Table 7
  Traditional and Elasticity (Engel Curve) Predicted GDP for Selected Countries


                       Expennditure       GDP Deflator          Engel Curve             Factor of
                         Elasticity      GDP per capita        GDP per capita        Convergence
                        of Calories        estimate              estimate


Indonesia-Urban            0.26               30.71                  304                   9.89

Philippines                0.32               36.88                286.86                  7.77

Philippines                0.34               36.88                281.14                  7.62

Philippines                0.43               36.88                255.43                  6.93

Indonesia-Rural            0.51               30.71                232.57                  7.57

Sri Lanka                  0.56                19.2                218.29                 11.36

United States - 1888       0.54                221                   221                       -

Great Britain - 1888       0.67               183.4                 183.4                      -

All GDP estimates in the table are in 1889 US dollars.
All non-1888 estimates of calorie elasticities are taken from Table 34.1 of Strauss and Thomas
(1995, pp. 1894-1895)

Traditional GDP estimates for developing countries are for 1983 and are computed using the
GDP deflator. The facor of convergence is the factor that the traditional GDP estimates must
be multiplied by in order to produce the income estimates derived by the Engel curve.
                                                                        Figure 1
                                                   The Calorie Elasticity - Real GDP per Capita Line


                                     0.8



                                     0.7
                                                   Great Britain


                                     0.6
                                                                                     United States
Expenditure Elasticity of Calories




                                     0.5



                                     0.4



                                     0.3



                                     0.2



                                     0.1



                                      0
                                       150   175            200                    225                    250   275   300
                                                                   Real GDP per Capita, 1889 US Dollars
                                            Appendix

       The comments in the 1888CEX were analyzed systematically in order to investigate household

production. Comments usually included a description of the dwelling (e.g. “home well kept” or

“house filthy”) and a mention of items owned by the household (sewing machines, poultry, organs,

pianos, etc.). If a comment mentioned poultry, gardens, chickens, pigs, pork, cows, beef, fruit trees, or

vegetables I noted that household as having home production. In looking at the comments, these were

the only words and phrases that could be construed as implying home production of calories. As

Table A1 shows, 27.15% of American households and 9.38% of British households in the survey had

evidence of home production.

       I then looked at the average log of per capita income and log of per capita expenditure for these

groups. If the home production of calories objection is valid, then the income and expenditure

distributions of home producing households should be markedly different from households with no

evidence of home production. If the distributions are the same then home production is a level effect

(in logs) and the elasticity estimate will not be influenced by the exclusion of home production. As

Table A1 shows, the means of the log of per capita income and the log of per capita expenditure are

very close for the two groups. In the British sample the means are approximately eight percentiles

apart, and in the American sample they are approximately five percentiles apart. Even this difference,

however, is an overstatement. In Table A2 I take account of households for which there are no

comments and the differences between the two means falls to less than seven percentiles for the

British sample, and less than four percentiles for the American sample.

       The mean, however, is a relatively small part of the story. It is the distribution of home

production that matters most. As the skewness results in Tables A1 and A2 confirm, American

households with home production are just as skewed as households with no home production. In
Britain households with home production are less skewed, but they account for a relatively small

fraction of the total sample, and since more than a third of all households have no comment it is

unclear how such evidence should be interpreted. Also, the kurtosis of the home producing

households was less than that of the non-home producing households, and this suggest that the

distribution of home production was more uniform than that of households with no home production.

This once again suggests a level effect on the estimates of the elasticity. On balance, these results

imply that the distribution of home production was not concentrated in lower income households.

       While these results do not support the home production of calories objection, they do not

deal a fatal blow to it. It would be cavalier to say that this analysis establishes that home

production was not concentrated in low income households for two reasons. First, we do not

know with any degree of certainty that a comment which does not mention home production

implies that the household did not have home production. The true distribution of home

production cannot be identified by these comments. Secondly, there is nothing in the remarks

themselves that give us any clues about the amount of home production. While establishing that

households with home production of calories were concentrated at lower incomes is necessary

for the home production of calories objection, it is not sufficient for the objection to hold. One

must show that wealthier households had less home production than poorer ones. This cannot be

known or inferred from the comments.
                                                 Table A1
                            Income, Expenditure and Remarks from 1888CEX

                                          United States Sample

                                                     Average      Skewness       Average       Skewness
                                                     Log of       of Log of       Log of        of Log of
                                         % of       Per Capita    Per capita    Per Capita     Per Capita
    Household Has            Total       Total       Income        Income       Expenditure    Expenditure



Poultry and/or Garden*       1,849      27.15%        9.4021        0.2573         9.3126        0.3208
                                                     (.51649)                     (.44097)

No Poultry and/or Garden     4,960      72.85%        9.5125        0.2581         9.4424        0.3136
                                                     (.51604)                     (.43848)

Total                        6,809       100%         9.4821        0.2533         9.4066        0.3033
                                                     (.51848)                     (.44296)
N = 6,809


                                           Great Britain Sample

                                                     Average      Skewness       Average       Skewness
                                                     Log of       of Log of       Log of        of Log of
                                         % of       Per Capita    Per capita    Per Capita     Per Capita
    Household Has            Total       Total       Income        Income       Expenditure    Expenditure



Poultry and/or Garden*        96        9.38%         9.1823        0.1050         9.1204        0.0413
                                                     (.38533)                     (.35741)

No Poultry and/or Garden      928       90.62%        9.2807        0.2926         9.2109        0.2321
                                                     (.42345)                     (.37361)

Total                        1,024       100%         9.2714       0.28743         9.2025        0.2197
                                                     (.42083)                     (.37289)
N = 1,024

Note: Only non-flower garden homes are included in the homes with gardens and/or polutry.
*Households with fruit trees, cows, and pigs are inclued in the Poulty and/or Garden Households.
Standard errors are listed in parentheses under the sample means
Positive values of skewness indicate the the distribution is skewed towards values greater than the
mean.
                                                 Table A2
              Income, Expenditure, Remarks, and Missing Values from 1888CEX Remarks
                                          United States Sample
                                                     Average      Skewness       Average       Skewness
                                                     Log of       of Log of       Log of        of Log of
                                         % of       Per Capita    Per capita    Per Capita     Per Capita
    Household Has            Total       Total       Income        Income       Expenditure    Expenditure


Poultry and/or Garden*       1,849      27.15%        9.4021        0.2573         9.3126        0.3208
                                                     (.51649)                     (.44097)

No Poultry and/or Garden     4,594      67.47%        9.5065        0.2630         9.4410        0.3286
                                                     (.51561)                     (.44175)

No Comments Made              366       5.38%         9.5869        0.2041         9.4603        0.0823
                                                     (.51629)                     (.39566)

Total                        6,809       100%         9.4821        0.2533         9.4066        0.3033
                                                     (.51848)                     (.44296)
N = 6,809

                                           Great Britain Sample
                                                     Average      Skewness       Average       Skewness
                                                     Log of       of Log of       Log of        of Log of
                                         % of       Per Capita    Per capita    Per Capita     Per Capita
    Household Has            Total       Total       Income        Income       Expenditure    Expenditure



Poultry and/or Garden*        96        9.38%         9.1823        0.1050         9.1204        0.0413
                                                     (.38533)                     (.35741)

No Poultry and/or Garden      579       56.54%        9.2546        0.3219         9.1886        0.2703
                                                     (.40570)                     (.36324)

No Comments Made              349       34.08%        9.3239        0.2082         9.2480        0.1492
                                                     (.44864)                     (.38792)

Total                        1,024       100%         9.2714       0.28743         9.2025       0.21967
                                                     (.42083)                     (.37289)
N = 1,024

Note: Only non-flower garden homes are included in the homes with gardens and/or polutry.
*Households with fruit trees, cows, and pigs are inclued in the Poulty and/or Garden Households.
Standard errors are listed in parentheses under the sample means.
Positive values of skewness indicate the the distribution is skewed towards values greater than the
mean.
