NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MONITORING CORRUPTION:
EVIDENCE FROM A FIELD EXPERIMENT IN INDONESIA
Benjamin A. Olken
Working Paper 11753
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11753
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2005

I wish to thank Alberto Alesina, Abhijit Banerjee, Robert Barro, Dan Biller, Stephen Burgess, Francesco
Caselli, Joe Doyle, Esther Duflo, Pieter Evers, Amy Finkelstein, Brian Jacob, Seema Jayachandran, Ben
Jones, Larry Katz, Philip Keefer, Michael Kremer, Jeff Liebman, Erzo Luttmer, Ted Miguel, Chris Pycroft,
Lant Pritchett, Mike Richards, Mark Rosenzweig, and numerous seminar participants for helpful comments.
Special thanks are due to Victor Bottini, Richard Gnagey, Susan Wong, and especially to Scott Guggenheim
for their support and assistance throughout the project. The field work and engineering survey would have
been impossible without the dedication of Faray Muhammad and Suroso Yoso Oetomo, as well as the entire
P4 field staff. This project was supported by a grant from the DfID-World Bank Strategic Poverty Partnership
Trust Fund. All views expressed are those of the author, and do not necessarily reflect the opinions of DfID,
the World Bank, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. Email: bolken@nber.org.
©2005 by Benajmin A. Olken. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Monitoring Corruption: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Indonesia
Benjamin A. Olken
NBER Working Paper No. 11753
November 2005
JEL No. D73
ABSTRACT
This paper uses a randomized field experiment to examine several approaches to reducing
corruption. I measure missing expenditures in over 600 village road projects in Indonesia by having
engineers independently estimate the prices and quantities of all inputs used in each road, and then
comparing these estimates to villages' official expenditure reports. I find that announcing an
increased probability of a government audit, from a baseline of 4 percent to 100 percent, reduced
missing expenditures by about 8 percentage points, more than enough to make these audits costeffective. By contrast, I find that increasing grass-roots participation in the monitoring process only
reduced missing wages, with no effect on missing materials expenditures. Since materials account
for three-quarters of total expenditures, increasing grass-roots participation had little impact overall.
The findings suggest that grass-roots monitoring may be subject to free-rider problems. Overall, the
results suggest that traditional top-down monitoring can play an important role in reducing
corruption, even in a highly corrupt environment.
Benjamin A. Olken
Harvard Society of Fellows
78 Mount Auburn St.
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138
and NBER
bolken@nber.org

1. Introduction
Corruption is a significant problem in much of the developing world. In many cases,
corruption acts like a tax, adding to the cost of providing public services and conducting
business. Often, though, the efficiency costs of corruption can be far worse. 1 Indeed, it has been
suggested that corruption may be a major contributor to the low growth rates of many developing
countries (Mauro 1995).
Despite the importance of the problem, the inherent difficulty of directly measuring
corrupt activity has meant that there is relatively little evidence, and therefore relatively little
consensus, on how to best reduce corruption. One approach to reducing corruption, dating back
at least to Becker and Stigler (1974), suggests that the right combination of monitoring and
punishments can control corruption. In practice, however, the very individuals tasked with
monitoring and enforcing punishments may themselves be corruptible. In that case, increasing
the probability that a low-level official is monitored by a higher-level official could result only in
a transfer between the officials, not in a reduction of corruption. 2 Whether one can actually
control corruption by increasing top-down monitoring in such an environment is an open, and
important, empirical question.
An alternative approach to reducing corruption, which has gained prominence in recent
years, is to increase grass-roots participation by community members in local-level monitoring.
Community participation is now regarded in much of the development community as the key not
only to reduced corruption, but to improved public service delivery more generally. For example,
the entire 2004 World Development Report is devoted to the idea of “putting poor people at the
1

See, for example, Krueger (1974) and Shleifer and Vishny (1993) for examples of how the efficiency costs of
corruption can substantially exceed the amount stolen itself.
2
Cadot (1987), for example, discusses this possibility, and shows that this type of multi-tiered corruption can lead to
multiple equilibria in corruption.

1

center of service provision: enabling them to monitor and discipline service providers,
amplifying their voice in policymaking, and strengthening the incentives for service providers to
serve the poor.” (World Bank 2004) The idea behind the grass-roots approach is that community
members are the people who benefit from a successful program, and so may have better
incentives to monitor than disinterested central government bureaucrats (Stiglitz 2002). Of
course, this approach has potential drawbacks as well – for example, monitoring public projects
is a public good, so there may be a serious free rider problem. Grass-roots monitoring may also
be prone to capture by local elites (Bardhan 2002, Bardhan and Mookherjee forthcoming). Given
these countervailing forces, whether grass-roots monitoring can actually succeed in reducing
corruption is also an empirical question. 3
To examine these alternative approaches to fighting corruption, I designed and conducted
a randomized, controlled field experiment in 608 Indonesian villages. At the time the study
started, each village in the study was about to start building a village road as part of a nationwide
village-level infrastructure project. To examine the impact of external monitoring, I randomly
selected some villages to be told, after funds had been awarded but before construction began,
that their project would subsequently be audited by the central government audit agency. This
amounted to increasing the probability of an external government audit in those villages from a
baseline of about 4 percent to essentially 100 percent. Government audits carry with them the
theoretical possibility of criminal action, though this is quite rare; more important, the results of
the audits were read publicly to an open village meeting by the auditors, and so could result in
substantial social sanctions. The audits were subsequently conducted as promised.

3

Several authors have found suggestive evidence in both micro and macro cross-sectional data that higher levels of
“voice” are associated with lower levels of corruption. Rose-Ackerman (2004) provides a summary of much of the
work on this topic to date.

2

To investigate the impact of increasing community participation in the monitoring
process, I designed two different experiments that sought to increase grass-roots monitoring in
the project. Specifically, the experiments sought to enhance participation at “accountability
meetings,” the village-level meetings where project officials account for how they spent project
funds. In one experiment, hundreds of invitations to these meetings were distributed throughout
the village, to encourage direct participation in the monitoring process and to reduce elite
dominance of the process. In the second experiment, an anonymous comment form was
distributed along with the invitations, providing villagers an opportunity to relay information
about the project without fear of retaliation. This comment form was then collected before the
accountability meetings in sealed drop-boxes, and the results were summarized at the meetings.
Both of these experimental interventions were successful in raising grass-roots participation
levels—the invitations increased the number of people participating in the accountability
meetings by about 40 percent, and the comment forms generated hundreds of comments about
the project, both good and bad, in each village.
To evaluate the impact of these experiments on corruption, one needs a measure of
corruption. Traditionally, much of the empirical work on corruption has been based on
perceptions of corruption, rather than on direct measures of corruption. 4 This paper, however,
builds on a small but growing literature that examines corruption by comparing two measures of
the same quantity, one “before” and one “after” corruption has taken place. 5 To do this in the

4

The use of perceptions-based measures of corruption in economics was pioneered by Mauro (1995) and forms the
basis of the much-cited Transparency International Corruption Index (Lambsdorff 2003). More recent work using
perceptions-based measures is summarized in Rose-Ackerman (2004).
5
For example, Reinikka and Svensson (2004) examine corruption in educational expenditures, Fisman and Wei
(2004) and Yang (2004) examine corruption in international trade, Di Tella and Schargrodsky (2003) examine
corruption in hospital procurement, and Olken (forthcoming) examines theft from a government redistribution
program. This paper differs slightly from much of this literature by comparing government reports to an
independently constructed estimate, rather than comparing government reports to the reports of a different

3

context of the road projects, I assembled a team of engineers and surveyors who, after the
projects were completed, dug core samples in each road to estimate the quantity of materials
used, surveyed local suppliers to estimate prices, and interviewed villagers to determine the
wages paid on the project. From these data, I construct an independent estimate of the amount
each project actually cost to build, and then compare this estimate with what the village reported
it spent on the project on a line-item by line-item basis. The difference between what the village
claimed the road cost to build, and what the engineers estimated it actually cost to build, is the
key measure of missing expenditures I examine in this paper. Since the village must account for
every Rupiah it received from the central government, stolen funds must show up somewhere in
the difference between reported expenditures and estimated actual expenditures. 6
Using these data, I find that there were substantial reductions in missing expenditures
associated with the audit experiment. In particular, I estimate that the audit treatment – i.e.,
increasing the probability of an audit from a baseline of 4 percent to 100 percent – was
associated with reductions in missing expenditures of an average of 8 percentage points. These
reductions came both from reductions in unaccounted-for materials procured for the project and
in unaccounted-for labor expenditures. The audits were particularly effective in villages where
the village head was up for reelection, and where the previous election results suggested that the
upcoming election would be close, which suggests that external monitoring and democratic
accountability may be complements, and more generally, that the interaction of the monitoring
probability and the punishment level conditional on being caught is positive. Interestingly, I find
government agency or to a household survey. In that sense, it is related to Hsieh and Moretti (2005), who compare
prices received by Iraq under the UN Oil-for-Food program to the world oil price.
6
These ‘missing expenditures’, i.e., the difference between reported expenditures and my estimate of actual
expenditures, may also include sources of losses other than pure theft. I discuss below how I constructed several test
roads to estimate the typical amount of materials lost during construction, which I use to calibrate the missing
expenditures measure to be 0 in a road where I know a priori that there was no corruption. I also discuss below how
I use independent measures of the quality of road construction that are likely to be unrelated to corruption to
differentiate between overall changes in the competence of road builders and corruption per se.

4

that the number of project jobs given to family members of project officials actually increased in
response to the audits, which provides suggestive evidence that alternative forms of corruption
may be substitutes. I compare the costs and benefits from the audits and find that on net the
audits were highly cost effective.
By contrast, I find that the participation experiments – the invitations and the comment
forms – were associated with much smaller, and statistically insignificant, reductions in overall
missing expenditures. As discussed above, the interventions did raise community participation in
the monitoring process. Moreover, villages in the invitations treatment were more likely to
openly discuss corruption problems at the accountability meetings, and villages receiving both
invitations and comment forms were more likely to take serious action at the meeting to resolve
corruption-related problems. However, the magnitude of these changes in behavior at the
meetings was small, and these treatments did not measurably reduce overall missing
expenditures.
The small overall effects of the participation experiments on overall missing
expenditures, however, mask substantial differences across types of expenditures. In particular,
the invitations treatment substantially reduced missing labor expenditures, but had no effect
whatsoever on missing materials expenditures. Since materials account for about three-quarters
of total expenditures, the average impact was nonetheless small and statistically insignificant.
There are two potential explanations for why increasing grass-roots participation would
have impacted labor expenditures but not materials – either community members had better
information about labor expenditures than about materials, or community members had a greater
incentive to monitor wage payments than materials payments (since they were the ones working
on the project and would be the beneficiaries if wage payments had been stolen). In fact, the

5

results suggest that villagers had less information about missing labor expenditures than about
missing materials expenditure. Furthermore, the invitations treatment was most effective when
the workers came from inside the village and participated in monitoring. Combined, this suggests
that grass-roots monitoring may be most effective when a subset of people personally stand to
gain from reducing corruption, and therefore have strong incentives to monitor actively. Grassroots monitoring may thus be subject to a free-rider problem.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the setting in
which the study takes place. Section 3 describes the experimental interventions. Section 4
describes the data used in the study. Section 5 presents the results of the experiments. Section 6
performs a cost-benefit analysis. Section 7 concludes.
2. Setting
The Kecamatan (Subdistrict) Development Project, or KDP, is a national government
program, funded through a loan from the World Bank. KDP finances projects in approximately
15,000 villages throughout Indonesia each year. The data in this paper come from KDP projects
in 608 villages in two of Indonesia’s most populous provinces, East Java and Central Java, and
were collected between September 2003 and August 2004.
In KDP, participating subdistricts, which typically contain between 10 and 20 villages,
receive an annual block grant for three consecutive years. Every year, each village in the
subdistrict makes a proposal for any combination of small-scale infrastructure and seed capital
for microcredit cooperatives. The majority of villages (72%) propose an infrastructure project,
plus a small amount for savings-and-loans for women. An inter-village forum ranks all of
proposals according to a number of criteria, such as number of beneficiaries and project cost, and
projects are funded according to the rank list until all funds have been exhausted.

6

If the project is funded, a meeting is held to plan construction, after which an elected
implementation team procures materials, hires labor, and builds the project. The members of the
implementation team receive an honorarium, limited in total to a maximum of 3 percent of the
total cost of the project. 7 No contractors are used in construction.
A typical funded village receives funds on the order of Rp. 80 million (US$8,800) for
infrastructure; these funds are often supplemented by voluntary contributions from village
residents, primarily in the form of unpaid labor. These projects are large relative to ordinary local
government activities; in 2001, the average village budget was only Rp. 71 million (US$7,800),
so receiving a KDP project more than doubles average local government expenditures. The
allocation to the village is lump-sum, so that the village is the residual claimant. In particular,
surplus funds can be used, with the approval of a village meeting, for additional development
projects, rather than having to be returned to the KDP program.
By far the most common type of infrastructure project proposed by villages is the
surfacing of an existing dirt road with a surface made of sand, rocks, and gravel. These roads
range in length from 0.5 – 3 km, and may either run within the village or run from the village to
the fields. Dirt roads in Java are typically impassible during the rainy season; surfacing these
roads allows them to be used year-round. To facilitate comparisons, the sample of villages
considered in this paper is limited to villages with such non-asphalt road projects.
The project includes several mechanisms to ensure proper use of project funds. The
primary mechanism is a series of village-level accountability meetings. Funds are released to the
implementation team in three tranches, of 40%, 40%, and 20% of the funds, respectively. In
order to obtain the second and third tranches of funds, the implementation team is required to
7

In the data, the total honorarium payments to each member of the implementation team averaged Rp. 460,000, or
approximately Rp. 150,000 ($17) per month of the construction. By comparison, median per-capita monthly
expenditure in comparable areas in East and Central Java in 2003 was about Rp 140,000 ($15).

7

present an accountability report to an open village meeting, explaining how all funds were used.
Only after that meeting has approved the accountability report is the next tranche of funds
released. Similarly, in order to participate in the subsequent year of KDP, villages are required to
present a final, cumulative accountability report at the end of the project, which similarly must
be approved by a village meeting. Though open to the entire village, these meetings are typically
attended by only 30-50 people, most of whom are members of the village elite, out of a total
adult population of about 2,500.
In addition, subdistrict, district and provincial level project managers, engineers, and
facilitators conduct overall supervision of all projects, and there is a provincial complaintshandling unit which investigates allegations of improprieties. Furthermore, each year, the project
is audited by the independent government development audit agency, Badan Pengawasan
Keuangan dan Pembangunan (BPKP). Each village-level project in the study area has about a
4% baseline chance of being audited by BPKP. Auditors come to the village, cross-check all of
the financial records looking for irregularities, and inspect the physical infrastructure. Findings
from the audits are sent to project officials for follow-up, and can potentially lead to criminal
action, though prosecutions for village-level officials are rare in practice (Woodhouse 2004).
More often, officials found to have stolen money are forced to publicly return the money, which
can result in substantial social sanctions.
Corruption at the village level can occur in several ways. 8 First, implementation teams,
potentially working with the village head, may collude with suppliers. Suppliers can inflate
either the prices or the quantities listed on the official receipts to generate money for a kick-back
to village and project officials. Second, members of the implementation team may manipulate

8

Of course, there may also be collusion or kickbacks at the national or district level of the program. This paper,
however, focuses on corruption where the bulk of the program money is actually spent—at the village level.

8

wage payments. As discussed above, villagers in Indonesia typically contribute unpaid or
reduced-wage labor to public works projects; corrupt officials can bill the project for labor
anyway and pocket the difference. In other cases, those running the project can simply inflate the
number of workers paid by the project. All of these types of corruption will be investigated in the
empirical work below.
3. Experimental Design
The experiments discussed in this paper examine different ways of altering the
probability that corruption is detected and punishments are enforced. Three interventions are
examined – increasing the probability of external audits (“Audits”), increasing participation in
accountability meetings (“Invitations”), and providing an anonymous comment form to villages
(“Invitations + Comments”). Section 3.1 discusses the overall experimental design. Section 3.2
then discusses the Audit interventions, and Section 3.3 describes the Invitations and Comment
interventions. Section 3.4 discusses the timing of the interventions and data collection.
3.1. Experimental Design
Table 1 displays the basic experimental design. As shown in Table 1, randomization into
the Invitations and Comment Form treatments was independent of randomization into the Audit
treatment. In both cases, the treatments were announced to villages after the project design and
allocations to each village had been finalized, but before construction or procurement of
materials began. 9 Thus, the choice of what type of project to build, as well as the project’s design
and planned budget, should all be viewed as exogenous with respect to the experiments.
9

In all villages (including control villages), at the village meeting immediately after the final allocations were
announced but before construction began, the study enumerator made a short (less than 5 minute) presentation,
introducing him or herself and explaining that there would be a study in the village, that each village and project
official would be interviewed for data collection, and that the enumerator would be present to record what happened
at each of the accountability meetings. In villages receiving a treatment, the only difference was that this
introduction was followed by a description of the treatment(s) in that village. The final engineering survey was not

9

The randomization of Audits and Invitations/Comment treatments differed in several
ways. First, there was a concern that the audit treatment might be likely to spillover from one
village to another, as officials in other villages might worry that when the auditors came to the
subdistrict, their villages might be audited as well. 10 On the other hand, the participation
treatments were much less likely to have similar spillover effects, as the treatment was directly
observable in the different villages early on. Therefore, the randomization for Audits was
clustered by subdistrict (i.e., either all study villages in a subdistrict received Audits or none did),
while the randomization for Invitations and Comment Forms was done village-by-village. The
calculations of the standard errors below are adjusted to take into account the potential
correlation of outcomes in villages within a subdistrict.
This difference in clustering also necessitated a difference in stratification. As the
Invitations and Comment Forms were randomized village-by-village, they were stratified by
subdistrict, the lowest administrative level above the village. Since the Audits were randomized
by subdistrict, they needed to be stratified at a higher level. Therefore, the Audits were stratified
by district and by the number of years the subdistrict had participated in the KDP program. This
yielded a total of 156 strata for the Invitations / Comment Forms, each containing an average of
3.8 study villages, and 50 strata for the Audits, each containing an average of 3.1 study
subdistricts and 12.1 study villages.
In the analysis, I report three specifications – no fixed effects, fixed effects for each
engineering team that conducted the survey, and stratum fixed effects. Despite the stratification,
the randomization was designed so that the probability each village received a given treatment
mentioned at all to the villagers during this presentation, or subsequently, until the surveyors actually appeared to
conduct the survey.
10
This was most likely to be a problem within subdistricts, as there is frequent communication between both village
officials and project officials within a subdistrict. Communication across subdistrict lines is much more limited,
particularly for village officials.

10

was always held constant, regardless of what stratum the village was in. The probability of
receiving a given treatment is therefore orthogonal to any stratum or village-level variable, so
including stratum fixed effects, while it may reduce standard errors, is not necessary for the
analysis to be consistent.
Although locations of treatments were randomized by computer according to the
procedures described above, it is useful to examine whether, ex-post, they are correlated with
village characteristics of interest. I therefore examined the relationship between the treatment
variables and ten village characteristics that might be correlated with the outcome variables of
interest. 11 As expected given the randomization, these variables are not jointly significant
predictors of the treatments. Moreover, including these variables as controls does not affect the
results of the experiment presented below.
3.2. The Audit Experiment
In the “Audit” treatment, villages were told, at the village meeting where they began
planning for actual construction, that their project would be audited by BPKP, the government
audit agency, with probability 1. They were told that the audit could take place either during or
after construction was finished, and would include inspections of both the project’s financial
records as well as a field-inspection of the construction activities. Approximately two months
later, the village implementation team received a one-page letter from BPKP which confirmed
that the village had been chosen to be audited and which spelled out in somewhat greater detail
exactly what would be covered by the audit.

11

The variables examined are the variables used in analysis of pilot data, and were specified before any of the data
used here was collected. The variables include the following: village population, percent of households in the village
classified as poor, number of mosques per thousand people, the total budget for the project, the number of subprojects included, distance from the village to the subdistrict, the village head’s age, education, and salary (in
hectares of land), and whether the community is mountainous. While several of these variables (village head age,
salary, and whether the community is mountainous) are correlated with the audit treatment at the 10% level, the 10
variables considered are not jointly significant.

11

Villages were told that results of the audits, in addition to being reported to the central
government and project officials, would also be delivered directly by the auditors to a special
village meeting. Village officials therefore faced several potential sanctions from the audits –
retribution from the village, the possibility that the village would not receive KDP projects in the
future, and the theoretical possibility of criminal action.
Between one and four months after construction had started, Phase I of the audits
commenced. 12 The main purpose of this first round of audits was to credibly demonstrate that the
audits were real, rather than an idle threat. One village in each subdistrict receiving the Audit
treatment was randomly selected to be audited during this first phase. The audit was conducted
over two days, and the results were subsequently presented by the auditors to a specially called
public village meeting, where members of the implementation team and village officials were
given an opportunity to propose corrective actions for the auditors’ findings.
After the first round of audits, all study villages receiving the audit treatment, including
the village that was audited during Phase I, were informed in another letter from BPKP that they
would be audited again after the construction on the project had been completed. The second
phase of the audits was conducted approximately seven months subsequently, after both
construction was finished and the collection of the corruption data described below was
completed. As with Phase I audits, the results from the Phase II audits were presented to the
village in an open village meeting and forwarded to the project for followup.

12

All audits in this phase took place during a three week period during mid January / early February 2004. However,
since there was heterogeneity in the timing of when construction started, this was anywhere between 1 and 4 months
after construction had begun.

12

3.3. The Participation Experiments
In the “Invitations” treatment, either 300 or 500 invitations were distributed throughout
the village several days prior to each of the three accountability meetings. 13 Though village
meetings are officially open to the public, in practice Javanese villagers consider it quite rude to
attend a meeting to which they have not been formally invited (usually in writing), and with the
exception of a few independent-minded members of the village elite, they rarely do. The village
head, who normally issues written invitations for the meetings, therefore has the potential to
stack the attendance of the accountability meeting in his favor by issuing invitations only to his
supporters. By distributing a large number of invitations, the village head’s ability to control who
attends the meeting was substantially reduced.
Given the size of a typical village, approximately one in every two households in
treatment villages received an invitation. The invitations were distributed either by sending them
home with school children, or by asking the heads of hamlets and neighborhood associations to
distribute them throughout their areas of the village. The number of invitations (300 or 500) and
the method of distributing them (schools or neighborhood associations) was randomized by
village. 14
In the “Invitations + Comment Forms” treatment, invitations were distributed exactly as
in the Invitations treatment, but attached to the invitation was a comment form asking villagers’
opinions of the project. The idea behind the comment form was that villagers might be afraid of
retaliation from village elites, and thus providing an anonymous comment form would increase
detection of corruption. The form asked the recipient to answer several questions about the road
13

In addition, for each meeting a small subsidy – Rp. 45,000 ($5) for villages with 300 invitations, Rp. 75,000 ($8)
for villages with 500 invitations – was given to the implementation team to cover the additional cost of providing
snacks to the extra attendees induced by the invitations.
14
The purpose of these extra randomizations – the number of invitations and how they were distributed – was to
generate additional variation in the number and composition of meeting attendees, to distinguish size effects from
composition effects. However, these sub-treatments did not generate a strong enough first-stage to be used in the
analysis.

13

project, and then to return the form – either filled out or blank – to a sealed drop box, placed
either at a village school or at a store in the sub-village. The instructions stated clearly that the
recipients should not write their name on the form, in order to preserve their anonymity. The
form had four closed-response questions (i.e., requesting answers of the form Good, Satisfactory,
or Poor) about various aspects of the project, and two free-response questions, one about the job
performance of the implementation team and one about any other project-related issues. The
comment forms were collected from the drop boxes two days before each meeting and
summarized by a project enumerator. The enumerator then read the summary, including a
representative sample of the open-response questions, at the village meeting.
3.4. Timing
The experiment began in September 2003. After the inter-village forum described in
Section 2 made the final allocations of funds, the enumerator went to the village planning
meeting that immediately followed and, at that planning meeting, announced any interventions
(audits or participation) that would take place in that village. Construction began shortly
thereafter, between October and November 2003. Those villages receiving audits received the
first letter from BPKP in November 2003, and the first round of audits took place in one
randomly selected village in each subdistrict in January 2004, while construction was in
progress. The second letter from BPKP was sent out to villages shortly thereafter. The
accountability meetings at which the participation interventions were conducted took place after
40%, 80%, and 100% of the funds were spent, between October 2003 and May 2004. The
engineering survey to measure missing expenditures took place after construction was finished,
between May and August 2004. The final round of audits was conducted in all villages in the
audit treatment in September 2004 after all of the data used in this paper had been completed.

14

4. Data
The data used in this paper come from four types of surveys, each designed by the author
and conducted specifically as part of the project: a key-informant survey, covering baseline
characteristics about the village and the village implementation team; a meeting survey,
containing data on the attendees and a first-hand report of discussions at the accountability
meetings; a household survey, containing data on household participation in and perceptions of
the project; and a final field survey, used to measure corruption in the project. This measurement
was conducted in all villages (both treatment and control), and is completely separate from the
audits conducted by BPKP as part of the “Audit” treatment. This section describes the final field
survey used to measure unaccounted-for expenditures in the road projects; the remaining data, as
well as additional details on the field survey, are discussed in more detail in Appendix A.
4.1. Reported Expenditures
The key dependent variable I examine is the difference between what villages claim they
spent on the project and an independent estimate of what villages actually spent. Obtaining data
on what villages claim they spent is relatively straightforward. At the end of the project, all
village implementation teams are required to file an accountability report with the project
subdistrict office, in which they report the prices, quantities, and total expenditure on each type
of material and each type of labor (skilled, unskilled, and foreman) used in the project. The total
amount reported must match the total amount allocated to the village. In addition, they also
report, for each type of material and labor, the amount donated to the project by villagers. These
financial reports were readily available to the survey team for all study villages.
Obtaining an independent estimate of what was actually spent is substantially more
difficult, and involves three main activities—an engineering survey to determine quantities of

15

materials used, a worker survey to determine wages paid by the project, and a supplier survey to
determine prices for materials.
4.2. Measuring Quantities of Materials
In the engineering survey, an engineer and an assistant conducted a detailed physical
assessment of all physical infrastructure built by the project in order to obtain an estimate of the
quantity of materials used. In the standard road design, known as a Telford road, the road
consists of three types of materials—a base of sand, a layer of large (10-15 cm) rocks, and a top
layer of gravel to provide a smooth running surface. 15 To estimate the quantity of each of these
materials, the engineers dug ten 40cm × 40cm core samples at randomly selected locations on the
road. By combining the measurements of the volume of each material per square meter of road
with measurements of the total length and average width of the road, I can estimate the total
quantity of materials used in the road.
It is important to note, however, that this estimate of the materials used in the road, while
it should be proportional to the total quantity of materials used in the road, may be smaller in
magnitude than the actual amount of materials used in the road, as some amount of loss is normal
during construction and measurement. For example, some amount of sand may blow away off
the top of a truck, or may not be totally scooped out of the hole dug by the engineers conducting
the core sample. I denote the average percentage of materials lost due to normal construction
processes and measurement error but with no corruption as the loss ratio.
To deal with these loss ratios, whenever possible I express the measured quantities in log
form, so that the average loss ratio will be captured by the constant term and will not affect
15

Three other similar road designs are also included in the study. Telasah roads are similar to Telford, but install the
rocks flatside-up to create a smooth running surface, and therefore largely omit the gravel layer. Sirtu roads consist
of gravel only, omitting the sand and rock layer. Katel roads are similar in design to Telford, but use a mixture of
clay and gravel in the top layer to create a more permanent top surface. Telford roads, however, account for 86
percent of the road projects in the sample. The type of road is chosen before the randomization is announced.

16

estimated differences across villages. However, in some cases, such as when combining different
types of materials into the aggregate percent missing measure, this approach is not sufficient, and
one actually needs to estimate these loss ratios. One also needs an estimate of these loss ratios if
one is interested in the level of the percent missing variable, not just the differences across
villages.
To obtain such an estimate, I constructed four short (60m) “test roads” in different areas
of East and Central Java as a calibration exercise. During the construction of each of these roads,
the survey team carefully measured all quantities before construction (i.e., while still in the
delivery trucks). After construction was completed, the techniques described above were used
several times, by different engineers, to estimate the quantity of materials used in the road. To
allow time for materials to settle and to account for the effects of weather, these followup
measurements were conducted anywhere from 1 week to 1 year after the test road was
completed. The ratio between the amount of materials actually used in the road and the amount
measured after the road was built is an estimate of the loss ratio. I describe this calibration
exercise and the resulting loss ratios in more detail in Appendix B.
While the road project comprises the main use of KDP funds in each village, roads are
often accompanied by smaller ancillary projects, such as culverts, retaining walls, and gabions,
and occasionally by larger projects, such as a small bridge. For each of the ancillary projects, the
engineer on the survey team conducted a detailed field survey, measuring and sketching each
constructed piece of infrastructure to estimate the volume of materials, such as cement, rocks,
and sand, used in the construction.
4.3. Measuring Wages and Hours Worked
Workers, defined as people who worked on the project for pay, were asked which of the
many activities involved in building the road were done with paid labor, voluntary labor, or some
17

combination, what the daily wage and number of hours worked was, and to describe any piece
rate arrangements that may have been part of the building of the project. To estimate the quantity
of person-days actually paid out by the project, I combine information from the worker survey
about the percentage of each task done with paid labor, information from the engineering survey
about the quantity of each task, and assumptions of worker capacity derived both from the
experience of field engineers and the experience from building the test roads. These assumptions
of worker capacity are discussed in more detail in Appendix B.
4.4. Measuring Prices
Since there is substantial variation in the prices of construction materials across
subdistricts, a price survey was conducted in each subdistrict. Since there can be substantial
differences in transportation costs within a subdistrict, surveyors obtained prices for each
material that included transportation costs to each survey village. The price survey included
several types of suppliers—supply contractors, construction supply stores, truck drivers (who
typically transport the materials used in the project), and workers at quarries—as well recent
buyers of material (primarily workers at construction sites). 16 For each type of material used by
the project, between three and five independent prices were obtained; I use the median price
from the survey for the analysis.
4.5. Measures of missing expenditures
From the data on the financial reports, I can calculate the expenditures from the financial
reports, which I hereafter will refer to as reported amount, and the expenditures estimated from
the field survey, which I will refer to as the actual amount. I define the percent missing to be the
16

Furthermore, to reduce the potential for bias induced by surveying the actual suppliers for the project, who may be
in collusion with project officials, only survey responses from sources outside a given village are used to construct
the prices for that village, and no mention of KDP was made until the end of the interview. It turns out that 27% of
those interviewed for the price survey had actually been suppliers to the KDP program; dropping them from the
analysis, however, does not affect the results. In fact, restricting the price data to only prices obtained from buyers of
materials (i.e., dropping all suppliers of materials from the price survey) also does not affect the results.

18

difference between the log of the reported amount and the log of the actual amount. This
variable—the percent missing—is the main measure used in the subsequent analysis.
I use several different versions of the percent missing measure in the empirical analysis.
First, I report the percent missing for the four major items—sand, rocks, gravel, and unskilled
labor—used in the road project. As shown in Table 2, expenditures on these four items account
for 90% of reported expenditures on the road project. As these are the four major sources of
expenditure, substantial effort was put into ensuring that these four items were measured as
accurately as possible in the engineering survey.
As shown in Table 2, the road project accounts for 77% of total funds spent; a further
15% of funds are spent on ancillary projects that go along with the road, such as culverts and
retaining walls. Each of these projects was inspected by the field engineers, generating an
estimate of the amount of sand, rock, cement, and labor used in each. The second measure of
missing expenditures, major items in the main road + ancillary projects, adds in these
expenditures as well. 17 Finally, I report the percent missing separately for materials and unskilled
labor in the road project.
5. Experimental Results
5.1. Estimating Equation
Given the randomized nature of the experiments, estimating their effects is
straightforward. I estimate an equation of the following form via OLS:
PERCENTMISSINGijk = α1 + α2 AUDITjk + α3 INVITATIONSijk +
α4 INVITATIONSANDCOMMENTSijk +εijk

17

(1)

The number of observations is higher when these ancillary expenditures are included because, for some villages,
reported expenditures for the main road were combined with those from the ancillary projects. For those villages, the
corruption measure could not be constructed for just the main road, but it could be computed for the main road +
ancillary projects.

19

where i represents a village, j represents a subdistrict, and k represents a stratum for the audits.
Since the AUDIT treatment variable is perfectly correlated within subdistricts, the standard
errors are adjusted to allow for correlation within subdistricts. As each of the 12 engineering
teams may have conducted the corruption measurements slightly differently, I estimate a version
of equation (1) that includes engineering team fixed effects. Finally, when investigating the
audits, I estimate a version of equation (1) that includes fixed effects for each audit stratum k,
and when investigating the invitations and comment forms, I estimate a version of equation (1)
that includes fixed-effects for each subdistrict j (i.e., the stratifying variable for the participation
experiments). 18
5.2. The Audit Experiment
5.2.1. Overall Effects
Table 3 presents the main results from the audit experiment. Each row presents the
percent missing in different aspects of the project. The first column presents the mean percent
missing in the control villages – i.e., those villages that did not receive the audits – and the
second column presents the mean level in the villages that received the audits. The effect of the
audits – i.e., the coefficient α2 in equation (1) – is presented in column (3). The p-value from a
test that the audit effect is zero is presented in column (4). Columns (5) and (6) again present the
audit effect and p-values allowing for engineer fixed effects, and columns (7) and (8) present the
results allowing for stratum fixed effects.

18

Note that approximately 12% of the observations in the sample were dropped, because the reported expenditure
could not be accurately matched to the data from the engineering survey. This was caused by one of four reasons:
(1) surveyor error in locating the road, (2) the project consisted largely of a partial rehabilitation of an existing road,
(3) agglomerated expenditures reports (i.e., the village expenditure report combined expenditures in the road project
with other projects that could not be independently measured, such as a school), or (4) villages that had asphalted the
road that refused to let the engineers break the asphalt to conduct the engineering survey. The probability of an
observation being dropped for any one of these reasons appears empirically to be unrelated to any of the treatments.

20

The results show that the audits had a substantial, and statistically significant, negative
effect on the percentage of expenditures that could not be accounted for. Column (3) shows that
the audits reduced the percent missing in the road project by 8.5 percentage points, and the
percent missing in the road and ancillary projects by 9.1 percentage points. These effects are
statistically significant, with p-values of 0.058 and 0.034, respectively. Looking across the other
columns, these effects are generally of similar magnitude and statistical significance with
engineer or stratum fixed effects. The only exception is when stratum fixed effects are included
on the road expenditures variable (Coulmn 7, row 1), in which case the estimated effect of the
audits is only a 4.8 percentage point reduction. 19 Looking across all of the specifications shown,
I conclude that the audits reduced missing expenditures by an average of about 8 percentage
points. Compared with the baseline level of about 28 percentage points in control villages, the
point estimates imply a reduction in missing expenditures of about 30 percent of the baseline
level, although, as discussed above, the absolute levels of the percent-missing variable depend on
assumptions for loss ratios and should be interpreted with caution.
Breaking down the change in corruption into materials and labor, Table 3 shows
substantial reductions in both materials (sand, rocks and gravel) and unskilled labor associated
with the audits, though these separate effects are not statistically significant. 20 Interestingly, in
results not reported in the table, I find no significant differences in the effect of the audits

19

The reason that the results are different when stratum fixed effects are included is that doing so effectively
removes 13 strata from the sample. The audit randomization was conducted before the list of villages with road
projects was known (though the randomization results were kept strictly secret). Out of the initial 166 subdistricts
included in the randomization, only 156 subdistricts ended up having villages with road projects. This, plus dropping
observations for the reasons described in footnotes 17 and 18, led to 13 out of 50 strata with either all audit or all
non-audit villages that are effectively dropped by stratum fixed effects. Estimating the overall results dropping these
13 strata, but without any fixed effects, yields results similar to stratum fixed effects results. This problem is less
severe for the major items in roads and ancillary projects, in part because fewer observations are missing and thus
fewer strata are effectively dropped.
20
It is worth noting that, due to the log transformation, mechanically the change in log (materials + wages) and
log(materials) + log(wages) will not be identical.

21

between those villages audited both during and after construction and those villages audited only
after construction was finished (and, therefore, after the engineering survey was completed). This
suggests that the reduction in missing expenditures was caused by the threat of an audit, rather
than corrective actions imposed by the auditors once they arrived.
Mechanically, unaccounted-for funds must be accounted for by differences in either the
price charged per unit or in differences in the quantities used. When the goods being procured
are commodities (as they are in this case), it is much easier for monitors to verify the unit price
than to verify the quantity of materials used, so one might expect corruption to occur by inflating
quantities rather than prices. To investigate this, in Table 4, I decompose the results into
differences in prices and differences in quantities. Column (1) shows that even in control
villages, there is almost no difference between reported and actual prices, and that all the
unaccounted-for expenditures were due to differences between reported and actual quantities. 21
Consistent with there being no mark-ups of prices to begin with, Columns (3) – (8) show that all
of the reductions in missing expenditures caused by the audits were on the quantity dimension.
An important question is whether the observed effects of the audits actually represent a
reduction in corruption per se, or whether incompetent builders are simply being replaced by
more skilled builders in response to the audits. To investigate this, I examined a number of
quality measures, such as compactness of the road, the size and shape of the rocks, and the grade
of the road, all of which are relatively inexpensive. Overall competence at construction should
affect both expensive and inexpensive components, whereas a reduction in corruption would
affect only the expensive aspects of construction quality (i.e. the volume of materials). In fact, I
find that controlling for these inexpensive quality measures, either individually or aggregated

21

This difference is statistically significant – a t-test in control villages rejects the equality of differences in prices
and differences in quantities with a p-value of less than 0.01.

22

into an index, does not change the corruption results presented above. 22 This suggests that the
results are actually being driven a reduction in corruption per se, rather than an overall change in
the competence of those building the project.
5.2.2. Interactions with Village Politics
An important question is the degree to which the monitoring probability and the
punishment level are complements or substitutes. 23 In this context, one important part of the
threat posed by an audit is that the village head might lose his re-election bid if corruption was
exposed. 24 This may be particularly true for those village heads for whom the previous election
for village head was close, and therefore for whom a small change in the vote would be more
likely to result in defeat. One can therefore examine whether village heads facing a tough
upcoming re-election battle respond more or less to audits, as a way of examining the interaction
between the monitoring probability and the expected punishment.
To examine this, I define a village as having an upcoming election for village head if the
next such election is scheduled within two years of time of the first audits. I define a narrow
victory in the last election as the difference between the runner-up’s vote share and the victor’s
vote share in the previous village head election, so that higher (i.e. less negative) numbers
indicate a closer election. I then re-estimate equation (1), including these variables and the
interaction of these variables with the audit treatment, where the dependent variable is the
percent missing in the road project.

22

Alternatively, putting an index of these variables on the left-hand side of equation (1) shows that there is no
change in these inexpensive quality measures in response to the audits.
23
It is worth noting that the sign of the second derivative of corruption with respect to the auditing probability and
the punishment is theoretically ambiguous. See Di Tella and Shargrodsky (2003) for a model that makes this point.
24
As discussed above, criminal corruption proceedings are becoming more common in Indonesia, but prosecutions
against village-level officials, however, remain rare. (Woodhouse et. al, 2004) Electoral and social sanctions against
village-levels are therefore likely to be a substantial portion of the threat created by audits.

23

The results are presented in Table 5. The results suggest that the audits have a
substantially larger effect – reducing the percent missing by 31 percentage points – in villages
with an upcoming election. When I include the triple-interaction of audits, an upcoming election,
and a narrow victory, I find that the effect of the audits is most pronounced for village heads who
are up for re-election and whose last election was close – i.e., the village heads who presumably
would find face the largest effective punishment for corruption being detected. In results not
reported, I find that the effect disappears if the election is more than 2 years away, which
suggests that the electorate is relatively myopic. Together, these results suggest that the audits
had a greater effect when the punishment from being detected was greater, and that auditing and
punishments – and specifically, punishments through democratic accountability – may be
complements.
5.2.3. Employment of family members
The BPKP auditors examined the project’s financial records and inspected the
construction site. They did not, however, examine who worked on the project, and whether those
who worked had family ties to the officials running the project. To the extent that giving jobs to
family members is an alternative, but less desirable, method of extracting rents from the project,
we might expect this type of non-audited behavior to respond to the increased audits. Of course,
there are other reasons to hire family members besides rent-extraction; for example, work on the
project by family members might increase if project officials facing audits wanted to improve the
project and if family members are less prone to moral hazard or have higher skill than non family
members.
I examine the change in employment by family members using data from the household
survey described in more detail in Appendix A. Each respondent in the household survey was

24

asked if he or she was related to any of seven types of village government members or the head
of the project implementation team. Overall, approximately 30 percent of respondents are related
to some member of the village government, and 6 percent of respondents are related to the head
of the project. I examine whether people who said that they were either immediate or extended
family members of village government were more or less likely to report having worked for pay
on the road project in audited villages than in control villages. Specifically, I estimate the
following linear probability model using OLS: 25
WORKEDhijk = γk + γ2 AUDITjk + γ3 FAMILYhijk + γ4 AUDIT × FAMILYijk
+ γ5 Xhijk + εhijk

(2)

where FAMILY is a dummy equal to 1 if the individual was a family member of village
government or the head of the project, WORKED is a dummy equal to 1 if a household member
worked for pay on the project, X is a vector of control variables (age and gender of respondent,
predicted household income, dummies for the ways the household was sampled, and the number
of social activities household members participated in during the previous three months), h
represents the household, i the village, j the subdistrict, k represents the audit stratum, and γk is a
stratum fixed effect. The coefficient of interest is γ4, which represents the differential probability
in audited villages relative to control villages that family members of village government or the
head of the project worked on the project. The empirical results include two different FAMILY
variables, one for being a family member of a government official and one for being a family
member of the project head.
The results are reported in Table 6. Column (1) shows that family members of
government members are 8 percentage points more likely to work on the project in audited

25

Regressions using a Probit specification produce essentially similar results.

25

villages than in control villages, and column (2) shows that family members of the project head
are 14 percentage points more likely to work on the project in audited villages than in nonaudited villages. Given that the mean probability of working on the project is only 30 percent,
these effects are quite large in magnitude. 26
As discussed above, there are different interpretations for these results – one view says
that this is alternative, less desirable form of corruption, whereas the other suggests this is
actually an attempt to improve the project. Though distinguishing between these alternative
hypotheses is difficult, there is some suggestive evidence in favor of the nepotism-as-corruption
view. In particular, the micro-finance literature has suggested that social connections can be an
effective mechanism for minimizing moral hazard (Karlan 2004), so if reducing moral hazard
was the issue, one might expect similar effects for workers with many social connections as for
family members. In column (3) of Table 6, however, I find that while workers with many social
connections are more likely to work on the project overall, there is no statistically significant
differential effect in response to the audits in the relationship between social connections and
working on the project. Column (4) shows that family member results are still present when I
examine all the interactions jointly. Furthermore, in results not reported here, I find that,
conditional on observables, family members of village officials are more likely to be employed
in the higher wage category (skilled labor rather than unskilled), suggesting that they may be
receiving rents from the project. While this evidence is suggestive of a nepotism-as-corruption
story, it is by no means definitive, and understanding this phenomenon is an important direction
for future work.

26

In results not reported, I find that there were no statistically significant changes in family members working on the
project associated with the invitations treatments. For the comment forms treatment, there was a statistically
significant increase in family members working on the project, but only for family members of the project head.

26

5.3. The Participation Experiments
5.3.1. Did the interventions increase participation?
Before we can assess the impact of increased participation on corruption, it is important
to make sure that the treatments —i.e., the invitations and comment forms – did, in fact, increase
villager participation. To examine this, in Table 7 I re-estimate equation (1), where the
dependent variables are several measures of participation in the accountability process. Each
observation represents one accountability meeting, so there are three observations for each
village. Standard errors are adjusted to take into account this intra-village correlation.
Column (1) shows that the treatments had a substantial effect on total attendance – the
invitations treatment increased attendance at the meetings by an average of 14.8 people, or
approximately 40 percent. 27 The slightly smaller increase for villages receiving comment forms
as well as invitations suggests that being able to submit written comments and attending
meetings are substitutes. Column (2) shows that virtually all of the increase in attendance at the
meetings came in the form of increased attendance by these non-elite villagers, so that the
number of non-elite at the meetings increased by 75 percent, from 16 people in the control
villages to 26 people in the treatment villages. 28
Columns (3) and (4) examine the impact of the treatments on active participation at the
meetings. Column (3) shows that, in the invitations treatment, the average number of people who
spoke at a meeting increased by 0.74, or just under 10 percent. Column (4) shows that about 40
percent of these new speakers were non-elite, increasing the number of non-elite villagers who
spoke at a meeting by about 30 percent over the baseline level.
27

Villages receiving 500 invitations had slightly higher attendance (by 1.7 people on average) than villages
receiving 300, though these differences are not statistically significant. Passing out invitations through schools did
not result in a statistically significant difference in composition of attendees. I therefore omit these additional subvariants in the subsequent analysis, though including them does not substantially alter the results.
28
I classify people as “non-elite” if they have no official position in the village, no official position on the project,
and were not described as a tokoh masyarakat (“informal village leader”) by village members who assisted the
enumerator.

27

In addition, the comment forms appear to have been quite successful in eliciting
villagers’ opinions about the project. On average, 140 comment forms (about 35 percent) were
returned, filled out, per meeting. The responses were quite varied, and on average had slightly
more positive than negative comments. There are no substantial differences in the response rate
across villages of differing average education levels—mean adult education in these villages is
4.8 years, and 89 percent of adults can read and write—which suggests that, at least within the
level of education in rural Java, education does not seem to be a substantial constraint to using
comment forms to elicit villager responses.
5.3.2. Effect on Meetings
Table 8 investigates the effect that increased participation (via the invitations and
comment forms) had on the accountability meetings. As discussed in more detail in Appendix A,
the enumerator recorded each problem or issue that was discussed at the meeting, and coded
whether the problem was potentially corruption-related or not. 29 In addition, I define a ‘serious
response’ to a problem as any of the serious actions that could be taken by a village in response
to a problem with the project – specifically, agreeing to replace a supplier or village official,
agreeing that money should be returned, agreeing for an internal village investigation, asking for
help from district project officials, or requesting an external audit. These serious actions are quite
rare – they occur at only 3 percent of meetings – and thus, to preserve statistical power, I
consider them together.
The results in Column (1) suggest that neither the invitations treatment nor the invitations
+ comment form treatment had a significant effect on the total number of problems discussed at

29

Classifying problems and listing whether they are potentially corruption related clearly requires some degree of
subjective judgment on the part of the enumerator filling out the form. However, all villages in a subdistrict were
handled by the same enumerator, so including stratum (i.e., subdistrict) fixed effects controls for these potential
differences in coding.

28

the meeting. This implies that the increase in the number of people talking in Table 7 is an
increase in who participates in the discussion, not an increase in the number of problems per se.
However, as shown in Column (2), both the invitations and the invitations + comment forms
increased the probability of having a corruption-related problem discussed at the meeting by 2.7
percentage points, or 50 percent above the baseline level. Only the comment forms, however,
affected how problems were resolved – column (3) shows that the probability of a serious action
being taken is 1.5 percentage points higher – or 70 percent higher than the baseline amount – in
villages receiving the comment forms, but that there is no effect in villages receiving only
invitations.
These results suggest that the impact of the comment forms was slightly different from
what was expected. In particular, despite the large number of comments received, adding the
comment forms did not change the probability that a corruption-related problem was discussed.
This does not mean that fear of retaliation was not an issue, however. Rather, the results suggest
that when an issue was brought up, possibly by an elite member of the village who had less fear
of retaliation by the implementation team, villagers may have been unsure whether to side with
the challenger or the implementation team. Knowing from the comment forms that many other
people agreed with them, and therefore that the challenge was likely to be victorious, may have
tipped the balance. This suggests the comment forms were more about creating common
knowledge about problem, rather than bringing previously unknown problems to light.
Nevertheless, both of these effects were small in absolute magnitude.
5.3.3. Effect on Missing Expenditures
Table 9 examines the overall impact of the two participation treatments on the percent
missing in the projects. The first panel shows the effect of the invitations treatment; the second

29

panel shows the effect of the invitations + comment forms treatment. The results suggest that
both the invitations and invitations + comment forms treatments had a small, and statistically
insignificant, impact on the overall percent missing from the project. Depending on the
specification and the measure of corruption, the point estimates suggest that these treatments
reduced the percent missing by between 1.5 and 3 percentage points, though these estimates are
never statistically distinguishable from 0.
The lack of a strong effect of the invitations and comment forms on corruption is
consistent with the evidence in Section 5.3.2, for while the comment forms did increase the
probability of serious action being taken in response to corruption, the magnitude of this
response was small. In fact, even if taking a serious anti-corruption action at a meeting
eliminated corruption entirely, the reduction in corruption in caused by these induced serious
actions would have been less than 1 percentage point of average total expenditures. 30 The results
here suggest that not only were the direct effects (via anti-corruption actions) small, but any
deterrent effects of the treatments were small as well.
However, the small effects on the overall percent missing variable mask the fact that
there were substantial reductions in missing labor expenditures. As shown in Table 9, the
invitations treatment led to a statistically significant reduction in missing expenditures in labor of
between 14 percentage and 18 percentage points. The invitations + comment forms also led to a
reduction in missing labor expenditures, though it was somewhat smaller in magnitude (9 to 13

30

To see this, suppose that taking a serious anti-corruption action eliminates corruption in the village. (In fact, in the
cross-section, villages where a serious response was taken had a missing expenditures about 18 percentage points
lower than other villages.) If I re-estimate Table 8 at the village level, rather than the meeting level, the pointestimate is that comment forms treatment increased the probability of a serious response to a problem by 3.8
percentage points. This suggests that, if the sole effect of the comment forms was through the probability of a
serious response being taken, the expected average reduction in the percent missing would be 18 × 0.038 = 0.68
percentage points.

30

percentage points) and not statistically significant. 31 On the other hand, the point estimates
suggest no change, or if anything a very mild increase, in missing funds on the materials
dimension. Since, as shown in Table 2, materials account for 68% of road expenditures whereas
unskilled labor accounts for only 20%, the lack of an effect on the materials dimension is why
the effects on the overall percent missing are small and statistically insignificant despite the
reduction in missing labor.
There are several different potential explanations for the reduction in labor expenditures
but not materials associated with the participation treatments. First, it may be easier for villagers
to observe actual wage payments than the quantity of materials delivered, making corruption in
labor technologically easier for villagers to detect. Alternatively, even if villagers had equal
information about both types of corruption, the focus on labor may have arisen because the
invitations induced more workers to attend the meetings, and those workers focused on their
private interest (i.e., the wages they personally were supposed to be paid by the project) rather
than the public good of a higher quality road.
Though these hypotheses are difficult to definitively distinguish, there is suggestive
evidence in favor of the hypothesis that it was more about incentives than information. First, the
household survey described in Appendix A included a question on the respondent’s perceptions
of corruption in the road project. In related work (Olken 2005), I find that these perceptions of
corruption in the project were positively correlated with missing materials expenditures, but were
uncorrelated with missing labor expenditures. This suggests that, surprisingly, villagers appear to
have more information about missing materials expenditures, not missing labor expenditures.

31

I cannot reject the hypothesis that the two participation treatments (invitations and invitations + comment forms)
had the same effect. Pooling them together yields an average reduction in labor expenditures of between 12 and 17
percentage points, with the average reduction statistically significant in 2 of 3 specifications.

31

Second, one can examine whether the invitations treatment varies when workers come
from outside the village, and are therefore ineligible to attend the accountability meetings. When
I do this (i.e., interact the invitations treatment with the percent of workers coming from outside
the village), I find that the reduction in missing labor associated with the invitations treatment is
smaller when more of the workers come from outside the village. Since the only people that
attend the accountability meetings are those who live in the village, this suggests that it is the fact
that the invitations induce workers to attend meetings and fight for their own wages that drives
the reduction in theft in wages. The percent of workers coming from outside the village is
potentially endogenous, so these results should be viewed as speculative. Nevertheless, this
result, combined with the result about information, suggests that the lack of a reduction in
materials may be because monitoring theft of materials is more of a public good than monitoring
theft of wages.
Even without the invitations and comment forms, the KDP program investigated here
includes more grass-roots participation, and a more complicated system of checks and balances,
than the typical government project in most developing countries. It is possible that the marginal
effects of increasing participation from this relatively high baseline—i.e., the effects reported
above—do not capture the overall effects of grass-roots participation as a monitoring
mechanism, and that more dramatic variations in the amount of participation might have
different effects. However, the fact that the invitations did lead to a substantial reduction in
missing labor expenditures suggests that the changes in participation induced by the
interventions were large enough to make a difference.

32

6. Cost-Benefit Analysis
The previous analysis discussed the direct effects of the treatments. This section performs
a cost-benefit calculation to assess whether, on net, the benefits from these treatments exceed the
costs. This exercise requires making several assumptions, particularly about the efficiency cost
of different types of missing expenditures, and therefore should be viewed as somewhat more
speculative than the preceding sections.
Table 10 presents the cost-benefit estimates for the audits and invitations treatments.
(Since none of the estimated effects of invitations + comment forms were statistically significant,
I omit them from this analysis.) For each treatment, I present two sets of net benefits – “equally
weighted net benefits,” calculated under the assumption that the marginal utility of income is
constant across individuals, and “distribution weighted net benefits,” which takes into account
the fact that some benefits and costs are borne by the rich while others are borne by the poor. 32
The net benefits are derived as follows. First, the monetary cost of the audits is the actual
cost paid by the project per audit, including the salary of the auditors, and the monetary cost of
the invitations is the actual cost paid for photocopying the invitations. The associated deadweight loss is the dead-weight loss associated with the increased taxes required to pay the
monetary cost of the treatments. 33 Finally, the time cost for both treatments is the monetary value

32

Specifically, the distribution-weighted net benefits assumes CRRA utility of per-capita consumption with a
coefficient of relative-risk aversion of 2, normalized so that the median household in rural Java has marginal utility
of 1. Households where someone is in the village government have per-capita expenditure 18.5 percent higher than
typical households in the village, so this (plus the CRRA assumptions) suggests that the social value of $1 of rents
received by project or government officials is $0.61. On the other hand, the social value of $1 of increased wages
received by workers is $1.29, as workers have per-capita consumption approximately 13 percent lower than the
median in the village. I assume that the social benefits from the road are enjoyed equally by all in the village, so they
have a marginal social value of 1. Finally, for taxes, I estimate the distributional impact of both the monetary and
deadweight loss cost using national consumption data from the 2003 SUSENAS, assuming that the burden is borne
proportionally to consumption.
33
Estimates of the marginal cost of public funds for indirect taxes vary considerably. For developing countries,
estimates for the marginal cost of funds from indirect taxes range from 1.04 to 1.05 in Indonesia and Bangladesh
(Devarajan et. al, 1999) to 1.59 to 2.15 for India (Ahmad and Stern, 1987). By comparison, estimates of the
marginal cost of public funds for the U.S. range from 1.17 to 1.56 (Ballard et. al, 1985), with policy analysis

33

of the additional time villagers spend at village meetings as a result of the treatments, valued at
average local wage rates.
The estimates for the change in rents received by corrupt officials are taken from Column
(3) in Table 3 and Table 9, multiplied by the average cost of the project and the average percent
of the project consisting of materials and labor expenditures from Table 2. To estimate the
change in benefits from the project, I use the point estimates of the change in actual expenditures
relative to the original (pre-randomization) plan. 34 For wages, the increase in actual wage
expenditures is valued at the actual amount transferred. For materials, the increase in materials
expenditure increases the lifespan of the road. To value the change in lifespan of the road, I use
estimates from a cost-benefit evaluation of KDP roads conducted for the World Bank (Dent
2001), which imply that the marginal dollar of materials stolen reduces the discounted benefits
from the road by 3.41 dollars. 35 For other reported expenditures, I assume a marginal social
value of 1, since it is unclear what percentage of them are actually spent productively on the road
as opposed to being captured by local officials.
The results presented in Table 10 suggest that the audits were substantially cost-effective.
I estimate that the net social benefits from the audits were approximately $250 per village, which

typically using values in the range from 1.30 to 1.40. I assume that the marginal cost of public funds is 1.4 (i.e. the
dead-weight loss is 0.4)
34
The reason to use the change in actual expenditures relative to the original plan, rather than missing expenditures
in each category, is that there may have been changes in where corruption was hidden in the accounting ledgers, and
such nominal changes in reporting would have no efficiency consequences. For example, in results not reported in
the table, I find that the reduction in missing labor expenditures was due to a combination of shifting reported
expenditures – there is a reduction in reported labor expenditures and a corresponding increase in reported other
expenditures (i.e., the 12% of expenditures on things other than rocks, sand, gravel, and unskilled labor) – as well as
a real increase in actual wage payments to workers, though these changes are not statistically significant. The
changes in missing expenditures due to the audits, however, all show up as increases in actual expenditures.
35
Dent estimates that KDP road projects produces annual flow benefits of 33% of their cost each year for the life of
the road. He also estimates that a good quality road will last 10 years and a poor quality road will last 5 years. Based
on conversations with KDP engineers, I assume that each percentage of materials stolen reduces the life of the road
by 0.1 years, so stealing 50% of materials is the difference between ‘good’ and ‘poor’ quality. Assuming a real
discount rate of 5% and that the baseline lifespan of a road is 7 years implies that each dollar of materials stolen
reduces the discounted net benefits of the project by 3.41 dollars.

34

implies that the benefits were more than 150% the cost of the audits. Weighting by distributional
incidence increases these net benefits even more. For the invitations treatment, I estimate net
benefits that are close to zero, since a reduction in theft of labor is just a transfer from wealthy
village leaders to ordinary workers.
The audit treatment discussed here was a move from a 4% baseline audit probability to a
100% audit probability. It is possible, however, that the response of corruption to the audit
probability is concave, so that an audit probability of only 50% or even 25% might achieve most
of the benefits. 36 The costs of audits, however, are roughly linear in the audit probability. This
suggests that raising audit probabilities to an intermediate level, rather than all the way to 100%,
might have an even higher cost-benefit ratio than the 100% audit probability documented here.
7. Conclusion
This paper has examined the results of a field experiment in Indonesia, designed to
investigate alternative approaches to fighting corruption. I examined the effect of two strategies:
top-down monitoring by government auditors, and bottom-up monitoring through grass-roots
participation in the village monitoring process. The evidence suggests that increasing the
probability of external audits substantially reduced missing funds in the project. A cost benefit
analysis suggests that the benefits from the audits exceeded their cost.
By contrast, increasing grass-roots participation in monitoring the project affected only
missing labor expenditures, with no impact on materials and, as a consequence, little impact
overall. These results suggest that grass-roots monitoring may be more effective for government
programs that provide private goods, such as subsidized food, education or medical care, where
individual citizens have a personal stake in ensuring that the goods are delivered and that theft is

36

For example, Nagin. et al. (2002), in a study of monitoring of call center employees, found substantial evidence of
diminishing returns to increasing the monitoring probability.

35

minimized. For public goods where incentives to monitor are much weaker, such as the
infrastructure projects studied here, the results suggest that using professional auditors may be
much more effective.
This does not mean that empowering community members to discipline service providers
has no role in an anti-corruption approach. In fact, the results suggests that the audits were most
effective when the village head was up for re-election, which suggests that local level
accountability may be an important mechanism for disciplining public officials. However, the
results suggest that grass-roots monitoring alone may not be sufficient, and that for detecting
corruption professional monitors may also important.
The results in this paper present the results from a short-run intervention. If auditors are
bribable, over time villages may develop repeat relationships with auditors which may make
bribing auditors easier than in the one-shot case examined here. This might suggest, for example,
that frequent rotation of auditors – or lower probabilities of audits combined with higher
punishments – may be optimal. Understanding the long-run implications of anti-corruption
policies, and developing ways of ensuring that they remain effective over the long term, is an
important issue for future research.

36

References
Ahmad, Etisham and Nicholas Stern, “Alternative Sources of Government Revenue: Illustrations
from India, 1979-80,” in David Newbery and Nicholas Stern eds., The Theory of Taxation for
Developing Countries, New York: Oxford University Press, 1987.
Ballard, Charles L., John B. Shoven, and John Whalley, “General Equilibrium Computations of
the Marginal Welfare Cost of Taxes in the United States,” American Economic Review 75
(1), pp 128-138, March 1985.
Bardhan, Pranab, “Decentralization of Governance and Development,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 16 (4), pp. 185-205, Fall 2002.
Bardhan, Pranab and Dilip Mookherjee, “Corruption and Decentralization of Infrastructure
Delivery in Developing Countries,” Economic Journal, forthcoming..
Becker, Gary S. and George J. Stigler, “Law Enforcement, Malfeasance, and Compensation of
Enforcers,” The Journal of Legal Studies 3 (1), pp. 1-18, January 1974.
Cadot, Olivier, “Corruption as a Gamble,” Journal of Public Economics 33, pp. 223-244, 1987.
Dent, Geoffrey, “Ex-Post Evaluation of Kecamatan Development Program (KDP) Infrastructure
Projects,” mimeo, Project Appraisals Pty Limited, November 2001.
Deaton, Angus, The Analysis of Household Surveys, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press,
1997.
Devarajan, Shantayanan, Karen E. Thierfelder, and Sethaput Suthiwart-Narueput, “The Marginal
Cost of Public Funds in Developing Countries,” in Amedeo Fossati and Wolfgang Wiegard
(eds.), Policy Evaluations with Computable General Equilibrium Models, New York:
Routledge Press, 2002.
Di Tella, Rafael and Ernesto Schargrodsky, “The Role of Wages and Auditing During a
Crackdown on Corruption in the City of Buenos Aires,” Journal of Law and Economics 46,
April 2003.
Fisman, Raymond and Shang-Jin Wei, “Tax Rates and Tax Evasion: Evidence from ‘Missing
Imports’ in China,” Journal of Political Economy 112 (2), pp. 471-500, 2004.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Enrico Moretti, “Did Iraq Cheat the United Nations? Underpricing,
Bribes, and the Oil for Food Program,” NBER Working Paper #11202, 2005.
Karlan, Dean S., “Social Connections and Group Banking,” mimeo: Princeton University, 2004.
Krueger, Anne O., “The Political Economy of the Rent-Seeking Society,” American Economic
Review 64 (3), pp. 291-303, June 1974.
Lambsdorff, Johann G., “Background Paper to the 2003 Corruption Perceptions Index,” mimeo:
Transparency International, September 2003.
Mauro, Paulo, “Corruption and Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 110 (3), pp. 681-712,
August 1995.
Olken, Benjamin A., “Corruption and the Cost of Redistribution,” Journal of Public Economics,
forthcoming.

37

Olken, Benjamin A., “Measuring Corruption: Perceptions vs. Reality,” mimeo, Harvard
University, 2005.
Nagin, Daniel S., James B. Rebitzer, Seth Sanders, and Lowell J. Taylor, “Monitoring,
Motivation, and Management: The Determinants of Opportunistic Behavior in a Field
Experiment,” American Economic Review 92 (4), pp. 850-873, September 2002.
Reinikka, Ritva and Jakob Svensson, “Local Capture: Evidence from a Central Government
Transfer Program in Uganda,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (2), pp. 679-706, May
2004.
Rose-Ackerman, Susan, “The Challenge of Poor Governance and Corruption,” mimeo,
Copenhagen Consensus and Yale University, 2004.
Shleifer, Andrei and Robert W. Vishny, “Corruption,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 108 (3),
pp. 599-617, August 1993.
Stiglitz, Joseph E., “Participation and Development: Perspectives from the Comprehensive
Development Paradigm,” Review of Development Economics 6(2), pp. 163-192, 2002.
Woodhouse, Andrea et. al., “Village Justice in Indonesia: Case Studies on Access to Justice,
Village Democracy, and Governance,” mimeo, World Bank Indonesia Office, February
2004.
World Development Report 2004: Making Services Work For Poor People, Washington, DC:
World Bank, 2004.
Yang, Dean, “Can Enforcement Backfire? Crime Displacement in the Context of a Common
Customs Reform,” University of Michigan, mimeo, 2004.

38

Appendix A Data collection
In addition to the corruption field survey described in Section 4 above, this paper uses
three other types of data collected during the course of the project—key-informant surveys, data
on village meetings, and a household survey. This Appendix describes the data on village
meetings and the household survey. In addition, it provides additional details on the field survey
described above.
Village meeting data
In each KDP year in a village, there are a total of seven regularly scheduled village
meetings that must occur (including the three accountability meetings.) The enumerator was
present at the final four meetings – the meeting at which preparations for construction were
begun plus the three accountability meetings. At each meeting, the enumerator circulated an
attendance list. As the meeting progressed, the enumerator (with the assistance of a local
counterpart) noted on the attendance list each person who spoke at the meeting. In addition,
sitting with the local counterpart after the meeting was over, the enumerator asked the local
counterpart to identify which of the attendees was a tokoh masyarakat, or informal leader, a
designation typically given to teachers, religious leaders, or other types of informal village
leaders.
While the meeting was in progress, the enumerator was asked to keep detailed notes on
what occurred during the meeting. The enumerator compiled a list of all problems that arose at
the meeting. A “problem” was defined as the topic of any substantial discussion other than the
routine business of the meeting; the median problem reported in the data was discussed for 7
minutes, and the mean number of problems reported in an Accountability Meeting was 0.73. For
each problem, the enumerator described the problem, classified it according to one of 57 predefined problem codes, and listed the amount of time spent discussing the problem, who first
raised the problem, who was potentially involved in the problem, whether there were indications
of corruption in the problem, whether the problem was resolved, and if so, what actions were
taken to resolve it.
Household survey
The household survey was conducted approximately during the last two months of
construction and the first month after construction was completed. The survey contained a
household roster, a list of assets, information on participation in social, religious, and
government activities, detailed information on participation in the road project, and a series of
questions about perceptions of corruption. Household expenditures were predicted based on
assets, using the relationship between assets and consumption from the 1999 SSD (Hundred
Villages Survey). The household survey was designed as a stratified random sample, containing
between six and thirteen respondents per village.
Field survey / Corruption measurement
The general approach used in the field survey is described in Section 4 of the text above.
This section discusses a number of additional aspects of the data collection not discussed above
that are important for the analysis in this paper.

39

One important issue is the treatment of voluntary contributions. According to official
village reports, these contributions account for an average of 16% of total project costs. Of these
voluntary contributions, the bulk (60% according to official village reports) comes in the form of
either voluntary labor or tools (typically, village workers bring their own tools to work on the
project; the value of these tools is often reported as a voluntary contribution). Anecdotal
evidence confirms that voluntary contributions are qualitatively important primarily for labor and
tools.
I treat these voluntary contributions as follows. For the three main materials in the road
projects—sand, rocks, and gravel—I include both reported project expenditures and reported
voluntary contributions when calculating the total amount of reported materials, as this total
amount should be comparable to the total amount of each type of material observed in the field.
For labor, where overstating voluntary labor is a much more important potential margin of
corruption than in materials, a different approach was taken. As discussed in Section 4, for labor,
I use only reports and actual estimates of paid labor, and exclude voluntary labor.
For the worker survey described in Section 4 above, a total of five worker interviews
were conducted in each village. Of these interviews, two were focus group interviews, consisting
of 3 or more workers interviewed together, and three were individual interviews. Two of these
interviews (one focus group, one individual) were workers randomly selected form the official
list of all workers who had ever been paid by the project; the remainder were recruited more
informally, by having the surveyor go to different areas of the village located near the road and
asking households who had worked on the project.
The responses on the worker survey are in some cases quite variable. In particular, there
is often variation because certain workers only worked on certain aspects of the project, because
certain parts of the project were done differently than others, or because some workers were
confused about the meaning of the questions. Because these discrepancies can be quite difficult
to capture on the survey, surveyors were asked to fill out a form in which they summarized the
results of all interviews. The surveyors were instructed that the summary should represent their
best understanding of what actually happened in the village, based only on the information in the
worker surveys. Though this summary is necessarily more subjective than answers to the worker
surveys, experience during the pilots suggests that this method is more accurate than using
mechanical averages from the individual worker surveys. Accordingly, the main results use the
information from this summary report.
Appendix B Assumptions and Calibration
Two main types of assumptions are used in the corruption calculations in this paper—
assumptions about loss ratios, defined as the percentage of materials unaccounted for as a result
of normal construction losses and measurement error, and assumptions about worker capacity,
defined as the amount of each type of task an average worker can accomplish in a day of work.
This section describes the assumptions used in the paper in more details, and discusses the
calibration exercises through which these assumptions were determined.
To determine the appropriate assumptions, two methods were used. First, similar
assumptions are used in the planning process for KDP roads. For example, KDP engineers
typically assume normal construction losses of 16 percent for sand and gravel, and 23 percent for
rock. Therefore, when purchasing supplies, engineers increase the final volume of materials they
need by these amounts to ensure the appropriate quantities at the time of construction. Similarly,
when budgeting labor requirements, KDP engineers estimate the quantities of each type of task

40

in the project, and multiply by standard worker capacity estimates. As a baseline, I therefore
obtained, from the KDP chief engineer, the standard assumptions typically used for KDP
projects.
There are several problems with these assumptions, however. For the loss ratios for
physical materials, the estimates included only the losses during the construction process; they
do not include the additional losses inherent in the measurement process. They are therefore
likely to be too small for the purposes here. For manual labor, the estimates used were apparently
based on a 1970s workfare program, when both worker nourishment and worker motivation were
substantially lower than today.
Given this, I conducted 4 calibration exercises. In each calibration exercise, our project
built a 60 meter Telford road, similar in construction techniques and standards to KDP road
projects. Materials were purchased from local suppliers, and labor was recruited from the
villages in which the roads were constructed. The roads were constructed in four very different
regions of the study area, which were chosen to represent the different types of conditions typical
in the study area. Detailed measurements were taken of all materials delivered to the site, and
careful track was kept of each worker’s activities during construction.
Once the road was completed, the measurement techniques from the study were applied
to the test road. Using these techniques, I estimated the total quantity of material used in each
road. By comparing the quantity of material estimated using the study techniques to the actual
quantity of material we used in the road (which is known, since it was measured as it arrived at
the project site), one can recover the correct loss ratios.
From the logs of worker activity, I was able to construct the actual time required by the
workers on these test roads to complete each of the tasks assigned to them. Of course, workers
who know that they are being closely watched may work more quickly than normal workers in
the field. Nevertheless, the pace of work in the test road was between 50 and 700 percent faster,
depending on the task, than the standard assumptions. Additional conversations with field
engineers confirmed that the 1970s standards were, in fact, quite low. As one engineer said, the
standards were so loose that “if a project using those standards didn’t finish with money left
over, I was immediately suspicious that there was corruption in that village.”
Table 11 lists the main assumptions used in the study, based on the results of the
calibration. For the labor estimates, the revised estimates were revised downward 20% from the
estimates from the test road, to incorporate breaks taken by workers and to take into account the
fact that carefully watched workers may work faster than workers under more normal monitoring
conditions.
Interestingly, the high loss ratio for gravel and low loss ratio for sand suggests that some
of the gravel is seeping through cracks in the rocks, and is counted by our survey as sand. This
suggests that one might better consider “sand + gravel” together (with an implied joint loss ratio
of 1.25), rather than separately. Doing so reduces the average percent missing from 23 percent to
21 percent, but otherwise does not alter the results of the paper.

41

Table 1: Number of villages in each treatment category
Control
Audit
Total

Control

Invitations

114
93
207

105
94
199

Invitations +
Comment Forms
106
96
202

Total
325
283
608

Notes: Tabulations from results of randomization. Each subdistrict faced a 48% chance of being randomized into the Audit treatment. Each
village faced a 33% chance of being randomized into the Invitations treatment, and a 33% chance of being randomized into the Invitations +
Comment Forms treatment. The randomization into Audits was independent of the randomization into Invitations or Invitations + Comment
Forms.

Table 2: Summary Statistics
Total project size (US$)

Share of total reported expenses
Road project
Ancillary projects
(culverts, retaining walls, etc)
Other projects
(schools, bridges, irrigation, etc)
Share of reported road expenses
Sand
Rocks
Gravel
Unskilled labor
Other

Number observations

8,875
(4,401)

0.766
(0.230)
0.154
(0.181)
0.079
(0.166)

0.099
(0.080)
0.484
(0.143)
0.116
(0.181)
0.196
(0.125)
0.105
(0.164)
538

Notes: Statistics shown are means, with standard deviations in parentheses.
Data for the 538 villages for which percent missing could be calculated.
Exchange rate: Rp. 9,000 = US $1.

Table 3: Audits – main theft results
No
Fixed Effects
Audit
P-Value
Effect

Engineer
Fixed Effects
Audit
PEffect
Value

Stratum
Fixed Effects
Audit
P-Value
Effect

-0.076
(0.037)
-0.086
(0.038)

0.041

-0.048
(0.033)
-0.090
(0.036)

0.144

477

0.012

538

-0.063
(0.042)
-0.090
(0.088)

0.141

-0.034
(0.040)
-0.041
(0.076)

0.398

477

0.590

426

Percent missing:
Log reported value –
Log actual value

Control
Mean

Treatment
Mean:
Audits

Major items in roads

0.277
(0.033)
0.291
(0.030)

0.192
(0.029)
0.199
(0.030)

-0.085
(0.044)
-0.091
(0.043)

0.058

0.240
(0.038)
0.312
(0.080)

0.162
(0.036)
0.231
(0.072)

-0.078
(0.053)
-0.077
(0.108)

0.143

Major items in roads
and ancillary projects
Breakdown of roads:
Materials
Unskilled labor

0.034

0.477

0.023

0.310

Num
Obs

Notes: Audit effect, standard errors, and p-values are computed by estimating equation (1), a regression of the dependent variable on a dummy
for audit treatment, invitations treatment and invitations + comment forms treatments. Robust standard errors in parentheses, allowing for
clustering by subdistrict (to account for clustering of treatment by subdistrict). Each ‘audit effect’, standard error, and accompanying p-value is
from a separate regression. Each row shows a different dependent variable, shown at left. All dependent variables are the log of the value
reported by the village less the log of the estimated actual value, which is approximately equal to the percent missing. Villages are included in
each row only if there was positive reported expenditures for the dependent variable listed in that row.

Table 4: Audits – prices vs. quantities
No
Fixed Effects
Audit
P-Value
Effect

Engineer
Fixed Effects
Audit
PEffect
Value

Stratum
Fixed Effects
Audit
P-Value
Effect

Percent missing:
Log reported value –
Log actual value

Control
Mean

Treatment
Mean:
Audits

Num
Obs

Prices

-0.018
(0.017)

-0.016
(0.021)

0.002
(0.027)

0.949

0.011
(0.025)

0.666

0.018
(0.024)

0.458

494

Quantities

0.276
(0.030)

0.207
(0.028)

-0.069
(0.041)

0.092

-0.069
(0.035)

0.053

-0.048
(0.032)

0.141

477

Notes: See Notes to Table 3. Reported and actual prices are defined as a weighted average across different commodities (rock, sand, gravel, and
unskilled labor), where each commodity is weighted by the reported quantity. Reported and actual quantities are also defined as a weighted
average, where each commodity is weighted by the reported prices.

43

Table 5: Interactions with village politics
(1)
Upcoming election

(2)

0.144
(0.111)
0.092*
(0.052)
-0.060*
(0.033)
-0.306*
(0.176)

Narrow victory
Audit
Upcoming election * Audit

(3)

0.026
(0.092)
0.049
(0.064)
-0.039
(0.049)

Narrow victory * Audit

0.219
(0.167)
0.024
(0.062)
-0.008
(0.047)
-0.668**
(0.268)
0.159
(0.102)
0.187
(0.218)
-0.878**
(0.428)
YES
428
0.39
0.24

0.112
(0.100)

Narrow victory *
Upcoming election
Narrow victory *
Upcoming election * Audit
Stratum fixed effects
Observations
R-squared
Mean dep. var

YES
428
0.38
0.24

YES
428
0.37
0.24

Notes: Results from estimating equation (1), with additional interactions between the audit
variable and the village-level characteristics shown in the table. Dependent variable is missing
expenditures in the road project. Robust standard errors in parenthesis, adjusted for clustering
at the subdistrict level. Upcoming election is a dummy variable for whether the village head
election is scheduled within the next 2 years. Narrow victory is defined as the difference
between the vote share of the second place candidate and the winning candidate in the most
recent village head election, so that larger (i.e., less negative) numbers indicate a closer
election.

Table 6: Nepotism
Audit
Village Gov't Family
Member
Project Head Family
Member
Social activities
Audit × Village Gov't
Family Member
Audit × Project Head
Family Member
Audit × Social
activities
Stratum Fixed Effects
Observations
R-squared
Mean dep. variable

(1)
-0.011
(0.023)
-0.020
(0.024)
0.051
(0.032)
0.017***
(0.006)
0.079**
(0.034)

(2)
0.004
(0.021)
0.016
(0.017)
-0.015
(0.047)
0.017***
(0.006)

(3)
-0.017
(0.032)
0.016
(0.017)
0.051
(0.032)
0.013*
(0.006)

0.138**
(0.060)

YES
3386
0.26
0.30

YES
3386
0.26
0.30

0.010
(0.008)
YES
3386
0.26
0.30

(4)
-0.038
(0.032)
-0.014
(0.023)
-0.004
(0.047)
0.014**
(0.006)
0.064*
(0.034)
0.115*
(0.061)
0.008
(0.008)
YES
3386
0.27
0.30

Notes: Data is from the household survey. Each observation represents one household. Results from estimating
equation (2), where the dependent variable is a dummy for whether a household member worked (for pay) on the
road project. Estimation is by OLS with stratum fixed effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses, adjusted for
clustering at subdistrict level. Social activities refers to the number of social activities adult household members
participated in during the last month. All specifications include controls for invitations and invitations + comment
form treatments, age and gender of respondent, mean adult education in the household, predicted household income,
and dummies for type of household sampled.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

44

Table 7: Participation – First stage
(1)
Attendance
Invitations
Invitations + Comment
Meeting #2
Meeting #3
Stratum Fixed Effects
Observations
R-squared
Mean dep. variable
P-value Invitations =
Invitations + Comment Forms

14.83***
(1.42)
11.48***
(1.41)
-5.32***
(1.16)
-4.29***
(1.26)
YES
1775
0.39
47.99
0.04

(2)
Attendance of
Non-Elite
13.47***
(1.31)
10.28***
(1.33)
-4.00***
(1.11)
-5.78***
(1.19)
YES
1775
0.38
24.15
0.04

(3)
Number Talk
0.743***
(0.196)
0.498***
(0.174)
0.163
(0.162)
0.431**
(0.180)
YES
1775
0.47
8.02
0.23

(4)
Number NonElite who Talk
0.286***
(0.082)
0.221***
(0.072)
0.024
(0.088)
-0.158*
(0.093)
YES
1775
0.28
0.94
0.45

Notes: Results from estimating equation (1), with the dependent variables the participation variables shown in the first row. Data is from the
meeting survey. Each observation is a single village meeting. Includes stratum (subdistrict) fixed effects; since audit is constant within substrict,
the audit variable is automatically captured by the stratum fixed effect. Robust standard errors in parentheses, adjusted for clustering at village
level.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Table 8: Participation – Impact on Meetings
(1)
Number
problems

Invitations
Invitations + Comment
Meeting #2
Meeting #3
Stratum fixed effects
Observations
R-squared
Mean dep. variable
P-value Invitations =
Invitations + Comment
Forms

0.072
(0.066)
0.104
(0.067)
-0.187***
(0.069)
-0.428***
(0.077)
YES
1783
0.50
1.18
0.62

(2)
Any
corruptionrelated
problem
0.027**
(0.013)
0.026**
(0.013)
0.002
(0.013)
-0.036***
(0.012)
YES
1783
0.31
0.07
0.96

(3)
Serious
response
taken
-0.003
(0.008)
0.015*
(0.008)
-0.020**
(0.010)
-0.029***
(0.010)
YES
1783
0.22
0.03
0.02

Notes: Results from estimating equation (1), with the dependent variables the outcome of meetings shown in the first-row. Data is from meeting
survey. Each observation represents one village. “Serious response” is defined as agreeing to replace a supplier or village office, agreeing that
money should be returned, agreeing for an internal village investigation, asking for help from district project officials, or requesting an external
audit. Estimation is by OLS. Robust standard errors in parentheses, adjusted for clustering by village.

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

45

Table 9: Participation -- Main theft results
Panel A: Invitations
No
Fixed Effects
Invite
P-Value
Effect

Engineer
Fixed Effects
Invite
PEffect
Value

Stratum
Fixed Effects
Invite
P-Value
Effect

-0.030
(0.035)
-0.032
(0.032)

0.391

-0.026
(0.034)
-0.029
(0.032)

0.448

477

0.356

538

0.008
(0.038)
-0.215
(0.095)

0.841

0.005
(0.037)
-0.143
(0.086)

0.882

477

0.098

426

Num
Obs

Percent missing:
Log reported value –
Log actual value

Control
Mean

Treatment
Mean:
Invites

Major items in roads

0.252
(0.033)
0.268
(0.031)

0.230
(0.033)
0.236
(0.031)

-0.021
(0.035)
-0.030
(0.032)

0.556

0.209
(0.041)
0.369
(0.077)

0.221
(0.041)
0.180
(0.077)

0.014
(0.038)
-0.187
(0.098)

0.725

Major items in roads
and ancillary projects
Breakdown of roads:
Materials
Unskilled labor

0.360

0.058

0.324

0.026

Num
Obs

Panel B: Invitations + Comments
No
Fixed Effects
Invite + P-Value
Comment
Effect

Engineer
Fixed Effects
Invite +
PComValue
ment
Effect

Stratum
Fixed Effects
Invite + P-Value
Comment
Effect

-0.024
(0.029)
-0.025
(0.031)

0.416

-0.015
(0.030)
-0.027
(0.031)

0.601

477

0.385

538

-0.022
(0.033)
-0.132
(0.088)

0.501

-0.010
(0.033)
-0.090
(0.091)

0.754

477

0.323

426

Percent missing:
Log reported value –
Log actual value

Control
Mean

Treatment
Mean:
Invites +
Comment

Major items in roads

0.252
(0.033)
0.268
(0.031)

0.228
(0.026)
0.238
(0.026)

-0.022
(0.030)
-0.026
(0.032)

0.455

0.209
(0.041)
0.369
(0.077)

0.180
(0.032)
0.267
(0.073)

-0.028
(0.034)
-0.099
(0.087)

0.414

Major items in roads
and ancillary projects
Breakdown of roads:
Materials
Unskilled labor

0.409

0.255

0.411

0.136

Notes: See Notes to Table 3. Results from estimating equation (1), a regression of the dependent variable on a dummy for audit treatment,
invitations treatment and invitations + comment forms treatments. Each ‘invitations effect’ and ‘invitations + comment effect’ is from a separate
regression, with the dependent variable listed in the row and the fixed effects specification listed in the column heading. Robust standard errors
in parentheses. Regressions without stratum (i.e., subdistrict) fixed effects include a variable for audits, and allow for clustering of standard
errors by subdistrict.

46

Table 10: Net benefits calculation
Audits
Equal
Distribution
Weighted
Weighted
Net Benefits
Net Benefits

Invitations
Equal
Distribution
Weighted
Weighted
Net Benefits
Net Benefits

Cost of treatment:
Monetary cost
Associated dead-weight loss
Time cost
Subtotal

-335
-134
-31
-500

-278
-111
-31
-419

-13
-5
-27
-46

-11
-4
-27
-43

Change in rents received by corrupt officials:
From theft of materials
From theft of wages
Subtotal

-367
-102
-468

-224
-62
-286

62
-254
-191

38
-155
-117

Change in benefits from project:
NPV value of road expenditures
Wages received by workers
Other expenditures
Subtotal

1165
86
-37
1213

1165
111
-37
1238

30
93
73
196

30
120
73
223

245

533

-41

64

TOTAL NET BENEFITS

Note: All figures in USD. Costs are listed as negative numbers. Distributional weights calculated using CRRA utility with coefficient of
relative-risk aversion of 2. Derivation of change in NPV value of road and additional assumptions are discussed in the text.

Table 11: Assumptions for loss ratios and worker capacity
Results from
Calibration
Loss Ratios
Sand
Rocks
Gravel
Worker Capacity
Clearing brush and cleaning road surface (m2)
Spreading sand (m3)
Splitting rocks (m3)
Installing rock layer (m2)
Spreading gravel (m3)
Digging side channels and creating shoulder
(m3)
Building retaining wall (m3)
(unskilled labor portion)
Standard cut and fill(m3)

1.00
1.20
1.75

20
4.5
3.0
6.5
2.25
1.0
0.33*
2*

Notes: All loss ratios are expressed as the ratio of the original amount of material to the amount
measured, and are for measurements loose, not compacted. Worker capacity is the quantity of the
given activity that can be done by one person per 6 hours of work.
* Original KDP assumption that was not able to be reconfirmed from calibration exercises.

47

