                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             TAX CHANGES AND ASSET PRICING:
                                  TIME-SERIES EVIDENCE

                                            Clemens Sialm

                                        Working Paper 11756
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w11756


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2005




I thank Gene Amromin, Doug Bernheim, Eric Engen, Jim Hines, Marcin Kacperczyk, Ken Klassen, Randall
Maringer, Jim Poterba, Steve Sharpe, John Shoven, Joel Slemrod, and seminar participants at the 2003 Tax
Symposium at the University of North Carolina, the 2004 American Finance Association Meetings in San
Diego, the American Enterprise Institute, Stanford University, and the University of Michigan for helpful
comments on earlier drafts. I am grateful to Zhuo Wang for outstanding research assistance. Address:
Stephen M. Ross School of Business; University of Michigan; 701 Tappan Street; Ann Arbor, MI 48109-
1234; Phone: (734) 764-3196; Fax: (734) 764-2557; E-mail: sialm@umich.edu. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2005 by Clemens Sialm. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Tax Changes and Asset Pricing: Time-Series Evidence
Clemens Sialm
NBER Working Paper No. 11756
November 2005
JEL No. G12, H20, E44

                                            ABSTRACT

The effective tax rate on equity securities has fluctuated considerably in the U.S. between 1917-
2004. This study investigates whether personal taxes on equity securities are related to stock
valuations using the time-series variation in tax burdens. The paper finds an economically and
statistically significant relationship between asset valuations and personal tax rates. Consistent with
tax capitalization, stock valuations tend to be relatively low when tax burdens are relatively high.

Clemens Sialm
University of Michigan Business School
701 Tappan Street
D3219
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
and NBER
sialm@umich.edu
1         Introduction

Taxes have an important impact on effective asset returns for taxable investors. If the

marginal investor is subject to taxes, then asset valuations and asset returns should

reflect this tax burden in equilibrium. In particular, to compensate taxable investors

for their tax burden, before-tax asset returns should be higher and asset valuations
should be lower in periods of relatively high tax rates. On the other hand, taxes

should not affect asset valuations if the marginal investor is effectively tax-exempt,
as first discussed by Miller and Scholes (1978). This study tests empirically whether

dividend and capital gains taxes are capitalized into asset prices using a new data
set covering personal tax burdens on the aggregate U.S. stock market over the period

between 1917-2004.

        The effect of personal dividend and capital gains taxes on stock prices and stock
returns has received a lot of attention in the economics, accounting, and finance
literatures.1 A first group of papers has analyzed whether asset returns depend on
dividend yields, based on the after-tax version of the CAPM by Brennan (1970).2 A

second group of papers attempts to identify the relationship between tax rates and
dividend yields using ex-dividend date price data.3 A third group of papers analyzes
whether there is a relationship between asset valuations and tax rates.4

        Despite the extensive literature in this area, the question of whether taxes are

capitalized or not has not yet been resolved. Whereas the previous empirical literature

on tax capitalization analyzed primarily the cross-section of asset prices and asset
    1
     See Auerbach (2002), Poterba (2002), and Allen and Michaely (2003) for reviews of this litera-
ture.
   2
     The papers in this literature include, for example, Black and Scholes (1974), Litzenberger and
Ramaswamy (1979), Blume (1980), Gordon and Bradford (1980), Miller and Scholes (1982), Poterba
and Summers (1984), and Naranjo, Nimalendran, and Ryngaert (1998).
   3
     The papers in this literature include, for example, Elton and Gruber (1970), Eades, Hess, and
Kim (1984), Barclay (1987), Michaely (1991), Frank and Jagannathan (1998), Green and Rydqvist
(1999), Graham, Michaely, and Roberts (2003), Elton, Gruber, and Blake (2005), and Chetty,
Rosenberg, and Saez (2005)
   4
     See, for example, Fama and French (1998), Harris, Hubbard, and Kemsley (2001), and Auerbach
and Hassett (2005).


                                                1
returns, my paper sheds light on this tax capitalization controversy by performing a

new test based on the substantial time-series variation in effective tax rates on equity

securities.
   My paper is related to McGrattan and Prescott (2005), who derive the quantitative

impact of tax and regulatory changes on equity values using a growth theory model.
They show that these regulatory changes can explain the large secular movements in

corporate equity values relative to GDP. McGrattan and Prescott (2005) base their
inferences on a carefully calibrated growth model. However, they do not perform an

econometric analysis of the relationship between tax rates and asset valuations. The

test in my paper investigates empirically whether there is a statistically significant
relationship between taxes and asset valuations over the longer period between 1917-
2004. Consistent with McGrattan and Prescott (2005), I find a negative relationship
between asset valuations and asset prices controlling for many macroeconomic factors.

   An influential literature in public economics has investigated the impact of divi-
dend tax changes on economic activity. Under the “traditional” view dividend taxes
affect the marginal source of finance, while under the “new” view developed by King

(1977), Auerbach (1979), and Bradford (1981) dividend taxes have no impact on the

investment incentives of firms using retentions as marginal source of funds. There
has been a significant debate concerning the relative importance of these two views:

For example, Poterba and Summers (1985) support the traditional view, while Desai
and Goolsbee (2004) and Auerbach and Hassett (2005) find more support for the new

view. Although my paper does not directly test the implications of the two views,
the theoretical model and the empirical results are broadly consistent with the “new

view.”

   The first part of the paper derives asset valuations in a stylized general equilibrium

model, based on the exchange economy model of Lucas (1978). My model generalizes
the Lucas model by introducing stochastic dividend taxes. The theoretical results


                                           2
show that, under plausible conditions, asset valuations tend to be lower in periods

where taxes are relatively high. Relatively low asset valuations in high-tax regimes

generate relatively high before-tax returns, which compensate investors for the tax
burden. The theoretical model in my paper differs from McGrattan and Prescott

(2005) by explicitly incorporating the uncertainty of the tax code.
   The second part of the paper computes effective tax rates on equity securities

following Poterba (1987b) and McGrattan and Prescott (2005). This section demon-
strates that the aggregate tax burden of equity securities has varied significantly

between 1917-2004. For example, the effective tax rate on equity securities amounted

to approximately 40 percent in the early 1950s and declined to about 5 percent in
2004. These substantial variations in tax rates are caused by three main factors:
First, several recent tax reforms gradually reduced the marginal statutory tax rates
on investment income. Second, corporations adjusted their distribution behavior and

substituted tax-favored share repurchases for highly taxed dividends during the last
decades. Third, the introduction of pensions and other tax-qualified savings oppor-
tunities reduced the proportion of equities held by taxable investors significantly,

resulting in a decrease in the effective tax rate.

   The main part of the paper presents a new test of tax capitalization that relates
equity valuations, such as the price-earnings ratio of the aggregate stock market, to

effective tax rates between 1917-2004. I find a negative relationship between asset

valuations and effective tax rates controlling for various macroeconomic factors. The

negative relationship is both statistically and economically significant. Consistent
with tax capitalization, I also find a positive relationship between taxes and asset re-

turns, indicating that investors are compensated for higher taxes with higher average

before-tax returns.

   The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 investigates the relationship between
dividend taxes and asset valuations in a stylized general equilibrium model. Section 3


                                            3
summarizes the major tax reforms between 1913 and 2004 and derives the historical

effective tax rates on asset returns over this period. Section 4 reports the main

results of this paper, investigating whether there is a systematic relationship between
the effective tax rate and equity valuations using the time-series variation in the

effective tax rate of the U.S. stock market. This section also includes a large number
of robustness tests that confirm the results using various specifications. Section 5

concludes.



2         Theory

This section describes a stylized general equilibrium model of asset markets that

generalizes the Lucas (1978) model by introducing stochastic dividend taxation.5


2.1        Assumptions

The output in the exchange economy is exogenous and perishable. Aggregate output

d > 0 follows a geometric random walk with drift, where zt+1 denotes its stochastic
growth rate. Output growth zt+1 has a constant mean of µ and a standard deviation
of σ. The distribution of the variables is assumed to remain constant over time.


                            dt+1 = dt exp(zt+1 ), zt+1 ∼ N (µ, σ 2 ).                          (1)


        The economy consists of only one security that corresponds to the market portfolio

of all assets. It is possible to introduce additional assets that are in zero net supply
without affecting the main asset pricing implications. The asset pays the dividend of

dt at the beginning of each period t. The price of equity pt is defined ‘ex-dividend.’
    5
     The model presented in this section is related to the model in Sialm (2005a), who analyzes the
impact of stochastic taxation on equity and term premia. One difference between the two models
is that the model in the current paper describes a dividend tax while the model in Sialm (2005a)
describes a consumption tax.



                                                4
Assets can be traded without incurring any transaction costs, and investors face no

borrowing or short-selling constraints.

       The government taxes the dividends at a flat tax rate τt . Tax rates are stochastic
and follow a two-state Markov-Chain with 0 ≤ τL < τH < 1. The transition proba-

bilities are assumed to be equal in the two states and φ denotes the probability that
the tax rate will not change in the next period:


                                     φ = P rob(τt+1 = τt ).                                    (2)


       To keep the model tractable, it is necessary to make several simplifying assump-
tions. First, the model assumes a flat tax on the total distributions of companies and
excludes taxes on capital gains. Furthermore, companies are not allowed to adjust

their distribution policies by changing their dividend payout ratios. However, the tax
rate can be thought of as an effective tax rate that aggregates all the various tax rates
and also incorporates the corporate distribution behavior in reduced form.6 Second,
the model focuses on the impact of personal taxation and does not explicitly take

into account corporate taxes, since the dividends paid by the companies are already

adjusted for corporate taxes. Thus, a change in the corporation tax would affect the
dividend process instead. Third, the growth rate of the economy is assumed to be

independent of the tax regime. Numerical computations show that this assumption

has no significant impact on the qualitative results for plausible calibrations.

       The representative consumer purchases the asset in quantity xt to maximize ex-

pected life-time utility. The discount factor is denoted by β ∈ (0, 1). The period
utility is denoted by u(c), where u0 (c) > 0 and u00 (c) ≤ 0.
   6
    For example, if companies reduce their dividend distributions in high-tax regimes and replace
the dividends partially with tax-preferred share repurchases, then the effective tax rate would not
increase as much as the statutory dividend tax rate. Companies will not completely offset tax
changes if there are some benefits of paying dividends.




                                                5
   The consumer’s problem is to maximize:

                                              ∞
                                              X
                                         Et         β i u(ct+i ),                     (3)
                                              i=0


   where:

                           ct = (1 − τt )dt xt−1 + pt (xt−1 − xt ).                   (4)

   Consumers are assumed to have a power-utility function with a coefficient of

relative risk aversion α ∈ [0, ∞).

                                                c1−α −1
                                        u(ct ) = t      .                             (5)
                                                  1−α

   Individuals with α = 0 are risk-neutral and individuals with α = 1 have logarith-
mic preferences u(ct ) = ln(ct ). With power utility, the risk aversion coefficient equals
the reciprocal of the elasticity of intertemporal substitution.

   The first-order condition is:

                                   ·                                     ¸
                                       u0 (ct+1 )
                        pt = βEt                  (pt+1 + (1 − τt )dt+1 ) .           (6)
                                        u0 (ct )

   This equation shows that the price of the asset pt is the present discounted value
of the future expected after-tax value of the asset pt+1 + (1 − τt+1 )dt+1 , where the

stochastic discount factor is mt+1 = βu0 (ct+1 )/u0 (ct ).

   An optimal solution to the agent’s maximization problem also must satisfy the

following transversality condition:


                         lim β i Et [u0 (ct+i )(1 − τt+i )pt+1 xt+i ] = 0.            (7)
                        i→∞



   For market equilibrium, the demand of the asset must equal the exogenous supply.




                                                     6
In equilibrium, the consumption of the representative agent amounts to:


                                     ct = (1 − τt )dt .                            (8)



2.2    Equity Valuations

The price-dividend ratio of the asset δt = pt /dt can be expressed in equilibrium as
follows:

                          ·                                  ¸
                         u0 (ct+1 ) dt+1
             δt   = βEt                  (δt+1 + (1 − τt+1 )) ,
                          u0 (ct ) dt
                        "µ            ¶−α µ       ¶1−α                     #
                            1 − τt+1         dt+1
                  = βEt                                (δt+1 + (1 − τt+1 )) .      (9)
                             1 − τt            dt

   This valuation equation is time-homogenous and depends only on the current tax

regime and is denoted by δt = δH if τt = τH and δt = δL otherwise. The price-dividend
ratios of the asset can be solved in closed form, as shown in Appendix A.

   This section determines the conditions under which equity valuations are higher
in the low-tax regimes.

Proposition 1 The price-dividend ratio is higher (lower) in the low-tax regime if the

tax regimes are relatively persistent (transient):


                                 δL R δH     if    φ R φ̃.


Proof: All proofs can be found in the Appendix.


   Proposition 1 indicates that asset valuations are relatively higher in the low-tax

regime whenever tax regimes are sufficiently persistent. However, this condition is

not very restrictive. As shown in the Appendix, the condition φ > φ̃ is always is

satisfied if φ > 0.5 and tax rates are more likely to remain unchanged than to change.

                                             7
Furthermore, this condition also is satisfied if investors are sufficiently risk-averse

(α > 0.5) for any persistence levels φ.

   To illustrate the impact of taxes on asset valuations, I compute numerically price-
dividend ratios in the two tax regimes for four different levels of risk-aversion α and

at different transition probabilities φ. The numerical example uses the following
parameter values: The time preference factor is β = 0.95; the tax rates in the two

regimes are τL = 0.3 and τH = 0.4, respectively; the mean dividend growth rate is
µ = 0.02; and the standard deviation of the dividend growth rate is σ = 0.1. The

results do not depend significantly on these assumed parameter values.
   Figure 1 depicts the price-dividend ratios at different persistence levels. The first

plot depicts the price-dividend ratio if investors are risk-neutral (α = 0). In this
case, asset valuations are higher in the high-tax regime if φ < 0.5. This surprising
result occurs because of the strong mean reversion in tax rates with φ < 0.5, since

tax rates are in this case more likely to be low next period if they are currently high.
If φ = 0.5, then the price-dividend ratio is identical in the two tax regimes, because
taxes are equally likely to be high or low next period regardless of the current tax

level. Overall, valuation levels in the low-tax regime increase with the persistence

level φ, because higher persistence levels indicate that it is more likely that tax rates

also will be low in the next period. This first effect is called the “cash-flow effect,”
because taxes reduce the cash flows investors obtain from their investments.

   If investors are risk-averse, then asset prices will in addition reflect the desire of

investors to smooth their consumption over time. If taxes are temporarily low, then
their current consumption is relatively high and they would like to save some of the

dividends. In equilibrium, to induce investors to consume the complete after-tax

dividend, the expected returns in low-tax regimes need to be lowered to decrease the

attractiveness of saving. Thus, asset valuations in the low-tax regime will increase rel-
ative to asset valuations in the high-tax regime as risk-aversion increases. The desire


                                           8
to smooth consumption becomes less pronounced if tax regimes are more persistent.

This second effect is called the “consumption-smoothing effect” and goes in the oppo-

site direction from the “cash-flow effect.” For example, if risk-aversion is α = 1, then
the two effects exactly offset each other and the asset valuations in the two regimes

do not depend on the persistence level, as shown in the second plot of Figure 1.
If investors are more risk-averse than log-utility investors, then the “consumption-

smoothing effect” dominates and the price-earnings ratio in the low-tax regime will
decrease with the persistence level.

   The price-dividend ratio is higher in the low-tax regime as long as the persistence
level is larger than 50 percent or as long as the risk-aversion is sufficiently large.

   The next proposition derives asset valuations in the special case, where taxes are
permanent (φ = 1) and do not change over time.


Proposition 2 If tax regimes are permanent (φ = 1), then the price-dividend equals:


                                                      βγ
                                    δt = (1 − τ )          ,
                                                    1 − βγ

   In this case, the price-dividend ratio is proportional to 1 − τ and remains constant
over time.

   The following proposition investigates whether taxes are fully or just partially
capitalized into asset prices:

Proposition 3 If tax regimes are not permanent (φ < 1), then taxes have a more

(less) than proportional impact on asset valuations if risk-aversion is relatively high

(low):


                                 δL   1 − τL
                                    Q               if   α Q 1.
                                 δH   1 − τH

   With log-utility (α = 1), the ratio between the two prices is just δL /δH = (1 −

                                               9
τL )/(1 − τH ). In this case, taxes are fully capitalized into asset valuations. The ratio

between the two asset valuation levels equals in this case the ratio in an environment

with permanent tax rates, as discussed in Proposition 2. This result is surprising
since the only relevant tax rate with log-utility is the tax rate in the current tax

regime. The tax rate in the other tax regime is irrelevant even if there is a positive
probability that this tax rate will eventually affect asset valuations. Proposition 3 also

demonstrates that taxes have a more than proportional impact on asset valuations if
investors are more risk-averse than log-utility investors.


2.3    Equity Returns

Finally, I study the relationship between expected returns and tax rates. The before-
tax expected return of the asset is given by:

                               ·         ¸      ·               ¸
                             pt+1 + dt+1          dt+1 δt+1 + 1
                    λt   = E               = Et                   .                  (10)
                                  pt               dt     δt

Proposition 4 The expected return is higher (lower) in the high-tax regime if the

price-dividend ratio in the high-tax regime is lower (higher) than the price-dividend
ratio in the low-tax regime:


                               λH R λL     if    δH Q δL .


   Propositions 1 and 4 indicate that asset returns are higher and asset valuations
are lower in the high-tax regime as long as tax regimes are sufficiently persistent.

   Figure 2 summarizes the corresponding expected returns in the two tax regimes

using the parameter values given in Section 2.2. The expected returns in the high-tax
regime are always higher than the expected returns in the low-tax regime except when

δH ≥ δL , which occurs at relatively low persistence levels φ ≤ φ̃.



                                           10
    The stylized theoretical model in this section demonstrates that under plausible

conditions asset valuations tend to be higher and expected returns tend to be lower

during low tax regimes. In Section 4, I will test these two predictions empirically
using data on U.S. stock prices. The next section derives the time-series of effective

tax rates between 1917-2004.



3     Effective Tax Rates

One of the biggest challenges of analyzing the effects of taxes on asset prices is the

identity of the marginal taxpayer. Taxes are irrelevant in asset pricing if the marginal

taxpayer is tax-exempt. On the other hand, taxes will have an impact on asset prices if
the marginal stockholder is an individual in a high tax bracket. This section describes
the derivation of the effective tax rates of equity securities over the period between
1917 and 2004. This study follows Poterba (1987b), Poterba (1998), and McGrattan
and Prescott (2005) and constructs dollar-weighted average tax rates for the aggregate

stock market.


3.1    Definition of Effective Tax Rate

The effective tax rate of equity securities depends not only on the statutory tax rates,

but also on the distribution properties of equity securities. The tax burden on equity

is reduced if the aggregate dividend yield is smaller, if capital gains are deferred and
capital losses are accelerated, and if a larger proportion of the assets are held in tax-

qualified environments (for example, pensions and tax-deferred retirement accounts).

The effective tax rate on equity securities at time t τtef f is given by:


                         τtef f = wtdiv τtdiv + wtscg τtscg + wtlcg τtlcg .         (11)


    The effective tax rate depends first on the marginal tax rates on dividends τ div

                                                11
and short- and long-term capital gains τ scg and τ lcg . Whereas realized short-term

capital gains are taxed at the ordinary income tax rate, realized long-term capital

gains are taxed at the capital gains tax rate, which has generally been lower. I use
the average marginal tax rates on dividends and capital gains as the relevant tax rates

to compute the effective tax rates.
       Second, the composition of the sources of income from equity investments has

an important impact on the tax burden of an asset portfolio. The proportion of
the returns paid as dividends is denoted by wdiv , while the proportions of realized

short- and long-term capital gains are denoted by wscg and wlcg .7 The deferral of the

realization of capital gains is beneficial because the present value of the tax liabilities
decreases if the tax payments are postponed. In addition, the taxation of capital
gains can be avoided completely due to the “step-up of the cost basis” at the time of
death, which eliminates the taxation of all unrealized capital gains. Optimal deferral

and avoidance strategies can reduce the effective tax rates significantly.8

       Third, the ability to invest through pension accounts and other tax-qualified sav-
ings vehicles reduces the effective tax rate of stocks. The tax rates on dividends and

capital gains decrease if a larger fraction of the assets are held by tax-exempt investors

or in tax-qualified locations. A more detailed description of the construction of the
effective tax rates is given in the Appendix.


3.2       Statutory Tax Rates

Marginal statutory tax rates on ordinary income at the federal level have fluctuated

considerably, as depicted in Figure 3. The figure shows the statutory federal marginal

income tax rates for households in five different tax brackets. The four lower tax
   7
     Note that the proportions of dividends and realized capital gains do not necessarily add to 100
percent, because capital gains can be deferred indefinitely.
   8
     Constantinides (1983), Stiglitz (1983), Constantinides (1984), and Dammon and Spatt (1996)
describe several investment strategies to minimize the taxes of financial returns. Poterba (1987a),
Auerbach, Burman, and Siegel (2000), and Ivkovich, Poterba, and Weisbenner (2005) show that a
large part of the investing public does not engage in tax-minimizing portfolio transactions.


                                                12
brackets correspond to real income levels of 50, 100, 250, and 500 thousand U.S.

dollars expressed in 2004 consumer prices. The fifth curve corresponds to the top

marginal income tax rate.9 The figure shows the impact of numerous tax reforms
since federal taxes were introduced in 1913. The highest marginal income tax rate

amounted to 94 percent in 1944 and 1945. Since then marginal income tax rates have
declined significantly.


3.3       Average Marginal Tax Rate

From Figure 3 it is difficult to determine the actual taxes investors paid, since the

tax bracket of the average investor might change over time. The Internal Revenue

Service publishes since 1917 the distribution of income sources of different taxpayers
in the Statistics of Income. For example, the IRS summarizes annually the total
dividends declared by individuals in different income brackets. The marginal tax
rate can be determined for each of these income brackets. This information allows

the computation of the dollar-weighted marginal tax rate faced by taxable investors
on dividend income, as suggested by Poterba (1987b). This tax rate is called the
“average marginal tax rate.” Such tax rates also will be computed for short- and
long-term capital gains. Prior to 1965, I hand-collected tax distribution data from

different issues of the Statistics of Income of the IRS to estimate average marginal

tax rates. Since 1960, the NBER computes the average marginal tax rates.10

       State and local governments impose additional taxes on income from financial

assets. The NBER tax series includes state and local taxes. Prior to 1965, I assume

that the marginal tax rate from states and localities is a fixed proportion of the federal
tax rate according to the current revenues of states and local governments relative
   9
      The figure lists the tax rates of households with relatively high income levels since a large portion
of financial assets is held by individuals in relatively high income tax brackets. Poterba (2000) shows
that the top one percent of equity holders account for 53.2 percent of household holdings of corporate
stock according to the 1998 Survey of Consumer Finances.
   10
      The data can be obtained from http://www.nber.org/∼taxsim/dtdy/. Additional information
on their model can be found in Feenberg and Coutts (1993).

                                                    13
to the federal government. The Appendix explains the construction of the different

time series in more detail.

   Figure 4 depicts the average marginal tax rates of dividend income and long-term
capital gains between 1917 and 2004. Average dividend tax rates increased from

approximately 10 percent in 1925 to more than 50 percent in 1943. The dividend
tax rates remained relatively high until Reagan’s tax cuts in the 1980s. The Jobs

and Growth Tax Reconciliation Act of 2003 capped the maximum federal tax on
dividends and long-term capital gains at 15 percent and reduced the average marginal

tax rate on dividends substantially. In 2004, the estimated average marginal tax rate

on dividends equals 18.7 percent. This exceeds the maximum federal tax rate on
qualified dividends primarily because of the additional state and local government
taxes on dividends.

   The average marginal tax rate on realized long-term capital gains is generally

less than the average marginal dividend tax. The Tax Reform Act of 1986 briefly
eliminated the distinction between capital gains and ordinary income. In 1997, the
maximum capital gains tax rate was lowered from 28 to 20 percent, which resulted

in a relatively significant drop in the average capital gains tax rate. The Jobs and

Growth Tax Reconciliation Act of 2003 further reduced the federal marginal tax rate
on realized long-term capital gains to 15 percent.


3.4    Sources of Investment Income

The sources of investment income for equity securities varied considerably over our

sample period, as shown in Figure 5. The figure depicts the dividend and the capital

gains yields of U.S. stocks. The dividend yield is defined as the ratio between the

total amount of dividends paid by companies in the Standard & Poor’s Composite
Index in a given year divided by the market capitalization of these companies at

the beginning of the corresponding years. The capital gains yield is defined as the


                                         14
total amount of realized short- and long-term capital gains on publicly traded equity

securities in each year divided by the initial market capitalization. The data sources

are described in more detail in Appendix B.
   Dividend income was an important income source for stockholders during most

of the period, and dividends became relatively less important during the last two
decades. In the 1980s and 1990s, dividend yields decreased substantially as compa-

nies retained a larger proportion of their earnings and as they recognized that share
repurchases have tax advantages for taxable shareholders compared to dividend pay-

ments. This recent drop in the dividend yield decreased the total tax burden of stock

investors, since dividends are taxed at higher rates than capital gains.
   As dividend yields decreased, capital gains have become a more important source
of income of investors. It is interesting to observe that the annual variation in capital
gains realization depends on anticipated tax changes. For example, tax realizations

were very substantial in 1986, the year prior to significant increases in the long-term
capital gains tax rate enacted as part of the Tax Reform Act of 1986. Shareholders
were aware of the tax reforms and accelerated the realization of capital gains under

the old tax regime.

   The IRS also distinguishes between short- and long-term capital gains realizations.
During most years since 1950, realized short-term capital losses exceeded the realized

short-term gains as investors avoided realizing short-term capital gains, which are

taxed heavily relative to long-term capital gains. Furthermore, the absolute short-

term capital gains tend to be considerably smaller in absolute terms than the absolute
long-term capital gains over the sample period.

   To eliminate the impact of large changes in capital gains realization, it is assumed

that investors have a fixed propensity to realize capital gains and capital losses over

the sample period out of the total capital gains. On the other hand, I use the actual
dividend yield at the beginning of each year as an estimate of the proportion of divi-


                                           15
dends paid during a particular time period. Appendix B.3 describes the computation

of the distribution weights in more detail.


3.5       Tax-Qualified Savings Accounts

One of the most influential tax reforms has been the introduction of various types of
tax-qualified pension and retirement accounts, resulting in a substantial decline in the

proportion of stocks held by taxable investors. The proportion of corporate equity

held by taxable investors decreased from more than 90 percent in the 1950s to 55

percent in 2004.11 This dramatic decline is primarily due to the increased importance

of pension funds, tax-deferred retirement accounts, and nonprofit organizations. The
proportion of equity held in taxable accounts is estimated using the Flow of Funds
published by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Bank.12


3.6       Effective Tax Rates

The empirical section of this paper relates the effective tax rate to the valuation levels

of equity securities. The effective tax rate in equation (11) depends on the dividend
yield of equity securities, which is inversely related to the valuation level of equity
securities. To avoid any spurious correlation between the valuation measures and the
effective tax rates, I also compute an effective tax rate using constant distribution

weights.

                            τtconst = wdiv τtdiv + wscg τtscg + wlcg τtlcg .                     (12)

       This alternative definition of effective tax rates eliminates the impact of the large
variation of dividend and capital gains yields by using the averages of the distribution
                              P                             P
weights of dividends (wdiv = t wtdiv /T ), short- (wscg = t wtscg /T ) and long-term
  11
     Earlier data on the flows of funds are not available. I assume that the proportion of stocks held
by taxable investors between 1917 and 1944 equals the proportion in 1945.
  12
     Chaplinsky and Seyhun (1990) examine the aggregate dividend tax savings provided to individ-
uals through tax-exempt and tax-deferred savings opportunities.


                                                  16
          P
(wlcg =    t   wtlcg /T ) capital gains over the whole sample period. Thus, this alternative

definition ignores an important determinant of the effective tax rates of equity secu-

rities and biases our results against finding an impact of taxes on asset valuations.
Thus, this second measure of the effective tax rate only reflects the changes in the

average capital gains and dividend tax rates. Most empirical results in Section 4 use
this alternative definition of the effective tax rate.
    Figure 6 summarizes the effective tax rate of equity securities over the sample
between 1917-2004. The more volatile curve corresponds to the definition given in

equation (11), whereas the more stable curve corresponds to the definition given
in equation (12). About one-quarter of the variation of the effective tax rate with

variable distribution weights is caused by changes in the dividend yield over time.
The effective tax rate using variable distribution weights decreased significantly since
the mid-1950s. The effective tax rate of stocks amounted to more than 40 percent in

1950 and decreased to 5.2 percent in 2004. The next section investigates empirically
whether there is a relationship between the effective tax rates and the asset valuation
levels.



4     Taxes and Asset Valuations

The theoretical model presented in Section 2 indicates that higher tax rates are asso-

ciated with lower asset valuations and higher asset returns. This section studies the
relationship between tax rates and asset valuations using the time-series variation in

effective tax rates.

    It should be kept in mind that the tax rate of the marginal investor will in general
be different from the effective tax rate computed previously. However, the measure-

ment error introduced by the fact that the tax rate of the marginal investor is not

observable will make it more difficult to reject the hypothesis that taxes have no



                                              17
impact on asset valuations.

   An additional caveat is that taxes are determined in an endogenous political pro-
cess and might therefore depend on the economic environment in general and the
stock market performance in particular. It is not possible to conclusively determine

the causality of the effects described in this paper. However, the multivariate regres-
sions include additional control variables that should capture the direct impact of

these variables on asset valuations.


4.1    Macroeconomic Data

This section uses an updated version of the data set in Shiller (1989) covering the
period between 1917 and 2004. The data are described in more detail in Appendix B.
   Table 1 lists summary statistics for the data used. Panel A summarizes the tax

variables. The first row summarizes the moments of the effective tax rate using
constant weights, as defined in equation (12). The second row reports the effective
tax rate based on the time-varying dividend yields, as defined in equation (11). The

next two rows summarize the average marginal tax rates on dividends and long-term

capital gains, as depicted in Figure 4. The last three rows summarize statutory federal
tax rates on dividends for households in three different income brackets, corresponding

to Adjusted Gross Incomes of $100,000, $250,000, and the maximum income levels
in 2004 U.S. dollars. The tax variables differ in their general levels, but they are

generally highly correlated with the exception of the average marginal tax rate on
long-term capital gains.

   Panel B of Table 1 summarizes macroeconomic variables. The first three variables

are proxies of aggregate equity valuations. The price-earnings and the price-dividend

ratios are defined as the S&P index level in January of the following year divided
by the earnings and the dividends in the current year. Tobin’s q is defined follow-

ing Blanchard, Rhee, and Summers (1993) as the ratio between the market value of


                                          18
equity and debt divided by the replacement cost of capital in the nonfinancial cor-

porate sector. The price-earnings ratio has a mean of 15.46 over the whole period

and varies between 5.63 (1917) and 46.18 (2001). The price-earnings ratio is highly
correlated with the two alternative valuations measures: The correlation with the

price-dividend ratio is 78.9 percent, and the correlation with Tobin’s q is 71.7 per-
cent. The Appendix describes the derivation of these macroeconomic variables in

more detail. All three valuation measures have a significantly negative correlation
with the effective tax rate, consistent with a plausible calibration in the theoretical

model from Section 2.
       The table summarizes additional macroeconomic variables, such as the nominal

return of the S&P 500 Index, the inflation rate, the real per capita growth rate, the
interest rate, and indicator variables for whether the president is affiliated with the
Democratic party and for whether the current year is an NBER recession or war

year. There is a strong association between taxes and years of war, since taxes were
often increased during war periods to pay for the additional government spending.
Furthermore, tax rates also tend to be higher under Democratic administrations.

However, I do not find a significant relationship between the tax rate and the output

growth rate and the recession indicator variable, indicating that the short-term growth

rate of the economy does not appear to be very sensitive to the effective tax rate.

       Since the price-earnings ratio is highly persistent, it is important to test whether it

follows a unit root. A Dickey-Fuller test for a unit root in the price-earnings ratio (and

in the logarithm of the price-earnings ratio) can be rejected at the one percent level.13
In the subsequent estimations, I will take into account the high autocorrelation of the

dependent variable by computing Newey-West standard errors.

       Figure 7 depicts the time-series of the price-earnings, the price-dividend, and
  13
    The Dickey-Fuller test statistic equals 3.882, which is larger than the 1 percent critical level.
Moreover, a regression of the difference in the price-earnings ratio on the lagged value of the price-
earnings ratio has a coefficient of -0.291 with a standard error of 0.075. Thus, the process of the
price-earnings ratio is significantly different from a unit root.


                                                 19
Tobin’s q ratio over the period between 1917 and 2004. The valuation levels vary

considerably through time. We observe that asset valuations were relatively low in

the early 1950s and in the late 1970s, time periods where taxes were relatively high.
On the other hand, asset valuations were relatively high in the 1960s and the 1990s,

when effective taxes were relatively low.
   To investigate in more detail the relationship between asset valuations and taxes, I

summarize in Table 2 the average effective tax rate and the three valuations measures
for 15 distinct tax regimes. To determine the relationship between taxes and asset

valuations, I compute the Spearman rank correlation, which is simply the Pearson

correlation coefficient based on the ranks of the average tax rates and the valuation
levels in the different tax regimes. One advantage of the Spearman rank correla-
tion relative to the Pearson correlation coefficient summarized in Table 1 is that the
Spearman correlation is not influenced as much by outliers. The results indicate that

there is generally a negative correlation between asset valuations and tax regimes.
The remainder of this paper will investigate this relationship in more detail using
multivariate regressions.


4.2    Regression Specification

The correlations in Tables 1 and 2 show a negative relationship between taxes and

asset valuations. It is possible that omitted variables affect the tax rates and the

asset valuations, thereby causing a bias in the coefficient estimates. This section
shows that effective tax rates remain an important determinant of asset valuations

even if additional macroeconomic variables are included.

   There are many other factors that affect asset valuations besides taxes. The level

of interest rates has an important impact on asset valuations, since stocks and fixed-
income securities are alternative investment options. As interest rates increase, stock

valuations should decline to generate higher expected returns as long as risk premia


                                            20
remain unaffected.

    A second factor besides the short-term interest rate in determining the discount
rate of equity securities is the equity risk premium. The risk premium depends on the
risk-aversion of investors and on the anticipated amount of risk during the next time

period. Four macroeconomic variables, the inflation rate, the per-capital growth rate
in output, an indicator variable for a recession, and an indicator variable for a time

period of war, attempt to capture this effect on asset valuations. Uncertainty tends
to be larger during periods of high inflation and low growth rates, particularly during

wars and recessions. Thus, it should be expected that asset valuations are lower with

high inflation, low growth rates, in recessions, and in times of war. However, such cri-
sis times also might be time periods where earnings or dividends are temporarily low.
Thus, if this effect dominates the risk-premium effect, then there should be a positive
relationship between asset valuation levels and these macroeconomic variables.14

    The party of the president is included as an additional explanatory variable, since
tax levels tend to be higher during Democratic administrations, as shown in Table 1.
An impact of the party of the president on asset pricing has been previously investi-

gated by Santa-Clara and Valkanov (2002), who show that asset returns tend to be

higher under Democratic presidents.
    Finally, I also include a linear time trend to capture omitted variables that change

linearly with time. For example, the risk tolerance might have increased over time

justifying higher stock valuations in the last part of our sample. The time trend

also can capture some tax effects. McDonald (2004) shows that financial innovations
introduced during the last several decades allow investors effectively to avoid the

taxation of dividends and capital gains. Thus, increasing valuation ratios also could

result from such financial innovations.
   14
      In the empirical estimation section, I will include several robustness tests to investigate these
issues more fully. For example, following Campbell and Shiller (1998), I will compute the moving
average of earnings over the previous five and ten years to mitigate the impact of temporary cyclical
variations in earnings.


                                                  21
       The relationship between asset valuations and effective taxes is estimated using

the following regression equation:


                     pt /et = α0 + α1 τtconst + α2 rft + α3 πt + α4 gt

                                   +α5 demt + α6 rect + α7 wart + α8 t + ²t .                       (13)


       The dependent variable in the base case is defined as the ratio between the index

value of the Standard and Poor’s Composite Index pt at the end of the year divided
by the earnings of companies in the underlying index et during the corresponding

year. The independent variables in the base case are measured in the current year:
The effective tax rate with constant distribution weights is denoted by τtconst ; the

short-term interest rate by rft ; the inflation rate by πt ; the real per capita growth
rate by gt ; an indicator variable for a Democratic president by demt ; an indicator
variable for an NBER recession by rect ; an indicator variable for a year of war by

wart ; and a linear time trend by t.15 If taxes are capitalized into asset prices, then
the tax coefficient α1 should be negative.


4.3       Regression Estimates

Table 3 summarizes the results of the main specification in this section. The first col-

umn reports the regression results for a univariate regression, and the second column

includes additional macroeconomic control variables and a linear time trend.
       The standard errors are given in parentheses and follow Newey and West (1987),
where the autocorrelation structure is estimated using a four-year lag. A four-year

lag is chosen because the autocorrelations of the price-earnings ratio up to a lag of
  15
     The empirical specification does not include the corporate tax rate as an additional explanatory
variable. Corporate taxes should not affect asset valuations in steady-state since the earnings are
measured after the deduction of the corporation tax. The correlation between the corporate and the
personal tax rates is relatively high (0.63), resulting in insignificant coefficients on the tax variables
if both variables are included.



                                                   22
four years are statistically significant. The significance levels are abbreviated with

asterisks: One, two, and three asterisks denote statistical significance at the 10, 5,

and 1 percent level, respectively.16
       The results on the tax coefficient are both economically and statistically signifi-

cant. For example, the second column shows in the multi-variate analysis that a one
percentage point increase in the effective tax rate reduces the price-earnings ratio by

0.35, or by about 2.3 percent of the mean price-earnings ratio.
       The interest rate and the inflation rate also have an important impact on asset

valuations. Asset valuation levels tend to be lower when nominal interest rates are
higher and when inflation rates are higher. The other macroeconomic variables are

less important. Finally, the regression detects a statistically significant positive time
trend.


4.4       Robustness Tests

This section tests for the robustness of the previously described results using different

measures of stock valuations, different tax rates, and alternative specifications.

       The endogeneity of taxes might be one issue of the base-case regression estimation.
Whereas the numerator p is measured at the beginning of the following year, the
denominator e is measured simultaneously with the explanatory variables. To avoid

any issues of reverse causality, Table 4 reports in the second column the regression

results, where the dependent variable is measured in the subsequent year. However,
neither the economic nor the statistical significance of the tax coefficient is affected

using this alternative specification.
  16
    The Newey-West standard errors are significantly higher than the OLS standard errors. For
example, the OLS standard error of the tax variable in the second column of Table 3 would have been
only 10.30. However, increasing the number of lags beyond four does not increase the standard errors.
For example, the standard errors with eight lags are 11.86, compared to 12.84 in the specification
with four lags. Thus, the choice of the lag length corresponds to the most conservative Newey-West
standard errors.




                                                 23
   The derivation of the effective tax rates requires many specific assumptions. Ta-

ble 5 analyzes whether the impact of taxes is robust if we use alternative tax rates.

The first column repeats the regression results from Table 3. The second column
defines the effective tax rate as in equation (11) and allows the distribution weights

to vary over time. The coefficient on the tax variable becomes slightly more negative
and more statistically significant under this specification. This confirms the expec-

tation that the results in the base case using effective tax rates based on constant
distribution weights are more conservative.

   The third column uses the average marginal tax rate on dividends. This tax
rate ignores the composition of the returns between dividends and capital gains and

regresses the valuation ratios on the average dividend tax rate, as summarized in
Figure 4. The coefficient estimate decreases because the tax rate of dividends is more
variable than the effective tax rate. However, the statistical significance increases in

this specification slightly relative to the base case summarized in the first column.

   The last three columns use the marginal statutory federal tax rates on dividends
for investors with real income levels of $100,000, $250,000, and the top tax rate.

Under all three cases, there is a negative relationship, which is at least statistically

significant at the five percent confidence level. The level of the coefficient estimates
differs between the various specifications, which should be expected since the different

tax variables have very different standard deviations, as summarized in Table 1.

   These results indicate that the results are robust to alternative definitions of the

relevant tax rate. These robustness tests are important because the tax rate of the
marginal investor cannot be observed. Therefore, it is crucial that the results are not

driven by an arbitrary choice of the effective tax rate.

   Table 6 analyzes the relationship between the effective tax rate on equity and

different valuation measures. The first column repeats the estimates in the base
case using the price-earnings ratio as the dependent variable. The second and third


                                          24
columns use the ratio of the current S&P 500 Index value divided by the moving

average of the real earnings during the previous five and ten years, respectively. By

averaging earnings over several years it is possible to partially isolate variations in the
stock valuations from short-term variations in earnings due to the business cycle, as

discussed by Campbell and Shiller (1998). The fourth column uses the price-dividend
ratio as the dependent variable, and the fifth column uses Tobin’s q measure. Our

results remain robust using these various valuation measures. In fact, the relationship
between asset valuations and taxes is substantially more statistically significant using

Tobin’s q measure than in the base case. This result might be caused by the fact that

earnings and dividends are more noisy normalization measures.
       Table 7 tests whether the results change using different transformations of the
valuation and the tax variables. The first column repeats the results for the base-case
specification, and the last column reports the results for a logarithmic specification. A

logarithmic specification might be more easily interpretable. For example, a coefficient
of one implies a complete tax capitalization. Such a relationship would be consistent
with a general equilibrium model without tax changes as shown in Proposition 2.17

       The results of this logarithmic specification in the fourth column are consistent

with the base-case specification. Whereas the coefficient estimate in the fourth column
is significantly different from zero, it is not significantly different from one. This

indicates that it is not possible to reject a complete tax capitalization using the
effective tax rates as the relevant measure of the aggregate tax burden.
  17
    Proposition 2 indicates in a model with stationary taxes that the price-dividend ratio is δ =
(1 − τ )βγ/(1 − βγ). Suppose that the dividend-payout ratio is constant over time d/e = θ. Then
the price-earnings ratio is p/e = (1 − τ )βγθ/(1 − βγ). Taking logarithms of this relationship gives:
ln(p/e) = ln(1 − τ ) + ln(βγ/(1 − βγ)), which has the same relationship between valuation levels and
taxes as equation (13). A similar relationship occurs in the more general model with tax changes if
α = 1. However, the coefficient will differ from one if α 6= 1 and if φ < 1, as shown in Proposition 3.




                                                  25
4.5       Equity Returns

This section includes one additional test that investigates the relationship between
taxes and asset returns. Proposition 4 indicates that under plausible conditions ex-
pected asset returns should be higher in periods of high tax rates. To test whether

equity returns are higher during periods of high taxes, I run the following regression:


                       rt = α0 + α1 τt + α2 rft + α3 πt + α4 gt +

                              α5 demt + α6 rect + α7 wart + α8 t + ²t .                   (14)


       The nominal return of the S&P Composite index in year t is denoted by rt , and
the additional control variables are defined as in the previous section. This empirical

test uses the effective tax rate with time-varying distribution weights as defined in

equation (11), because there is no issue of a spurious correlation if the dependent
variable is the asset return. The first column of Table 8 summarizes the coefficient
estimates using the contemporaneous return as the dependent variable. The results
indicate a statistically significant relationship between taxes and asset returns. Av-

erage stock returns tend to be higher in periods of higher tax rates, consistent with
the hypothesis that investors are compensated for higher taxes with higher average
returns. Thus, before-tax asset returns are higher and asset valuations are lower in

periods of relatively higher tax burdens. The higher asset returns during high-tax

regimes are simply a consequence of the lower asset valuations.

       The second column uses the return in the following year as the dependent variable

to avoid any issues of endogeneity. This second specification is related to the literature
in finance on the predictability of asset returns.18

       The coefficients on the tax rates are economically very large. For example, a
one percentage point increase in the effective tax rate increases asset returns by
  18
    See, for example, Campbell and Shiller (1988), Fama and French (1988), Stambaugh (1999) for
a discussion of this literature.


                                              26
between 0.50 and 0.61 percentage points per year. However, the standard errors

of this specification are also large, resulting in test statistics with relatively poor

power. To increase the power of the tests, one could either increase the number of
observations or extend the data set by including some cross-sectional variation. The

first strategy of increasing the number of observations is not feasible since tax data
are only available over the last century. However, Sialm (2005b) divides up the stocks

traded on the major U.S. stock exchanges between 1926 and 2004 into portfolios
according to their lagged dividend yield, generating portfolios that should be affected

differentially by the time-variations in tax rates, and shows that taxes have a more

significant impact for high-dividend stocks that tend to be taxed more heavily. These
panel results confirm the hypothesis that taxes have an impact on abnormal asset
returns.



5     Conclusions

This paper investigates the effective taxation of equity securities and studies whether

personal taxes are capitalized in asset prices. The effective personal taxation of
equity securities fluctuated considerably since federal taxes were introduced in 1913.
The effective tax rate of stocks decreased over the last 50 years, because statutory tax

rates decreased, because the dividend yield decreased, and because a larger fraction of

stocks is held today in tax-exempt accounts. The U.S. tax system on equity securities

moved gradually from an income-tax system toward a consumption-tax system.

    The paper proposes a new empirical test based on the time-series variation in tax

burdens to study whether equity taxes are priced. The empirical estimations indicate
that aggregate stock valuations tend to be relatively high and asset returns relatively

low when taxes are low. This relationship remains robust after controlling for addi-

tional macroeconomic variables. These results confirm the results of McGrattan and



                                          27
Prescott (2005), who find in a calibrated growth model that asset valuations increased

significantly between 1960-2000 due to various tax and regulatory reforms.

   Taxes appear to be one of the factors that drive valuation levels of the aggregate
stock market. It must be kept in mind that taxes do not explain all the variation

in asset valuations and that changes in risk, changes in risk-aversion, and changes in
investor sentiment probably also account for a significant portion of the variability in

asset valuations over the last century.




                                          28
References
 Allen, F. and R. Michaely (2003). Payout policy. In G. M. Constantinides, M. Har-
    ris, and R. M. Stulz (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Finance Volume 1A
    Corporate Finance, pp. 337–429. Amsterdam: Elsevier North-Holland.
 Auerbach, A. J. (1979). Share valuation and corporate equity policy. Journal of
   Public Economics 11 (3), 291–305.
 Auerbach, A. J. (2002). Taxation and corporate financial policy. In A. J. Auerbach
   and M. S. Feldstein (Eds.), Handbook of Public Economics Vol. 3, pp. 1251–
   1292. Amsterdam: North Holland.
 Auerbach, A. J., L. E. Burman, and J. M. Siegel (2000). Capital gains taxation
   and tax avoidance: New evidence from panel data. In J. Slemrod (Ed.), Does
   Atlas Shrug? The Economic Consequences of Taxing the Rich. Cambridge, MA:
   Harvard University Press.
 Auerbach, A. J. and K. A. Hassett (2005). The 2003 dividend tax cuts and the
   value of the firm: An event study. NBER Working Paper 11449.
 Barclay, M. J. (1987). Dividends, taxes, and common stock prices: The ex-dividend
    day behavior of common stock prices before the income tax. Journal of Financial
    Economics 19 (1), 31–44.
 Black, F. and M. Scholes (1974). The effects of dividend yield and dividend policy
    on common stock prices and returns. Journal of Financial Economics 1 (1),
    1–22.
 Blanchard, O., C. Rhee, and L. Summers (1993). The stock market, profit, and
    investment. Quarterly Journal of Economics 108 (1), 115–136.
 Blume, M. E. (1980). Stock return and dividend yield: Some more evidence. Review
    of Economics and Statistics 62 (1), 1–22.
 Bradford, D. F. (1981). The incidence and allocation effects of a tax on corporate
    distributions. Journal of Public Economics 15 (1), 1–22.
 Brennan, M. J. (1970). Taxes, market valuation, and financial policy. National Tax
    Journal 23, 417–429.
 Burman, L. E. (1999). The Labyrinth of Capital Gains Tax Policy. A Guide for the
    Perplexed. Washington: Brookings.
 Campbell, J. Y. and R. J. Shiller (1988). Stock prices, earnings, and expected
   dividends. Journal of Finance 43 (6), 661–676.
 Campbell, J. Y. and R. J. Shiller (1998). Valuation ratios and the long-run stock
   market outlook. Journal of Portfolio Management 24 (2), 11–26.
 Chaplinsky, S. and H. N. Seyhun (1990). Dividends and taxes: Evidence from
   tax-reduction strategies. Journal of Business 63 (2), 239–260.
 Chetty, R., J. Rosenberg, and E. Saez (2005). The effects of taxes on market
   responses to dividend announcements and payments: What can we learn from
   the 2003 tax cut. NBER Working Paper 11452.

                                       29
Constantinides, G. (1983). Capital market equilibrium with personal tax. Econo-
  metrica 51 (3), 611–636.
Constantinides, G. (1984). Optimal stock trading with personal taxes. Journal of
  Financial Economics 13, 65–89.
Dammon, R. M. and C. S. Spatt (1996). The optimal trading and pricing of se-
  curities with asymmetric capital gains taxes and transaction costs. Review of
  Financial Studies 9 (3), 921–952.
Desai, M. A. and A. D. Goolsbee (2004). Investment, overhang, and tax policy.
   Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 35 (2), 285–338.
Dodd, D. B. (1993). Historical Statistics of the States of the United States. Two
  Centuries of the Census 1790-1990. Westport: Greenwood.
Eades, K. M., P. J. Hess, and E. H. Kim (1984). On interpreting security returns
   during the ex-dividend period. Journal of Financial Economics 13, 3–34.
Elton, E. J. and M. J. Gruber (1970). Marginal stockholder tax rates and the
   clientele effect. Review of Economics and Statistics 52 (1), 68–74.
Elton, E. J., M. J. Gruber, and C. R. Blake (2005). Marginal stockholder tax
   effects and ex-dividend day behavior: Evidence from taxable versus non-taxable
   closed-end funds. Forthcoming: Review of Economics and Statistics.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (1988). Dividend yields and expected stock returns.
   Journal of Political Economy 96, 246–273.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (1998). Taxes, financing decisions, and firm value.
   Journal of Finance 53 (3), 819–843.
Feenberg, D. and E. Coutts (1993). An introduction to the TAXSIM model. Journal
   of Policy Analysis and Management 12 (1), 189–194.
Frank, M. and R. Jagannathan (1998). Why do stock prices drop by less than
   the value of the dividend? Evidence from a country without taxes. Journal of
   Financial Economics 47 (2), 161–188.
Gordon, R. H. and D. F. Bradford (1980). Taxation and the stock market value
   of capital gains and dividends: Theory and empirical results. Journal of Public
   Economics 14 (2), 109–136.
Graham, J. R., R. Michaely, and M. R. Roberts (2003). Do price discreteness and
   transactions costs affect stock returns? Comparing ex-dividend pricing before
   and after decimalization. Journal of Finance 58 (6), 2611–2636.
Green, R. C. and K. Rydqvist (1999). Ex-day behavior with dividend preference
   and limitations to short-term arbitrage: The case of Swedish lottery bonds.
   Journal of Financial Economics 53 (2), 145–187.
Harris, T. S., R. G. Hubbard, and D. Kemsley (2001). The share price effects of
   dividend taxes and tax imputation credits. Journal of Public Economics 79 (3),
   569–596.


                                      30
Internal Revenue Service (Ed.) (1954). Statistics of Income. Washington D.C.: U.S.
    Treasury Department.
Ivkovich, Z., J. Poterba, and S. Weisbenner (2005). Tax-motivated trading by in-
   dividual investors. Forthcoming: American Economic Review .
Joint Committee on Taxation (1988-1998). General Explanation of Tax Legislation.
   Washington D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
King, M. A. (1977). Public Policy and the Corporation. London: Chapman and
   Hall.
Litzenberger, R. H. and K. Ramaswamy (1979). The effects of personal taxes and
   dividends on capital asset prices: Theory and empirical evidence. Journal of
   Financial Economics 7, 163–195.
Lucas, R. E. (1978). Asset prices in an exchange economy. Econometrica 46 (6),
   1429–1445.
McDonald, R. L. (2004). Portfolio choice and corporate financial policy when there
  are tax-intermediating dealers. Northwestern University.
McGrattan, E. R. and E. C. Prescott (2005). Taxes, regulations, and the value of
  U.S. and U.K. corporations. Review of Economic Studies 72 (3), 767–796.
Michaely, R. (1991). Ex-dividend day stock price behavior: The case of the 1986
   tax reform act. Journal of Finance 46 (3), 845–859.
Miller, M. H. and M. S. Scholes (1978). Dividends and taxes. Journal of Financial
   Economics 6 (4), 333–364.
Miller, M. H. and M. S. Scholes (1982). Dividends and taxes: Some empirical
   evidence. Journal of Political Economy 90 (6), 1118–1141.
Mitchell, B. (1983). International Historical Statistics: The Americas and Aus-
   tralasia. Michigan: Gale Research.
Naranjo, A., M. Nimalendran, and M. Ryngaert (1998). Stock returns, dividend
   yields, and taxes. Journal of Finance 53 (6), 2029–2057.
Newey, W. and K. West (1987). A simple, positive, semi-definite, heteroskedasticity
  and autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix. Econometrica 1987 (55), 703–
  708.
Pechman, J. A. (1987). Federal Tax Policy (5th ed.). Washington D.C.: Brookings.
Poterba, J. M. (1987a). How burdensome are capital gains taxes? Evidence from
   the United States. Journal of Public Economics 33 (2), 157–172.
Poterba, J. M. (1987b). Tax policy and corporate saving. Brookings Papers on
   Economic Activity 1987 (2), 455–503.
Poterba, J. M. (1998). The rate of return to corporate capital and factor shares:
   New estimates using revised national income accounts and capital stock data.
   Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 48, 211–246.


                                       31
Poterba, J. M. (2000). Stock market wealth and consumption. Journal of Economic
   Perspectives 14 (2), 99–118.
Poterba, J. M. (2002). Taxation, risk-taking, and household portfolio behavior. In
   A. J. Auerbach and M. S. Feldstein (Eds.), Handbook of Public Economics Vol.
   3, pp. 1109–1171. Amsterdam: North Holland.
Poterba, J. M. and L. H. Summers (1984). New evidence that taxes affect the
   valuation of dividends. Journal of Finance 39 (5), 1397–1415.
Poterba, J. M. and L. H. Summers (1985). The economic effects of dividend taxa-
   tion. In E. Altman and M. Subrahmanyam (Eds.), Recent Advances in Corporate
   Finance, pp. 227–284. Homewood, IL: Dow Jones-Irwin Publishing.
Santa-Clara, P. and R. Valkanov (2002). The presidential puzzle: Political cycle
   and the stock market. Journal of Finance 58 (5), 1841–1872.
Shiller, R. J. (1989). Market Volatility. Cambridge: MIT.
Sialm, C. (2005a). Stochastic taxation and asset pricing in dynamic general equi-
    librium. Forthcoming: Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control .
Sialm, C. (2005b). Tax changes and asset pricing: Cross-sectional evidence. Uni-
    versity of Michigan.
Stambaugh, R. F. (1999). Predictive regressions. Journal of Financial Eco-
   nomics 54, 375–421.
Stiglitz, J. E. (1983). Some aspects of the taxation of capital gains. Journal of
    Public Economics 21 (2), 257–294.




                                      32
A      Proofs
A.1     Proof of Proposition 1
The price-dividend ratio from equation (9) can be expressed as:

              δH = βγ [φ(δH + (1 − τH )) + (1 − φ)(δL + (1 − τL ))η] ,              (15)
              δL = βγ [φ(δL + (1 − τL )) + (1 − φ)(δH + (1 − τH ))/η] .             (16)

    where γ = Et [(dt+1 /dt )1−α ] = exp ((1 − α)µ + 0.5(1 − α)2 σ 2 ) and η = [(1 −
τL )/(1 − τH )]−α . This simplification is possible because of the independence between
the tax and the dividend process.
    Equations (15) and (16) can be solved in closed form for the two price-dividend
ratios. These equations can be written in matrix form, where δ = [δH δL ]0 :

                                        Aδ = b,                                     (17)

    where:                    ·                                ¸
                                    1 − βγφ    −βγ(1 − φ)η
                       A=                                          ,
                                  −βγ(1 − φ)/η  1 − βγφ

                         ·                                             ¸
                             βγ (φ(1 − τH ) + (1 − φ)(1 − τL )η)
                    b=                                                     .
                             βγ (φ(1 − τL ) + (1 − φ)(1 − τH )/η)

   The price-dividend ratio can be solved in closed form if A is nonsingular. The
determinant |A| is:

                      |A| = (1 − βγφ)2 − (βγ)2 (1 − φ)2
                          = (1 − βγ)[(1 − βγφ) + βγ(1 − φ)].

    The determinant |A| is strictly positive whenever 0 < βγ < 1. As long as risk-
aversion and the moments of the growth rate are finite, βγ = β exp[(1 − α)µ + 0.5(1 −
α)2 σ 2 ] > 0. Furthermore, the transversality condition (7) is violated if βγ ≥ 1. Thus,
for prices to be finite, we need to require that βγ < 1.
    The closed-form solutions for the price-dividend ratios are:

                                       δ = A−1 b.                                   (18)

    The price-dividend ratios in the two regimes are as follows:

               βγ [(φ(1 − βγ) + (1 − φ)(βγ))(1 − τH ) + (1 − φ)(1 − τL )η]
        δH =                                                               ,        (19)
                           (1 − βγ)[(1 − βγφ) + βγ(1 − φ)]
               βγ [(φ(1 − βγ) + (1 − φ)(βγ))(1 − τL ) + (1 − φ)(1 − τH )/η]
        δL   =                                                               .      (20)
                            (1 − βγ)[(1 − βγφ) + βγ(1 − φ)]

    The price-dividend ratios are strictly positive whenever 0 < βγ < 1.


                                            33
    Next, I compare the valuation levels in the two regimes. The denominators are
identical for the two valuation ratios. The first term in brackets for equation (19) is
smaller than the first term for equation (20) (φ(1 − βγ) + (1 − φ)(βγ))(1 − τH ) <
(φ(1 − βγ) + (1 − φ)(βγ))(1 − τL ), as long as τH > τL . The second term in brackets for
equation (19) is smaller than the second term for equation (20) if α > 0.5. Note that
(1 − τL )η = (1 − τL )[(1 − τL )/(1 − τH )]−α = (1 − τL )1−α (1 − τH )α and (1 − τH )/η =
(1 − τH )[(1 − τH )/(1 − τL )]−α = (1 − τH )1−α (1 − τL )α . The second term is identical in
the two equations if α = 0.5 and is smaller in equation (19) if α > 0.5. Thus, δH < δL
if α > 0.5.
    To show the general conditions for the asset valuations in the two tax regimes, we
only need to take into account the numerators of equations (19) and (20), since the
denominators are identical and positive. The inequality δH Q δL results if:

                  (φ(1 − βγ) + (1 − φ)(βγ))(1 − τH ) + (1 − φ)(1 − τL )η
            Q     (φ(1 − βγ) + (1 − φ)(βγ))(1 − τL ) + (1 − φ)(1 − τH )/η.

   It is possible to re-write this inequality using:

                                      φ(x + y) Q x,

   where:

                     x = βγ(τH − τL ) + (1 − τH )/η − (1 − τL )η,
                     y = βγ(τH − τL ) + (1 − τH ) − (1 − τL ).

    Note that y is always negative since y = βγ(τH − τL ) + (1 − τH ) − (1 − τL ) =
(βγ − 1)(τH − τL ). Also note that y ≤ x since η = ((1 − τL )/(1 − τH ))−α ≤ 1.
    We need to distinguish between two cases, depending on whether x + y is positive
or negative. Case 1 has x + y < 0. In this case, δH Q δL if φ R x/(x + y). If x < 0,
then x/(x + y) > 0 and since y ≤ x it must be that x/(x + y) ≤ 0.5. On the other
hand, if x > 0, then x/(x + y) < 0 and δH < δL for all probabilities φ ∈ [0, 1].
    Case 2 has x + y ≥ 0. In this case, δH Q δL if φ Q x/(x + y). Since x + y ≥ 0 and
y < 0, it must be that x > 0. Thus, x/(x + y) > 1 and δH < δL for all probabilities
φ ∈ [0, 1].
    Thus, these results indicate that δH < δL for all cases, except for the case where
x < 0 and φ < x/(x + y) ≤ 0.5. Thus, δH Q δL if φ R φ̃, where the critical persistence
level is defined as:            ½
                                   −∞         if x + y ≥ 0
                           φ̃ =
                                   x/(x + y) if x + y < 0

A.2     Proof of Proposition 2
If taxes are permanent (φ = 1), then the price-dividend ratio equals:
                              ∞
                              X       ·    0
                                                                 ¸
                                        i u (ct+i ) (1 − τ )dt+i
                      δt =          Et β 0                         ,
                              i=1
                                           u (ct )      dt

                                               34
                                      ∞
                                      X £        ¤             βγ
                         = (1 − τ )         (βγ)i = (1 − τ )        ,                 (21)
                                      i=1
                                                             1 − βγ

A.3     Proof of Proposition 3
Equations (19) and (20) describe the asset valuations in the two states. The ratio of
the asset valuation is given by:

       δL     (φ(1 − βγ) + (1 − φ)(βγ))(1 − τL ) + (1 − φ)(1 − τH )/η
            =
       δH      (φ(1 − βγ) + (1 − φ)(βγ))(1 − τH ) + (1 − φ)(1 − τL )η
                                                              ³      ´1−α 
              µ        ¶ (φ(1 − βγ) + (1 − φ)(βγ)) + (1 − φ) 1−τH
                1 − τL                                          1−τL      
            =                                                 ³      ´1−α  .
                1 − τH                                           1−τL
                          (φ(1 − βγ) + (1 − φ)(βγ)) + (1 − φ) 1−τ   H



    Note that if α Q 1, then [(1 − τL )/(1 − τH )]1−α R 1 and [(1 − τH )/(1 − τL )]1−α Q 1.
Thus, the numerator in brackets is smaller (larger) than the denominator whenever
α < 1 (α > 1). With log-utility (α = 1), the ratio between the two prices is just
δL /δH = (1 − τL )/(1 − τH ).

A.4     Proof of Proposition 4
The expected returns in the two tax regimes are as follows:
                                ·                          ¸
                                   δH + 1           δL + 1
                      λH = ξ φ            + (1 − φ)                                   (22)
                                     δH               δH
                                ·                          ¸
                                   δL + 1           δH + 1
                      λL = ξ φ            + (1 − φ)          .                        (23)
                                     δL               δL

   where ξ = Et [(dt+1 /dt )] = exp (µ + 0.5σ 2 ).
   Equations (22) and (23) describe expected returns in the two states. If δH Q δL
then (δH + 1)/δH R (δL + 1)/δL and (δL + 1)/δH R (δH + 1)/δL . Thus, if δH Q δL
then λH R λL .


B     Data
This section explains in more detail the computation of the effective tax rates.

B.1     Statutory Tax Rates
Taxable income is derived for five real income levels after deducting exemptions for a
married couple filing jointly with two dependent children from the fixed income levels.
The proportion of total deductions relative to the adjusted gross income is assumed
to equal the proportion of total deductions in the whole population for each year as
reported by the Internal Revenue Service.

                                             35
    The marginal income tax brackets and exemptions are determined using the Statis-
tics of Income of the Internal Revenue Service (1954) for the years 1913-1943, Pechman
(1987) for the years 1944-1987, and different issues of the Instructions to Form 1040
from the IRS for the remaining years between 1988-2004. The values of the Consumer
Price Index from 1913-1957 are taken from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.19 Total
deductions as a proportion of adjusted gross income (AGI) are derived from different
issues of the Statistics of Income of the IRS. Marginal income tax rates for individ-
uals in five different tax brackets corresponding to Adjusted Gross Income levels of
50, 100, 250, 500 thousand U.S. dollars (with 2004 consumer prices), as well as the
highest marginal income tax rate are derived.
    The long-term capital gains tax rate applies to realized gains with a holding period
of more than five years. The data source for the capital gains tax rates for 1913-1950
is the Synopsis of Federal Tax Laws from the Statistics of Income for 1950. The
remaining tax rates are taken from different issues of the General Explanations of
Tax Legislation by the Joint Committee on Taxation (1998) and Table 2-4 from
Burman (1999).

B.2     Average Marginal Tax Rates
The time series for the average marginal tax rates of dividends, capital gains, interest
income, and wage income are computed using different annual issues of the Statistics
of Income between 1917 and 1964 and the average marginal tax rates from the Na-
tional Bureau of Economic Research between 1965-2004. Post-2001 data is derived
from the 2000 Tax Model, since these years are not yet available from the SOI. How-
ever, the data includes the impact of EGGTRA and JGTRRA and reflects therefore
the tax changes through January 2005. The NBER publishes average marginal tax
rates for selected income sources since 1960 using their Taxsim software.20
    The NBER publishes average marginal tax rates that include state and local taxes.
For the early data, I use the National Income and Product Accounts published by the
Bureau of Economic Analysis to determine the state and local tax rates. The BEA
summarizes the current personal income tax receipts of state and local governments
(Table 3.3) and the federal government (Table 3.2).21 I assume that the state and
local government tax rate is a fixed proportion of the federal tax rate according to
the annual revenues.
    The proportion of equity held in taxable accounts is estimated using the Flow
of Funds published by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Bank.22 The
proportion is only computed for equities held by domestic investors, since it would be
impossible to determine the marginal tax rates faced by international stock investors.
The detailed derivation of the time series is available upon request. The flow of funds
publishes this distribution of equity holdings only between 1945 and 2001. The values
prior to 1945 and after 2001 are taken from the most recent available year.
 19
    Data can   be found at http://www.bls.gov/cpi/home.htm.
 20
    The time   series can be downloaded from http://www.nber.org/∼taxsim.
 21
    The data   can be downloaded from http://www.bea.gov.
 22
    The data   can be downloaded from http://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/Z1/.


                                               36
    The tax rates τdiv , τscg , and τlcg from equations (11) and (12) are computed by
multiplying the average marginal tax rates of taxable investors given in Figure 4 with
the proportion of equity held in taxable accounts. This assumes that assets held in
retirement accounts and by tax-exempt institutions face a zero effective tax rate.23

B.3      Distributions of Dividends and Capital Gains
The proportion of dividend distributions wtdiv is computed as the ratio of the dividend
yield ytdiv and the average real stock return E(r):

                                                        ytdiv
                                              wtdiv =         .                                 (24)
                                                        E(r)

    The average proportion of dividend distributions equals 43.06 percent and ranges
between 11.85 (1999) and 85.45 (1950) percent.
    The short- and long-term capital gains yields ytscg and ytlcg are defined as the
product between the dividend yield ytdiv and the ratio between the short- and long-
term realized capital gains SCGt and LCGt divided by the total dividend payments
Dt , as reported by the IRS:
                                                        LCGt
                                      ytlcg = ytdiv          ,                                  (25)
                                                         Dt
                                                        SCGt
                                      ytscg     = ytdiv                                         (26)
                                                         Dt
    The annual Statistics of Income of the Internal Revenue Service report for most
years in our sample the total short- and long-term capital gains and the dividends
declared by individuals. The capital gains given by the Statistics of Income include
capital gains from many sources and not just from stock transactions. The IRS does
unfortunately not report every year the proportion of capital gains that result from
transactions of corporate equities. However, for eight years between 1959 and 2004,
the IRS reported the sources of capital gains in more detail. On average, about 35
percent of the capital gains result from transactions of corporate equity. I interpolated
the fraction of stock capital gains using these eight years.
    The average value of the proportion of short-term capital gains is -1.38, and the
proportion of long-term capital gains equals 24.96 percent. On average, 66.64 percent
of the expected real returns are either realized as dividends or as capital gains.
    The capital gains realizations vary substantially through time. For example, long-
  23
     Asset returns remain untaxed in tax-preferred accounts, such as ROTH-IRA accounts, as long
as investors do not take non-qualified distributions. However, the returns in tax-deferred savings
accounts, such as regular IRAs and 401(k) accounts, are not completely tax-exempt. Contributions
to tax-deferred accounts are deducted from taxable income while the total withdrawals are taxed at
the ordinary income tax rate. If investors remain in the same tax bracket throughout their lifetimes,
then savings in a tax-deferred account accumulate completely tax-free. If investors are in a lower
(higher) tax bracket during retirement compared to before retirement, then they face effectively
negative (positive) taxes on their accumulated savings in a tax-deferred account.



                                                   37
term capital gains are extremely high in 1986, before the enactment of the TRA of
1986, where capital gains taxes were increased from 20 to 28 percent. Moreover,
short-term capital loss realizations are relatively high in the early 2000s due to the
large decline in stock prices during that period. To eliminate the impact of these
high-frequency changes in capital gains realization, it is assumed that investors have
a fixed propensity to realize capital gains and capital losses over the sample period
out of the total capital gains. Thus, the proportions of the short- and long-run capital
                      scg
gains distributions wkt   and wtlcg are given by the following equation:

                                               y lcg 1 − wtdiv
                                     wtlcg =                   ,                    (27)
                                               E(r) 1 − wdiv
                                               y scg 1 − wtdiv
                                     wtscg   =                 ,                    (28)
                                               E(r) 1 − wdiv

    where wdiv denotes the average proportion of returns distributed as dividends,
and y lcg and y scg denote the average long- and short-term capital gains yields over
the whole sample period. However, our regression results are not affected qualitatively
if we use the actual annual capital gains realizations instead (e.g., wtlcg = ytlcg /E(r)
and wtscg = ytscg /E(r)).

B.4        Macroeconomic Data
The S&P Composite Index Value, the corresponding dividend and earnings variables,
the consumer price index, and the interest rates series between 1913 and 2005 used in
Section 4 are taken from Robert Shiller’s webpage.24 The stock prices are the average
values in January of the Standard and Poor’s Composite index. The dividends and
the earnings per share are adjusted to the S&P Composite index (4 Quarter Total).
Tobin’s q is computed following Blanchard, Rhee, and Summers (1993). The nominal
output growth rate is computed using the growth rate in the GNP from Mitchell
(1983) prior to 1928 and the growth rate in the GDP from the BEA (Table 1.1 Line
1; http://www.bea.gov). The U.S. population prior to 1940 is taken from Dodd
(1993) and after 1939 from the BEA (Table 8.7 Line 16; http://www.bea.gov). The
party of the president was found on http://www.whitehouse.gov/history/presidents/.
The NBER recessions are obtained from http://www.nber.org/cycles/. World War I
(1914-1918), World War II (1941-1945), the Korean War (1950-1953), and the Viet-
nam War (1965-1972) are counted as war years.




 24
      See http://aida.econ.yale.edu/∼shiller/.


                                                  38
Figure 1: Price-Dividend Ratio
These figures depict the price-dividend ratio δ in the two tax regimes at four different
risk-aversion levels.


                                                 α=0                                                                               α=1
                          26.5                                                                                      15

                                                                                                                   14.5
                           26
                                                                                                                    14
                          25.5
                                                                                                                   13.5                Low Tax
 Price−Dividend Ratio δ




                                                                                          Price−Dividend Ratio δ
                           25
                                                                                                                    13
                                  High Tax                            Low Tax

                          24.5                                                                                     12.5

                                                                                                                    12
                           24
                                                                                                                   11.5
                          23.5                                                                                                          High Tax
                                                                                                                    11
                           23
                                                                                                                   10.5

                          22.5                                                                                      10
                              0          0.2      0.4        0.6           0.8   1                                    0    0.2      0.4        0.6      0.8   1
                                                Persistence Level φ                                                               Persistence Level φ

                                                 α=3                                                                               α=5
                          12                                                                                       20

                                                                                                                                      Low Tax
                          11                        Low Tax                                                        18
 Price−Dividend Ratio δ




                                                                                          Price−Dividend Ratio δ




                          10                                                                                       16



                           9                                                                                       14



                           8                                                                                       12

                                                     High Tax
                           7                                                                                       10
                                                                                                                                      High Tax


                           6                                                                                        8
                            0           0.2      0.4        0.6           0.8    1                                   0    0.2      0.4        0.6       0.8   1
                                               Persistence Level φ                                                               Persistence Level φ




                                                                                     39
Figure 2: Expected Asset Returns
These figures depict the expected returns in the two tax regimes at four different
risk-aversion levels.


                                        α=0                                                                          α=1
                     0.072                                                                              0.3


                     0.071
                                                                                                       0.25
                                                                                                                           High Tax
                      0.07
                                                              High Tax
                                                                                                        0.2
                              Low Tax
 Expected Return λ




                                                                                  Expected Return λ
                     0.069
                                                                                                       0.15
                     0.068
                                                                                                        0.1
                     0.067

                                                                                                       0.05
                     0.066
                                                                                                                           Low Tax
                     0.065                                                                               0


                     0.064                                                                            −0.05
                          0     0.2       0.4        0.6       0.8       1                                 0   0.2     0.4        0.6      0.8   1
                                        Persistence Level φ                                                          Persistence Level φ

                                        α=3                                                                          α=5
                        1                                                                              1.4

                                                                                                       1.2
                      0.8
                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                        High Tax
                      0.6                    High Tax                                                  0.8
 Expected Return λ




                                                                                  Expected Return λ




                                                                                                       0.6
                      0.4
                                                                                                       0.4
                      0.2
                                                                                                       0.2

                        0                                                                               0
                                                                                                                          Low Tax
                                              Low Tax                                                 −0.2
                     −0.2
                                                                                                      −0.4

                     −0.4                                                                             −0.6
                         0     0.2        0.4        0.6       0.8       1                                0    0.2     0.4        0.6      0.8   1
                                        Persistence Level φ                                                          Persistence Level φ




                                                                             40
Figure 3: Statutory Federal Marginal Income Tax Rates at Different Real Income
Levels
The marginal income tax rates are depicted over the period from 1913 to 2004 for five
different real income levels. The four lower curves correspond to the marginal income
tax rates for households with real income levels of 50, 100, 250, and 500 thousand
U.S. dollars expressed in 2004 consumer prices. The highest curve corresponds to the
maximum marginal income tax rate.

                            1
                                                         Maximum
                           0.9

                           0.8

                           0.7                               500K
       Marginal Tax Rate




                           0.6

                           0.5                               250K


                           0.4

                           0.3                                100K


                           0.2
                                                              50K

                           0.1

                            0
                                 1920   1930   1940   1950     1960   1970   1980   1990   2000
                                                               Year




                                                             41
Figure 4: Average Marginal Investment Income Tax Rates for Taxable Investors
The dollar-weighted average marginal tax rates for taxable investors on dividend
income and capital gains are depicted between 1917 and 2004. The tax rates include
taxes imposed by state and local governments.




                                  0.5
                                                                     Dividends
      Average Marginal Tax Rate




                                  0.4



                                  0.3



                                  0.2

                                                                     Long−Term
                                                                    Capital Gains
                                  0.1



                                   0
                                        1920   1930   1940   1950     1960       1970   1980   1990   2000
                                                                      Year




                                                                    42
Figure 5: Dividend and Capital Gains Realizations
These figures depict the total dividend and the capital gains realizations on the U.S.
stock market divided by the initial market capitalization.


                                       Dividend Yield                                                                             Capital Gains Yield
                   0.1                                                                                              0.1

                  0.09                                                                                             0.09

                  0.08                                                                                             0.08

                  0.07                                                                                             0.07
                                                                                             Capital−Gains Yield




                  0.06                                                                                             0.06
 Dividend Yield




                  0.05                                                                                             0.05

                  0.04                                                                                             0.04

                  0.03                                                                                             0.03

                  0.02                                                                                             0.02

                  0.01                                                                                             0.01

                    0                                                                                                0
                         1920   1930   1940   1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000                                     1920   1930   1940   1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000
                                                     Year                                                                                             Year




                                                                                        43
Figure 6: Effective Tax Rate on Stock Returns
This figure depicts the effective tax rates for all stocks. The more volatile curve
corresponds to the effective tax rate with time-varying distribution weights, and the
more stable curve corresponds to the effective tax rate with constant distribution
weights.

                                  0.45

                                                  Variable
                                   0.4           Distribution
                                                  Weights


                                  0.35                                         Constant
                                                                              Distribution
                                                                               Weights
      Average Marginal Tax Rate




                                   0.3


                                  0.25


                                   0.2


                                  0.15


                                   0.1


                                  0.05


                                    0
                                         1920   1930       1940   1950    1960       1970    1980   1990   2000
                                                                          Year




                                                                         44
Figure 7: Asset Valuations
The price-earnings, the price-dividend, and Tobin’s q ratio are depicted over the
period from 1917-2004.


                        40
          PE Ratio




                        20


                             0
                                 1920   1930   1940   1950    1960   1970   1980   1990   2000

                   100
      PD Ratio




                        50


                             0
                                 1920   1930   1940   1950    1960   1970   1980   1990   2000


                             2
                 Tobin‘s Q




                             1


                             0
                                 1920   1930   1940   1950    1960   1970   1980   1990   2000




                                                             45
Table 1: Summary Statistics of Macroeconomic Variables
This table summarizes the means and the standard deviations of various tax rates and
macroeconomic variables between 1917-2004. The third column shows the correlation
between the corresponding variable and the effective tax rate.
                                                      Mean   Std. Dev.   Correlation
     Panel A: Tax Variables
     Effective Tax Rate with Constant Weights       17.68     6.30       100
     Effective Tax Rate with Time-Varying Weights   18.05     8.21        87.29∗∗∗
     Average Marginal Tax on Dividends              33.45    11.75        91.55∗∗∗
     Average Marginal Tax on Capital Gains          18.25     4.77        21.12∗
     Income Tax Rate (Income of $100,000)           21.27    11.07        56.88∗∗∗
     Income Tax Rate (Income of $250,000)           34.71    16.55        80.62∗∗∗
     Income Tax Rate (Maximum Income)               63.30    22.65        86.19∗∗∗
     Panel B: Macroeconomic Variables
     P-E Ratio                                      15.46     7.19       −28.86∗∗∗
     P-D Ratio                                      28.52    15.52       −24.42∗∗
     Tobin’s q                                       0.80     0.38       −38.13∗∗∗
     Nominal S&P Composite Return                   11.86    19.02         5.61
     Inflation Rate                                  3.36     5.28        29.08∗∗∗
     Real Per Capita Growth Rate                     1.99     6.81        15.56
     Nominal Interest Rate                           4.73     3.33       −13.97∗∗
     Democrat President Indicator Variable          50.00    50.29        28.60∗∗∗
     War Year Indicator Variable                    21.59    41.38        48.45∗∗∗
     Recession Year Indicator Variable              39.77    49.22        −8.21




                                            46
Table 2: Asset Valuations in Different Tax Regimes
This table summarizes the effective tax rate using constant distribution weights, the
price-earnings ratio, the price-dividend ratio, and Tobin’s q ratio for different tax
regimes in our sample. The table also includes the Spearman rank correlations and
the corresponding p-values in parentheses. The significance levels are abbreviated
with asterisks: One, two, and three asterisks denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1
percent level, respectively.
                 Time Period Tax Rate    P-E Ratio    P-D Ratio   Tobin’s q
             1   1917-1923      12.81      11.29        14.97        0.43
             2   1924-1931       8.06      13.71        20.07        0.83
             3   1932-1935      13.15      19.56        22.00        0.75
             4   1936-1939      15.75      15.11        20.73        1.10
             5   1940-1947      25.65      12.12        19.04        0.66
             6   1948-1950      22.72        7.15       15.25        0.49
             7   1951-1963      24.62      14.97        26.52        0.63
             8   1964-1968      22.35      17.53        32.79        0.94
             9   1969-1981      22.16      11.80        25.23        0.57
             10 1982-1986       14.66      13.22        25.11        0.54
             11 1987-1992       12.99      17.57        30.78        0.89
             12 1993-1996       13.06      18.67        42.22        1.20
             13 1997-2000       12.77      28.40        76.61        1.90
             14 2001-2002       11.62      39.33        64.08        1.39
             15 2003-2004        7.58      20.27        62.44        1.40
             Spearman Rank Correlation     −0.55∗∗      −0.39      −0.52∗∗
             P-Value                        (0.034)     (0.148)     (0.048)




                                         47
Table 3: Relationship Between Taxes and the Price-Earnings Ratio
This table summarizes the coefficients of the following regression: pt /et = α0 +
α1 τtconst + α2 rft + α3 πt + α4 gt + α5 demt + α6 rect + α7 wart + α8 t + ²t , where pt /et is the
price of the Standard & Poor’s Composite Index at the end of year t divided by the
earnings of the underlying stocks during year t; τtconst is the effective tax rate using
constant distribution weights; rft is the risk-free interest rate; πt is the inflation rate;
gt is the per-capita real growth rate of GDP; demt is an indicator variable for whether
the president is a Democrat; rect is an indicator variable for whether the current year
is a recession year according to NBER; wart is an indicator variable for whether the
current year is a war year; and t is a linear time trend. The Newey-West standard
errors are summarized in parentheses and use a four-year lag. The significance levels
are abbreviated with asterisks: One, two, and three asterisks denote significance at
the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively.
                                              Univariate     Multivariate
                                              Estimates        Estimates
                       Effective Tax Rate   −30.75∗          −35.00∗∗∗
                                             (17.22)         (12.84)
                       Interest Rate                         −71.74∗∗∗
                                                              (22.75)
                       Inflation Rate                        −32.38∗∗∗
                                                              (11.85)
                       Growth Rate                           −11.74
                                                              (11.11)
                       Democrat                                 1.06
                                                               (1.51)
                       Recession                                1.62
                                                               (2.00)
                       War                                      2.30
                                                               (1.62)
                       Time Trend                               0.18∗∗∗
                                                               (0.05)
                       Constant               20.90∗∗∗         17.01∗∗∗
                                              (3.81)           (2.33)
                       Observations           88               88
                       R2                      0.08             0.49




                                                48
Table 4: Relationship Between Taxes and the Price-Earnings Ratio
This table summarizes the coefficients of the following regression: pt+k /et+k = α0 +
α1 τtconst + α2 rft + α3 πt + α4 gt + α5 demt + α6 rect + α7 wart + α8 t + ²t+k , where pt+k /et+k
is the price of the Standard & Poor’s Composite Index at the end of year t + k divided
by the earnings of the underlying stocks during year t + k with k ∈ (0, 1); τtconst is
the effective tax rate using constant distribution weights; rft is the risk-free interest
rate; πt is the inflation rate; gt is the per-capita real growth rate of GDP; demt is
an indicator variable for whether the president is a Democrat; rect is an indicator
variable for whether the current year is a recession year according to NBER; wart is
an indicator variable for whether the current year is a war year; and t is a linear time
trend. The first column reports the regression results using this year’s price-earnings
ratio, while the second column reports the results using next year’s price-earnings
ratio and the explanatory variables in the current year. The Newey-West standard
errors are summarized in parentheses and use a four-year lag. The significance levels
are abbreviated with asterisks: One, two, and three asterisks denote significance at
the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively.
                                          This Year’s            Next Year’s
                                     Price-Earnings Ratio   Price-Earnings Ratio
                                            (pt /et )            (pt+1 /et+1 )
                Effective Tax Rate          −35.00∗∗∗              −41.50∗∗∗
                                             (12.84)                (15.32)
                Interest Rate               −71.74∗∗∗              −28.48
                                             (22.75)                (23.60)
                Inflation Rate              −32.38∗∗∗              −41.25∗∗∗
                                             (11.85)                (10.70)
                Growth Rate                 −11.74                     4.70
                                             (11.11)                 (6.42)
                Democrat                        1.06                   3.05
                                              (1.51)                 (2.22)
                Recession                       1.62                   3.35∗∗
                                              (2.00)                 (1.39)
                War                             2.30                   2.83∗
                                              (1.62)                 (1.65)
                Time Trend                      0.18∗∗∗                0.17∗∗∗
                                              (0.05)                 (0.04)
                Constant                      17.01∗∗∗               14.48∗∗∗
                                              (2.33)                 (2.37)
                Observations                  88                     87
                R2                              0.49                   0.45




                                               49
Table 5: Relationship Between Taxes and the Price-Earnings Ratio: Different Tax
Rates
This table summarizes the coefficients of the following regression: pt /et = α0 + α1 τt +
α2 rft + α3 πt + α4 gt + α5 demt + α6 rect + α7 wart + α8 t + ²t , where pt /et the price of the
Standard & Poor’s Composite Index at the end of year t divided by the earnings of
the underlying stocks during year t; τt is tax rate; rft is the risk-free interest rate; πt
is the inflation rate; gt is the per-capita real growth rate of GDP; demt is an indicator
variable for whether the president is a Democrat; rect is an indicator variable for
whether the current year is a recession year according to NBER; wart is an indicator
variable for whether the current year is a war year; and t is a linear time trend.
The different columns represent coefficient estimates using different tax rates. The
Newey-West standard errors are summarized in parentheses and use a four-year lag.
The significance levels are abbreviated with asterisks: One, two, and three asterisks
denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively.
                             Effective Tax Rates                 Statutory Tax Rates
                      Constant     Varying       Div-      $100,000 $250,000 Maximum
                      Weights      Weights     idends
     Tax Rate         −35.00∗∗∗ −42.70∗∗∗ −19.62∗∗∗        −25.38∗∗     −14.57∗∗∗    −6.48∗∗
                       (12.84)       (8.85)     (6.87)      (10.22)      (5.28)      (3.23)
     Interest Rate    −71.74∗∗∗ −75.78∗∗∗ −64.02∗∗∗        −52.08∗∗     −55.32∗∗    −66.94∗∗∗
                       (22.75)     (19.02)    (21.40)       (22.16)     (21.36)     (23.83)
     Inflation Rate   −32.38∗∗∗ −26.04∗∗ −32.00∗∗∗         −31.70∗∗     −31.56∗∗    −36.63∗∗∗
                       (11.85)     (10.77)    (11.99)       (13.34)     (12.45)     (12.31)
     Growth Rate      −11.74      −11.85      −11.24       −15.45       −13.82      −10.82
                      (11.11)      (10.00)    (11.09)       (11.20)     (11.09)     (11.50)
     Democrat            1.06         1.57       1.20         0.74        0.75        1.29
                        (1.51)       (1.24)     (1.47)       (1.47)      (1.49)      (1.55)
     Recession           1.62         1.94       1.51         1.02        1.22        1.58
                        (2.00)       (1.87)     (1.97)       (1.96)      (1.99)      (2.02)
     War                 2.30         3.33∗∗∗    1.98         1.73        2.05        0.98
                        (1.62)       (1.16)     (1.48)       (1.35)      (1.50)      (1.63)
     Time Trend          0.18∗∗∗      0.15∗∗∗    0.20∗∗∗      0.24∗∗∗     0.21∗∗∗     0.15∗∗∗
                        (0.05)       (0.04)     (0.05)       (0.06)      (0.05)      (0.05)
     Constant           17.01∗∗∗    19.02∗∗∗    15.83∗∗∗     13.11∗∗∗    13.93∗∗∗    16.02∗∗∗
                        (2.33)       (2.04)     (2.28)       (2.31)      (2.23)      (2.49)
     Observations       88          88          88           88          88          88
     R2                  0.49         0.59       0.49         0.48        0.49        0.45




                                               50
Table 6: Relationship Between Taxes and Asset Valuation: Various Valuation Ratios
This table summarizes the coefficients of the following regression: valt = α0 +
α1 τtconst + α2 rft + α3 πt + α4 gt + α5 demt + α6 rect + α7 wart + α8 t + ²t , where valt
is the valuation ratio at the end of year t; τtconst is the effective tax rate using con-
stant distribution weights; rft is the risk-free interest rate; πt is the inflation rate; gt
is the per-capita real growth rate of GDP; demt is an indicator variable for whether
the president is a Democrat; rect is an indicator variable for whether the current year
is a recession year according to NBER; wart is an indicator variable for whether the
current year is a war year; and t is a linear time trend. The Newey-West standard
errors are summarized in parentheses and use a four-year lag. The results using var-
ious valuation ratios are summarized in the columns: (1) price earnings ratio; (2)
price earnings ratio where the earnings are defined as the average earnings over the
previous five years; (3) price earnings ratio where the earnings are defined as the
average earnings over the previous ten years; (4) price dividend ratio; (5) Tobin’s
q ratio. The significance levels are abbreviated with asterisks: One, two, and three
asterisks denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively.
                                            Equity Valuation Ratios
                            PE Ratio PE5 Ratio PE10 Ratio PD Ratio Tobin’s q
       Effective Tax Rate   −35.00∗∗∗  −29.94∗∗∗    −33.42∗∗     −82.63∗∗∗ −3.08∗∗∗
                             (12.84)   (11.03)       (15.43)      (30.27)   (0.61)
       Interest Rate        −71.74∗∗∗  −63.48∗∗∗    −54.09∗    −132.21∗∗∗ −3.84∗∗∗
                             (22.75)   (20.50)       (27.51)      (39.21)   (1.08)
       Inflation Rate       −32.38∗∗∗  −21.44∗      −24.60∗      −23.48     −1.18
                             (11.85)   (11.70)       (14.31)      (21.32)   (0.73)
       Growth Rate          −11.74      10.20          2.84         0.18     0.75
                             (11.11)    (9.92)        (9.28)      (16.27)   (0.50)
       Democrat                1.06      2.26          3.03         4.09     0.21∗∗
                              (1.51)    (1.66)        (2.40)       (4.35)   (0.11)
       Recession               1.62     −0.12          0.10         1.51     0.07
                              (2.00)    (1.20)        (1.35)       (2.65)   (0.08)
       War                     2.30      0.11          2.17         3.03     0.07
                              (1.62)    (1.90)        (1.71)       (2.77)   (0.09)
       Time Trend              0.18∗∗∗   0.19∗∗∗       0.24∗∗∗      0.53∗∗∗  0.01∗∗∗
                              (0.05)    (0.03)        (0.05)       (0.11)   (0.00)
       Constant               17.01∗∗∗  15.84∗∗∗      14.68∗∗∗     24.04∗∗∗  0.95∗∗∗
                              (2.33)    (2.52)        (3.50)       (4.52)   (0.12)
       Observations           88        88            88           88       88
       R2                      0.49      0.58          0.59         0.65     0.62




                                            51
Table 7: Relationship Between Taxes and the Price-Earnings Ratio: Different Variable
Transformations
This table summarizes the coefficients of the following regression: valt = α0 +α1 taxt +
α2 rft + α3 πt + α4 gt + α5 demt + α6 rect + α7 wart + α8 t + ²t , where valt is either the
price-earnings ratio at the end of year t (columns 1 and 2) or the logarithm of the
price-earnings ratio at the end of year t (columns 3 and 4); taxt is either τtconst
(columns 1 and 3) or ln (1 − τtconst ) (columns 2 and 4); rft is the risk-free interest
rate; πt is the inflation rate; gt is the per-capita real growth rate of GDP; demt is
an indicator variable for whether the president is a Democrat; rect is an indicator
variable for whether the current year is a recession year according to NBER; wart
is an indicator variable for whether the current year is a war year; and t is a linear
time trend. The Newey-West standard errors are summarized in parentheses and use
a four-year lag. The significance levels are abbreviated with asterisks: One, two, and
three asterisks denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively.
                                                   Raw                  Logarithm of
                                           Price-Earnings Ratio     Price-Earnings Ratio
      Effective Tax Rate                −35.00∗∗∗                  −1.71∗∗
                                         (12.84)                    (0.77)
      Log of (1 - Effective Tax Rate)                   28.96∗∗∗                 1.41∗∗
                                                       (10.48)                  (0.63)
      Interest Rate                     −71.74∗∗∗     −72.88∗∗∗    −4.07∗∗∗    −4.13∗∗
                                         (22.75)       (22.77)      (1.38)      (1.38)
      Inflation Rate                    −32.38∗∗∗     −32.26∗∗∗    −2.70∗∗∗    −2.69∗∗
                                         (11.85)       (11.80)      (0.82)      (0.81)
      Growth Rate                       −11.74        −12.05       −0.80       −0.82
                                         (11.11)       (11.10)      (0.72)      (0.72)
      Democrat                             1.06          1.02        0.02        0.02
                                          (1.51)        (1.51)      (0.10)      (0.10)
      Recession                            1.62          1.60        0.02        0.02
                                          (2.00)        (2.00)      (0.11)      (0.11)
      War                                  2.30          2.36        0.13        0.14
                                          (1.62)        (1.60)      (0.12)      (0.12)
      Time Trend                           0.18∗∗∗       0.18∗∗∗     0.01∗∗∗     0.01∗∗∗
                                          (0.05)        (0.05)      (0.00)      (0.00)
      Constant                            17.01∗∗∗      16.62∗∗∗     2.79∗∗∗     2.77∗∗∗
                                          (2.33)        (2.24)      (0.15)      (0.14)
      Observations                        88            88         88           88
      R2                                   0.49          0.49        0.51        0.48




                                               52
Table 8: Asset Returns and Taxes
This table summarizes the coefficients of the following OLS regression: rt+k = α0 +
α1 τt + α2 rft + α3 πt + α4 gt + α5 demt + α6 rect + α7 wart + α8 t + ²t+k , where rt+k is
the nominal return on the S&P Composite Index during year t + k with k ∈ (0, 1);
τt is the aggregate effective tax rate using time-varying distribution weights; rft is
the risk-free interest rate; πt is the inflation rate; gt is the per-capita real growth rate
of GDP; demt is an indicator variable for whether the president is a Democrat; rect
is an indicator variable for whether the current year is a recession year according to
NBER; wart is an indicator variable for whether the current year is a war year; and
t is a linear time trend. The first column uses the return in the current year, and the
second column uses the return in the subsequent year as the dependent variable. The
Newey-West standard errors are summarized in parentheses and use a four-year lag.
The significance levels are abbreviated with asterisks: One, two, and three asterisks
denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively.
                                    This Year’s Return   Next Year’s Return
                                           (rt )               (rt+1 )
                   Tax Rate                 0.61∗∗               0.50∗
                                           (0.24)               (0.29)
                   Interest Rate            0.27                 0.65
                                           (0.58)               (0.42)
                   Inflation Rate         −0.48                −0.32
                                           (0.55)               (0.31)
                   Growth Rate              0.14                 0.18
                                           (0.49)               (0.27)
                   Democrat                 0.00               −0.02
                                           (0.05)               (0.04)
                   Recession              −0.05                  0.01
                                           (0.06)               (0.06)
                   War                    −0.06                −0.02
                                           (0.05)               (0.05)
                   Time Trend               0.00                 0.00
                                           (0.00)               (0.00)
                   Constant                 0.03                 0.01
                                           (0.12)               (0.09)
                   Observations           88                    87
                   R2                       0.07                 0.04




                                              53
