NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ELECTRONIC FILING, TAX PREPARERS,
AND PARTICIPATION IN THE EARNED INCOME TAX CREDIT
Wojciech Kopczuk
Cristian Pop-Eleches
Working Paper 11768
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11768
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2005

We are grateful to Michael Conlin, Gary Engelhardt, Brendan O’Flaherty, Jeff Liebman, Lucie Schmidt, Till
von Wachter and seminar participants at Columbia, Syracuse, Harvard/MIT and Duke for helpful comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Wojciech Kopczuk and Cristian Pop-Eleches. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Electronic Filing, Tax Preparers, and Participation in the Earned Income Tax Credit
Wojciech Kopczuk and Cristian Pop-Eleches
NBER Working Paper No. 11768
November 2005
JEL No. H24, I38
ABSTRACT
In 2002 more than 18 million low-income individual taxpayers received the Earned Income Tax
Credit (EITC). Despite its size, non-participation in this program is a concern and substantial effort
is devoted by the IRS, local governments and many non-profits to address it. Most of the tax returns
for EITC recipients are filed electronically by paid tax preparers who often charge significant fees
for their services. Using variation across states in the introduction of state electronic filing programs,
we show that the introduction of electronic filing had a significant effect on participation in the
EITC. Our results are robust to accounting for other welfare, EITC and IRS reforms introduced
during the same period. We suggest that this effect is due to the impact that electronic filing
opportunities had on the tax preparation industry, therefore providing an example of how a marketbased approach can be effective in addressing the problem of program non-participation.
Wojciech Kopczuk
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street, Rm. 1022 IAB
MC 3323
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
wk2110@columbia.edu
Cristian Pop-Eleches
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street, Rm. 1022 IAB
MC 3323
New York, NY 10027
cp2124@columbia.edu

1

Introduction

Tax rules and details of welfare programs are difficult to understand for economists, and
even more so for the average taxpayer. The classic “tagging” logic emphasized by Akerlof
(1978) suggests that better targeting of benefits allows for reducing distortions. At the
same time, precise targeting requires specifying precise eligibility criteria thereby increasing
the complexity of rules applying to individuals. As a practical matter, increased complexity makes it difficult for intended recipients to learn about and benefit from government’s
programs; they are also bound to make mistakes and to be unaware of all of their responsibilities. Consequently, increased tagging does not just lead to reduced distortions but also
limits the effectiveness of transfer programs by making them more complex. We provide
empirical evidence, in the context of the Earned Income Tax Credit, that this trade-off is
endogenous and sensitive to its institutional and technological environment. In particular,
we argue that the market for tax preparation services effectively helps in addressing the
problem of non-participation.
Complexity is often suggested as the reason for reforming the US tax code and it is also
one of the key issues in designing welfare programs. In this paper we focus on a particular
program, the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC), which has attracted a lot of attention
in recent years from both academic and policy circles. While we discuss the evidence and
difficulty of measuring non-participation in this program in detail in Section 2.2, the main
puzzle behind the present analysis is that non-participation in the EITC is non-trivial
despite its significant advantage over other types of welfare programs. This advantage is
generally attributed to its integration into the income tax system; therefore, individuals
who file their taxes are likely to be aware of its existence.
In this paper we demonstrate the causal link between the technology of tax compliance
and claiming of EITC benefits. By reducing the time it takes to obtain a refund, the introduction of electronic filing technology constituted a breakthrough in the tax preparation
industry. This change provided tax preparers with the opportunity to provide a new kind
of service: a quick refund. Filing taxes electronically usually required (at least at the lower
end of income distribution) relying on a tax preparer. As the result, the industry was able to
reap benefits of this new technology. At the same time, the additional rents made it worthwhile to expand and reach taxpayers who would otherwise not file their tax returns. Thus,
our results provide support for and are an example of the possibility discussed by Currie
(2004) in a recent review of the literature on the take up of social programs, that participation in such programs can be increased when businesses or individuals have a stake in
promoting them.
More specifically, we use the staggered introduction of state electronic filing programs
during the 1990’s to show that these state programs had a large effect on the number
of federal electronic filers as well as the number of EITC claims. Our main identifying
assumption is that once we control for state and year effects as well as state-specific time

1

trends, the timing of the introduction of the state electronic filing programs is not correlated
with other factors that might have an effect on our outcome variables. To test the robustness
of our main result, we present a number of specification checks that try to account for
possible competing alternative explanations of our results, such as the welfare reform and
state-specific welfare waivers implemented during this period, IRS programs to reduce EITC
related cheating, or the reform and expansion of EITC in 1991 and 1994. We provide
evidence that this growth cannot be explained by cheating of existing filers and show that
the bulk of the effect represents increased participation by individuals who previously did
not file their tax returns (“non-filers”). While we provide some evidence that these new
filers of tax returns and EITC benefits are similar among many observable characteristics,
we cannot rule out entirely the possibility that cheaters might drive some of the increase in
participation.
The results suggest a counter-balancing argument to claims that the tax preparation
industry takes advantage of EITC claimants. Tax preparers charge significant fees for their
services. Although electronic filing itself very significantly reduces the time from filing to
the refund, tax preparers often provide the so-called Refund Anticipation Loans (RALs)
to electronic filers. These loans have benefits to taxpayers: they amount to receiving their
refund earlier (in some cases, instantaneously) and may relax liquidity constraints. However,
these loans involve little risk1 and given the relatively short time that it takes for the IRS to
process an electronic return, these fees amount in some cases to exorbitant interest rates.2
We do not evaluate the direct welfare benefits and costs of the RALs,3 but our results
suggest that one should not consider RALs out of context: in their presence tax preparers
have an additional incentive to assure that taxpayers apply for the benefits they are due.
As a result, the RALs may be considered to be the price of the (arguably socially beneficial)
market solution to the problem of complexity.4
Our analysis proceeds as follows. We describe the EITC program, changes in tax filing
technology, and the tax preparation industry in Section 2. In Section 3, we present a very
1

In fact, tax preparers are even able to verify before they provide a loan whether the taxpayer owes taxes
to the IRS in which case credit would be reduced.
2
On the high cost of tax preparation services and RAL loans see Berube et al. (2002) and Wu and Fox
(2003). Berube et al. (2002, page 14) are explicit about the negative welfare impact of the tax preparation
industry: “There is no question, however, that the public interest is not served when a tax credit designed
specifically to supplement the earnings of low-income workers with children becomes an important profit
center for a multi-billion dollar industry.”
3
A baseline economic model suggests that taxpayers who decide to purchase a loan of this kind must
find it beneficial. In practice, this is more controversial because the tax preparation industry was accused
of misleading the customers by blurring the distinction between rapid refunds and loans (see “H&R Block
Is Sued by City Over Loan Ads,” New York Times, March 31, 2002.) Implicit in this argument is that
taxpayers have to be unaware of the possibility of receiving a refund quickly (though not as fast as in the
case of RALs) by filing electronically without purchasing a loan.
4
We of course do not claim that RALs are the optimal solution. The question of how and if the government
should encourage market solutions intended to increase program participation is an interesting topic for
future research.

2

simple model that illustrates how the introduction of electronic filing could have affected
EITC participation. In Section 4, we introduce our data and empirical specification. The
main empirical analysis is presented in section 5. We discuss the possible explanations and
interpretations of our results in Section 6. We conclude in Section 7 with the discussion of
implications of our results and possible extensions.

2

Earned Income Tax Credit and E-Filing

2.1

EITC

We will only briefly review the main features of the EITC, since Hotz and Scholz (2003)
provide a recent survey on its history and research on this topic. The Earned Income Tax
Credit was introduced in 1975 to provide support for the working poor. The benefits are
phased in for low income workers, held constant in the middle range, and phased out for
the highest eligible incomes. The EITC was expanded between 1991 and 1994. The 1990
EITC expansion was phased in over three years so that in 1993 the maximum benefit was
higher than the 1990 maximum by almost 50% (in real terms). The 1993 budget bill further
expanded the reach of the program by another round of benefits increases, and for the first
time, expanded eligibility to childless individuals. EITC benefits vary with the number of
qualifying children. The 1999 (the last year we use in our analysis) maximum for workers
with two or more children was $3,816, with the phase in range between $0 and $9,540 and
the phase out range beginning at $12,460. The credit was fully phased out at $30,580. Since
1994, single individuals are also eligible, however, in 1999 their maximum benefit was just
$347 and the program was fully phased out when income reached $10,200. The Earned
Income Tax Credit is refundable: if the credit exceeds taxpayers’ tax liability, the excess is
payable to the taxpayer.5
In order to claim the credit a taxpayer has to file a tax return. Taxpayers generally
are not required to file if their income is below the filing threshold (the sum of standard
deductions and own personal exemptions). If there are dependents, exemptions for them
are not part of the filing thresholds so that the taxpayer may be required to file even if
there is no income tax liability. Furthermore, there is also a significant group of individuals
who do not file even though they are required to do so (see, Erard and Ho, 2001, for the
discussion).
Although the basic computation of the EITC is straightforward, the eligibility criteria
are not. The major difficulty lies in determining whether the taxpayer meets the qualifying
child criteria. Only own children, grandchildren or foster children qualify. A child must be
either under 19 (24 for a full-time student) or be permanently and totally disabled. The
5

In 2002, eighteen states have had their own EITC programs. This is a relatively new phenomena: in
1999 there were twelve such states, and in 1990 only five. We ignore state EITC programs in most of the
paper and provide only some robustness checks that indicate that these programs do not affect our analysis.

3

residency test requires that the child lives with the taxpayer for at least half a year in the
case of an own child and the whole year in the case of a foster child. If two different taxpayers
are eligible, the one with the higher AGI is supposed to claim the child. The qualifying
child criteria for EITC are different from those for child tax credit and tax exemptions.
In fact, it is possible that a taxpayer can claim tax exemption for the child that’s not
a qualifying dependent for the purpose of EITC and vice versa. Apart from the criteria
related to children, there is also room for manipulating the system by adjusting filing status.
While a married couple filing jointly is eligible for the credit, the resulting credit is smaller
than if they each filed separately. Another source of potential fraud and complexity within
the system has to do with the definition of income for EITC. Generally, public assistance
benefits are supposed to be excluded from calculation of income for the EITC purposes.
Certain types of income can make taxpayer ineligible if they exceed the threshold amount
($2,350 in 1999). They include interest, dividend, rent and royalties, capital gains and
passive income not related to self-employment.
There is evidence of non-compliance related to the eligibility criteria (McCubbin, 2000;
Liebman, 2000), but also some evidence that many mistakes are not intentional. Using a
random sample of EITC recipients examined by the IRS’s Criminal Investigations Division,
McCubbin (2000) finds that most of the overclaims are due to qualifying child errors (almost
70% of the total amount overclaimed). During audits agents were also asked to indicate
whether they believed that mistakes were intentional and based on this information the IRS
officials testified that approximately 50 percent of errors were not intentional (McCubbin,
2000)

2.2

Non-participation in EITC

Apart from the issue of non-compliance, non-participation in the EITC program has received significant attention from the government and researchers. Most of the studies on
EITC participation rely on datasets that allow to determine eligibility, such as the Census
Bureau’s Current Population Survey March Supplement (CPS) or the Survey of Income and
Program Participation (SIPP). However, even studies based on confidential administrative
data sources such as Internal Revenue Service (2002) are unable to determine with certainty
whether an individual claimed EITC and instead rely on proxies such as whether the tax
return was filed.
Scholz (1994) estimated that in 1990 approximately 80% of eligibles actually claimed
benefits. A recent IRS study (Internal Revenue Service, 2002) states that in 1996 between
13% (based on march CPS) and 18% (based on SIPP) eligible individuals (between 2.3 and
3.4 million) did not file tax returns and therefore did not take advantage of the program.
However, as discussed below, there are a number of reasons why these numbers might be
an overestimate of the true non-participation rates during our period of study. First, IRS’s
computations rely on a very questionable treatment of a large group of potentially eligible

4

individuals. They include in the denominator (therefore treating them as if they were
eligible) 23% of otherwise eligible individuals who refused to provide their SSN in the CPS
and 7% of respondents in the SIPP who refused to answer the question about filing a tax
return. However these same individuals are not counted as non-participants. Both estimates
also assume that an eligible taxpayer who filed a tax return actually claimed benefits.
Holtzblatt and McCubbin (2003) present back-of-the-envelope calculations suggesting that
the true non-participation rate probably exceeds 20%.
Secondly, Hotz and Scholz (2003) speculate that non-participation in the 1990’s might
have increased for some groups due to changes in labor market participation of women as
well as repeated expansions during this period that forced taxpayers to learn new rules. Hill
et al. (1999) provide evidence suggesting that participation rates among women who used
to be on welfare are much lower (even as low as 50%) than overall participation rates.
The continued increase in the share of Hispanics in the US population might also have
affected the rate of non-participation in recent years. Recent survey evidence (Maag, 2005)
indicates that among Hispanic low income parents, only 27% have heard of the EITC,
compared to an average of 58% for the entire population.
Finally, non-participation in the EITC is also affected by the existence of a significant
pool of non-filers of federal taxes. In a recent paper, Erard and Ho (2001) calculate that in
1988 about $5 billion in unpaid taxes are due to people who are legally obliged to file but
do not do so (the so-called “ghosts”). Most interesting in our context is their estimate that
29% of “ghosts” might actually be entitled to get money back but somehow do not file and,
moreover, that “ghosts” are likely to be over-represented in the EITC eligible groups.
Many advocacy groups concentrate their effort on providing information about the program6 . The IRS itself continues to devote a lot of attention to the issue of non-participation.
In a recent press release, the IRS listed a number of ways in which it attempts to increase
participation including “working with more than 180 community-based organizations nationwide to reach low-income workers who may be unaware of the EITC availability”, “helping set up 14,000 volunteer centers that offer free tax preparation for low-income and elderly
individuals”, “coordinating with mayors offices nationwide to help identify low-wage earners who may qualify for EITC” and “teaming with a special grassroots cadre in two target
cities — Los Angeles and Miami —to reach out to taxpayers who have limited proficiency
in English but who may qualify for EITC.”7

2.3

E-filing

The IRS introduced electronic filing of tax returns in 1986. Electronic filing is beneficial
from the IRS point of view because it reduces the cost of handling paper returns and the
6

For example, one of the websites devoted to the EITC ( http://www.eitc.info/eitc_basics/, accessed
on December 3 rd , 2003) states as its objective “Ensuring that more families know about and file for the tax
credits they are due.”
7
http://www.irs.gov/newsroom/article/0,,id=119792,00.html.

5

likelihood of mistakes.8 Taxpayers can benefit from electronic filing in a number of ways.
First, returns filed electronically have a much lower error rate than paper returns therefore
reducing the risk of audits and penalties. Second, the more efficient handling of the returns
by the IRS and the reduced likelihood of mistakes both facilitate a much quicker potential
refund. Third, since software has to be involved in order to file a tax return electronically, it
increases the chance of discovering previously unknown opportunities for tax saving. Fourth,
taxpayers receive an immediate confirmation that the return was accepted.
There are a few different ways to file tax returns electronically, and patterns of filing
changed over time. Most electronic filing is done by professionals who are authorized by the
IRS as Electronic Return Originators (ERO). Some taxpayers choose to prepare their own
tax return and have a professional file it electronically. In other cases, a paid tax professional
also prepares the tax return. Throughout the paper we will be focused on electronic filing;
whether a professional signed the tax return is secondary. In the late 1990s, many taxpayers
chose to file their tax returns by phone under the TeleFiling program. This option has always
been limited to taxpayers with relatively simple tax returns: the reach of this method of
e-filing is limited to the group of childless taxpayers. These taxpayers have low income
maxima for EITC and low maximum benefits. Because we are not able to distinguish
between telefiling and other forms of e-filing in our data, we consider this low-income group
separately in our analysis. Finally, the direct on-line filing is another possibility to file
electronically, but its importance was in the period that we consider limited.9
Forty one states and the District of Columbia operate their own income tax systems.
The relationship of state and federal income taxes varies, but in each case they are operated
as separate systems. Traditionally, taxpayers were (and still are) required to file both federal
and state tax return. States started introducing their own electronic filing systems in the
early 1990s, a few years after federal electronic filing was introduced. Most income tax
states (except for California, Maine, Massachusetts and Minnesota) took advantage of the
broader IRS initiative operated by the IRS Office of FedState Relations established in 1991.
This was one of the IRS’s efforts intended to achieve the 80% electronic filing rate by 2007,
as outlined in the IRS Restructuring and Reform Act of 1998. In these states, there is
only one electronic return to be filed, with the IRS transmitting the relevant information to
the state on the taxpayers’ behalf. The remaining four states operate their own electronic
systems. Two states (Illinois and Maryland), operated their own electronic filing systems
before they joined the federal program. The timing of introduction of state electronic filing
varied between 1990 for South Carolina and 2001 for Hawaii and Vermont. We later show
that the introduction of state electronic filing had significant effect on the number of federal
8

According to the IRS “Questions and Answers” about e-filing using a tax preparer (http://www.irs.
gov/efile/page/0,,id=10093,00.html), accessed February 15, 2004), the error rate for electronically filed
returns is less than 1%, compared to the error rate for paper returns which is about 20%.
9
In 1999, the last year in our sample, approximately 8% of electronic returns were filed online and the
penetration of this method was most likely even lower at the bottom of the income distribution. Our data
does not allow for separating online filing from other means of electronic filing.

6

returns that were filed electronically.
The FedState program also produced other types of interactions between federal and
state tax authorities including sharing computer files with taxpayer information, sharing
audit results and organizing seminars for tax practitioners, cooperation in administration
of other types of taxes. By the late 1990s, the program also led to the introduction of joint
state/federal TeleFiling systems that allowed the qualified taxpayers to file their taxes over
the phone. While the federal TeleFiling system was tested in Ohio as early as in 1992 and
became available nationwide in 1996, only 3 states introduced it before 1996; 11 still do not
have one in place. The joint state/federal TeleFiling possibility was only introduced for the
returns filed for 1998 in Indiana and Kentucky, and by 2003 it was still only available in
seven states. Although, as discussed above, claiming EITC using TeleFile is not a concern,
it is possible that media/marketing coverage of this new possibility might have attracted
attention to other types of electronic filing possibilities. In particular, we will show as a
robustness check that the number of e-filers responds to state TeleFiling programs but EITC
participation does not.

2.4

The Role of Tax Preparers

We use the term “tax preparer” to describe any professional involved in the process of filing
a tax return, including electronic return originators (so-called EROs) who file electronically
tax returns prepared by their customers. In terms of the structure of the tax preparation
industry, two large companies dominate in the market: H&R Block and Jackson Hewitt.
Together they controlled roughly 30% of the electronic filing market in 2001 (15.6% of all returns filed). The remaining 70% is highly diversified and includes both trained professionals
and amateurs who often work only during the tax season.
The introduction of electronic filing was from the very beginning a partnership between
the IRS and the tax preparation industry. In fact, in 1985, the first pilot electronic filing
program was a partnership between the IRS and H&R Block, the largest tax preparation
company in the market.10 The advantages to the tax industry of this partnership were
twofold. First, at least until the late 1990’s when on-line filing began to take off, anyone
interested in filing taxes electronically basically had to use the services of the tax preparation industry. According to an IRS insider “when the program began, the only way to
electronically file a 1040 was to pay a private tax preparer for the privilege” (Davis, 1998,
p. 70).
Secondly, the IRS was willing to share information about filers with the tax preparers.
Tax preparers actively market Refund Anticipation Loans (RALs). They are very short term
loans made usually by a tax preparer as the intermediary of a bank to an electronic taxpayer
once a tax return is filed. RALs are due to be repaid when the refund is received from the
IRS. For every tax return submitted electronically, the IRS would immediately issue a direct
10

See Fletcher (2003).

7

deposit indicator (DDI), also known as the debt indicator or the refund offset indicator. This
indicator informs the tax preparer if the refund requested by the taxpayer will be reduced
because of a debt owed to the IRS or other federal agencies, such as outstanding child
support or student loans. Therefore, the existence of this debt indicator greatly reduced
the risks associated with RALs. Some industry experts consider the introduction of RAL’s
as the chief incentive driving the volume of electronic filing.11 The IRS further reduced the
risk of RALs by making it possible that the refund be deposited directly to the creditor’s
account.
As early as 1990, it was possible to file taxes electronically at many locations across the
country. For example, a company called Instatax had as many as 7000 sites in 1990 located
in all states at major retail chains such as Mailboxes Etc., 7-Eleven, or Revco drugstores.12
At these particular locations, no actual tax preparation was done; instead customers brought
returns prepared by themselves or by outside tax professionals. These returns were faxed to
the company headquarters, verified for inconsistencies, and filed electronically with the IRS.
Refund Anticipation Loans were provided through an arrangement with the Greenwood
Trust Company once the IRS confirmed that the refund was forthcoming. The fee for
electronic filing was $29.95 and the fee for the loan was $35. Fees for the RAL in the
following years appeared higher. A newspaper article in 199213 reported fees at H&R Block
to be $63. Some places in the Atlanta area charged as much as $112. By 1995, the fee
for a $1,000 loan was reportedly $89, even though the loan was typically repaid within 13
days.14 The reported fees for RALs are probably not a reliable measure of their actual cost,
because the RALs are purchased as a part of a package with electronic filing and may also
involve tax preparation. There is usually also a processing fee involved. According to a
2003 report by a consumer advocacy group (Wu and Fox, 2003), a tax filer could expect to
pay on average $75 for a RAL fee, $40 for an electronic filing fee, $100 for a tax preparation
fee and another $33 for additional processing fees. The estimated drain of all these fees on
the overall EITC program was around $1.2 billion, roughly 4% of total EITC spending.15
Berube et al. (2002) document that commercial tax preparers target low income neighborhoods. Based on the data for the largest 100 metropolitan areas, they found that in
11

December 6, 1994 speech by Ms. Peggy Rule, IRS Director for Electronic Filing Programs, before the
AICPA Tax Division, Retrieved May 20th , 2004 from the World Wide Web: http://www.nysscpa.org/
prof_library/Briefingbook/Spring96/tax2.tbb.htm.
12
This paragraph is based on Jan M. Rosen, “Electronic Filing For Tax Returns”, New York Times,
February 10, 1990.
13
“Impatience proves costly with ’instant tax refunds’ Fees of more than $100 aren’t unusual”, Atlanta
Constitution, February 7, 1994
14
David Cay Johnston, “IRS and Lender Settle Dispute on Refunds,” New York Times, March 4, 1995.
15
Note that even if we add the administrative costs to the IRS (estimated at around 1% of EITC benefits)
to the above mentioned costs related to the preparation of returns, the total costs of EITC still compare
very favorably to the administrative costs of, for example, AFDC (Liebman, 1998, estimated in 1995 at 16%
of benefits paid). Even if we only use as a base of this calculation the 50% of EITC claimants who e-file, we
are left with a number smaller than 10% of the total spending on the program.

8

1999 zip codes with a share of EITC recipients greater than 30% had on average 15 EROs
per 10,000 taxpayers, while those with the share below 5% had on average 10 EROs per
10,000 taxpayers. They also estimate that almost half of 1999 EITC dollars involved RALs.
The importance of IRS cooperation in securing Refund Anticipation Loans was stressed
by the industry. When the IRS eliminated the Direct Deposit Indicator and announced
that it will send refunds directly to taxpayers in November of 1994,16 some experts in
the industry predicted that delinquency rate on RAL will increase from the extreme low
of 1% to as much as 20% to 40%.17 There is evidence that electronic filing and Refund
Anticipation Loans played an important role for tax preparation companies. On the day
of the 1994 announcement that the IRS will stop providing the Direct Deposit Indicator
to e-filers, shares of H&R Block fell by 17%.18 Similarly, RALs and similar quick refund
products contributed 29.8% of total revenue for Jackson Hewitt, the second largest firm in
the market.19
The introduction of electronic filing as a new technology for tax preparation had a large
effect on this particular industry. Thus, the founder of Jackson Hewitt was “mapping the
company’s expansion quite deliberately over the years to the IRS’s test sites for its e-filing
program [and] the plan helped make Jackson Hewitt, now a leader in providing electronic
tax services, the second largest tax preparation company in the nation.”20
Similarly, the introduction of state electronic filing provided an additional incentive for
tax preparers to provide e-filing services because it introduced the possibility of going allelectronic, reducing the paperwork and increasing the size of potential refund for the purpose
of offering RALs. Benefits from electronic filing, such as speedy refunds, are also naturally
increased from the point of view of the taxpayer when two rather than one returns can be
filed in this way.21 The importance of the joint state/federal electronic filing programs in
inducing the tax preparation industry to adopt and popularize e-filing as a method for filing
federal tax returns has been repeatedly highlighted by the IRS. Thus in a recent report to
Congress, the Electronic Tax Administration Advisory Committee (2002) emphasized that
“the ability to simultaneously file both a federal and a state return adds significantly to the
value of e-filing for taxpayers and tax practitioners, and will lead to continued growth of
e-filing at the federal level”.
The significant role that electronic filing of state taxes plays for the tax preparation
16

This policy was in effect during the 1995 season (i.e., 1994 tax returns) only. We test the robustness of
our results to this policy change in the empirical section.
17
David Cay Johnston, “Bank Challenges I.R.S. on Refunds for Borrowers”, New York Times, February
22, 1995.
18
“H&R Block Stock Plunges On Electronic Filing Change”, New York Times, November 23, 1994.
19
Source: Tax Notes, Sept. 22, 2003, p. 1488.
20
Source: Tax Notes, Apr. 9, 2001, p. 189.
21
Another channel through which state electronic filing might have stimulated federal filing is through
advertisement campaigns. For example, the Wisconsin Department of Revenue actively advertised the
program to the tax preparers (see “Wisconsin: DOR Encourages Electronic Filing,” August 23, 1993, 5
State Tax Notes 403.

9

industry can be seen from the recent development of a free e-filing program of federal
taxes for low income people, a cooperation between the IRS and the Free File Alliance, an
organization of the tax preparation industry. Maybe not surprisingly, almost all participants
in the free federal e-file program charge a fee for e-filing of state taxes, equal in the case of
H&R to $24.95 for the 2003 filing season.22 Similarly, according to a representative from a
leading provider of electronic filing software for the tax preparation industry, the ability of
their product to handle state electronic filing allowed their “customers to get an early start
on their tax season and a jump on their competition.”23

3

A Model of the Effect of E-Filing on EITC Participation

In order to highlight how the introduction of electronic filing can affect EITC participation,
we present a simple model. Assume that there are many (heterogeneous) communities.
There are the same number of individuals in each community, normalized to equal one. In
community i, αi individuals are eligible for EITC and 1 − αi are not. The distribution of
communities is characterized by the c.d.f. F (α) and the total number of communities is
normalized to one. One straightforward interpretation of a community is as a geographical
unit, but it can also be interpreted as a particular customer base. The key assumption of
the model will be that it is costly for a tax preparer to reach a “community.” The model
applies both to the situation where a tax preparer makes a decision of whether to open a
new location and to a situation where a tax preparer decides to serve a wider customer base
from an existing location.
Preferences of individual j are characterized by cj − Lj where cj is the consumption
level and Lj measures the importance of liquidity constraints and therefore the value of
receiving the refund quickly. Fraction γ of eligible individuals are liquidity constrained,
so that Lj = L (where L is a constant) when they have to wait for a refund and Lj = 0
otherwise. The remaining individuals are not liquidity constrained, so that Lj = 0 regardless
of the timing of the refund. Consequently, the first type of individuals will decide to select
a speedy refund if its price is lower than L while others will never buy it.
The eligibles are not necessarily aware of the EITC. We assume that either everyone
in the community is aware of the program or nobody is. In order to stress the role of tax
preparers, we assume that a community is aware of the EITC if and only if a tax preparer
decides to locate there. A tax preparer decides to enter the community if it is profitable
to do so. Entry requires paying the fixed cost of f . Although in general tax preparers
provide many layers of service including preparation of the return, electronic filing and
refund anticipation loans, we simplify by assuming that the product that tax preparers sell
22

H&R Block advertisement, http://www.hrblock.com/taxes/partner/product.jsp?productId=54, retrieved from the World Wide Web May 18th , 2004.
23
Drake Software, source: www.taxingsubjects.com/archives/issue11 articles/artcl1.html, retrieved from the World Wide Web on May 18th , 2004

10

is a speedy refund. In practice, both electronic filing alone and e-filing coupled with RAL
fall into this category: both of these accelerate the refund — in the latter case the refund is
received immediately, in the former it is received significantly faster than if the return was
filed in the traditional way.24,25 Critically, we assume that following the entry taxpayers
who become aware of EITC and who value speedy refunds are not able to use alternative
means of obtaining the refund. As discussed earlier, it appears to be a fair description of
the situation throughout the 1990s, because electronic filing not through a commercial tax
preparer was next to impossible for anyone but fairly computer savvy individuals.
The marginal cost of providing a speedy refund in period t is given by dt . Once the
tax preparer decides to enter the community, the maximum price that can be charged for a
speedy refund is L — the value of the refund to liquidity constrained taxpayers. When the
price is lower than L, all liquidity constrained taxpayers will decide to purchase the refund.
Given the price pi ≤ L of the speedy refund, the tax preparers’ profit in community i is
equal to πt (pi ) = (pi − dt )αi γ − f . There will be entry to the community whenever profits
at the maximum feasible price of L are positive:
πt (L) ≥ 0

=⇒

αi ≥

f
≡ ω(dt )
γ(L − dt )

(1)

Given the cost of dt , there will be entry and therefore the community will be aware of the
EITC for sufficiently large values of αi , i.e. the ones that exceed ω(dt ). Clearly, ω 0 (dt ) > 0.
Therefore, when the cost of a speedy refund goes down, the threshold for entry goes down
as well and tax preparers enter additional communities.
Proposition 1. Suppose that dt+1 < dt . Then EITC participation in year t + 1 is higher by
β(dt+1 , dt ) and the number of EITC participants who rely on tax preparer service increases
R ω(d )
by γβ(dt+1 , dt ), where β(d1 , d2 ) = ω(d21) dF (α).
Proof. Following theh decrease in the
 cost of a speedy refund, tax preparers enter communities with α ∈ ω(dt+1 ), ω(dt ) . The number of individuals in these communities is
given by β(dt+1 , dt ). Fraction γ of these individuals will purchase speedy refunds from tax
preparers.
The introduction of electronic filing corresponds to a reduction of the price of a refund.
As discussed above, filing a tax return electronically significantly reduces the time it takes to
24

In fact, using a tax preparer without e-filing may also be interpreted in a similar way: the reduced
likelihood of a mistake amounts to a higher probability that a refund will be received without a delay.
25
On its web page, H&R Block highlights the speed of receiving the refund as the critical factor in the
development of e-filing: “In a 1986 test with the IRS, H&R Block filed 22,000 returns electronically from
two sites. The test was a success: Electronic filing significantly reduced the amount of time required for a
taxpayer to receive a refund. More than a decade later, H&R Block’s trademarked “Rapid Refund” service
has become synonymous with electronic filing. Now, the company files nearly half of the total number
of returns filed electronically with the IRS.” (http://www.hrblock.com/presscenter/about/history.jsp,
accessed March 1st , 2004.)

11

receive the refund both due to faster processing by the IRS and due to the reduced likelihood
of mistakes. Second, providing a loan toward a future refund became much less risky due to
the IRS providing a debt indicator and making it possible to deposit the refund directly to
the creditor’s bank account, and the development of cooperative agreements among banks
that facilitate identifying cheaters. The cost is further reduced when it is possible to file both
state and federal tax electronically. The model predicts, therefore, that the introduction
of electronic filing will increase the number of EITC recipients. However, only fraction γ
of them will rely on tax preparers. The activity of tax preparers has a spillover effect of
informing the remaining 1 − γ of population about the EITC.
The model highlights two important aspects of the institutional environment that are
important for increased participation in the program and these facts fit well with the actual
developments in the United States in the 1990s. First, tax preparers have to be able to
provide a product that is valued by low-income individuals. In the context of EITC, this
product is the quick refund. As discussed earlier, the marginal cost of providing a quick
refund was reduced significantly due to the introduction of electronic filing of tax returns.
Second, because information about the existence of the program is non-excludable, the alternative means of obtaining the service provided by tax preparers (i.e., quick refund) must
be unavailable or at least costly. By making it difficult to file electronically other than
through a tax preparer, the IRS guaranteed that this condition was met. It is the combination of these two assumptions that leads to an increase in participation, as demonstrated
by Proposition 1.

4

Data and empirical specification

Our main sources of data are the annual public use samples of federal income tax returns
(“Tax Model Files”) issued by the Statistics of Income (SOI) division of the IRS and available from the NBER.26 These samples are available for most years between 1960 and 1999
(with the exception of 1961, 1963 and 1965). Our study period starts in 1988, the first year
for which our dataset includes information on whether a tax return was filed electronically,
and stops in 1999, the latest year for which the data is available. The size of yearly samples
varies between 90,0000 and 130,000 observations, with between 13,000 and 32,000 observations having adjusted gross income below 30,000.27 The public use files contain most of
the information from federal tax returns, but no other information.28 For example, we can
observe the state of residence, the EITC status and payment, information on whether a professional was involved in preparing the return, the electronic filing indicator, adjusted gross
26

The documentation for this dataset can be accessed at www.nber.org/taxsim.
In this dataset high income individuals are oversampled.
28
Some information (including state of residence) is blurred or erased for high-income (above $200 thousand) taxpayers to protect taxpayer confidentiality. Since we are interested in the low income group only,
this is not a major problem.
27

12

income, filing status and the number of dependents. We use sampling weights provided by
the SOI.
We aggregate all information by state and income categories described below rather
than using individual level data. The main reason for this approach is that we doubt the
validity of the assumption that our samples are identical from one year to the next. In fact,
previewing our results, we find that the most important channel of increased participation is
through an increase in the number of tax filers: some individuals who used not to file a tax
return started to do so after electronic filing was introduced. Furthermore, the existence of
an electronic filing program varies only by year and state so that our source of identification
is not compromised by aggregation. The standard argument for using individual level
data is to control for observable individual characteristics. As we have already mentioned,
our dataset contains very limited background information about filers. Moreover, of the
variables included in the data, it is difficult to think of an observable personal characteristic
that would not be endogenous: even demographic characteristics such as marital (filing)
status or the number of children as reported on the tax return are likely to be responsive to
EITC considerations because they affect eligibility and generosity of benefits. Furthermore,
the response on the filing/non-filing status makes the distribution of these characteristics
endogenous even in the absence of taxpayers’ attempts to game the system.
Over the twelve year long period (1988-1999) the fifty states plus the District of Columbia
result in 612 cells. We usually use fewer observations because in our main specifications
we are not using states without their own income tax. The Tax Model Data is designed
to be a representative sample of tax filers. We compared estimates of the number of EITC
recipients as well as the number electronic filers by tax preparation status to the totals
published by the IRS and they closely match.
We divided taxpayers into income categories based on their AGI.29 Both adjusted gross
income and earned income have to be below the relevant threshold (depending on the
number of children and filing status) to be eligible for the EITC. All our dollar figures
are expressed in 2000 dollars and adjusted for inflation. The maximum threshold between
1988 and 1999 was $31,794 (in real 2000 dollars). The maximum threshold for childless
individuals was $10,597. Because the credit for childless individuals was introduced in
the middle of our sample, in 1994, our major analysis is performed on the $10,597-$31,794
category that excludes childless EITC recipients. We refer to this category as “10-30K”. We
also present some results based on the $0-$10,597 category (and call it the 0-10K category)
and divide the 10-30K category into two brackets by splitting it at $20,000, thus creating
29

The dataset contains a measure of the Earned Income, constructed by the SOI. Although taxpayers do
not have to report their Earned Income directly, they need to determine it for the purpose of establishing
eligibility and computation of the credit on the so-called EIC form. This form does not have to be submitted
with the tax returns. We found that the constructed earned income measure does not match closely with
the size of the EITC refund. It is also not available for non-EITC recipients. The AGI does not suffer from
these problems.

13

two additional income categories called the “10-20K” and “20-30K” categories. Finally we
look at the whole category of individuals below $31,794 (“0-30K”). All EITC recipients in
our dataset are included in this last category.
The major reason for this approach is to better account for changes in the criteria
for receiving the EITC. The upper bound of earned income for receiving EITC benefits
varied between $26,892 and $31,794 of real 2000 dollars. Since 1994, childless individuals
are also eligible for receiving EITC benefits. The maximum income for receiving these
types of benefits varied between $10,464 and $10,596. Because our dataset does not contain
information about the number of children that are qualifying for EITC purposes, we are not
able to precisely distinguish between different categories of EITC filers.30 Changes in the
number of low income EITC recipients are likely to be to a large extent driven by altered
eligibility criteria. Dividing the sample into income groups allows us to isolate the impact of
these changes. This approach will also make it possible to study potential shifting between
income categories.

4.1

Summary Statistics

The first four columns of Table 1a present the mean number of people who claim EITC on
their federal tax return by year and income category for the period 1988-1999. The data
shows an increase in the penetration of the program during this period from 10% to 16%
(an increase from 11 to 19 million). The table also highlights the major federal expansions
of the EITC program in 1993 and shows that its effect is in fact limited to the 0-10K
category.31 The following four columns of Table 1a present analogous statistics for electronic
filers. Although introduced in 1986, this federal program grew slowly in the first years
after implementation so that by 1990 less than 10% of tax returns were filed electronically.
Federal electronic filing grew steadily in the 1990’s. One notable but complicating feature
of the trend in electronic filing is the temporary fall between 1993 and 1994. Although the
program was expanded at the same time, the source of the drop is due to attempts by the
IRS to reduce cheating.32 The measures involved both administrative requirements, such
as the requirement to include the qualifying child’s Social Security number on the return,
as well as reduced cooperation with electronic returns originators. This change stopped
30

We have attempted to classify taxpayers into different categories based on the size of credit. We were
not always able to reconcile the amount of the credit with taxpayers income under any of the possible EITC
claiming categories, although we were able to determine it for most of the taxpayers. We will show some
results based on this classification as our robustness checks.
31
The increase in participation following the 1993 expansion is mostly due to extending eligibility to
childless individuals. The total number of EITC recipients increased from 15.1 to 19 million between 1993
and 1994. In our 10-30K category that does not include childless individuals, the number of EITC returns
increased from 10.0 to 10.3 million between 1993 and 1994, while the number of returns in the 0-10K category,
that includes all of the childless EITC recipients, increased from 5.1 to 8.6 million.
32
Table 1a demonstrates that this drop is most pronounced in the 10-30K income category that does not
include newly eligible recipients.

14

the growth of e-filing for one year only. Furthermore, this change was likely perceived as
temporary because the IRS had promised to facilitate usage of RALs in the future even
before the end the same tax season. 33 Because this event falls exactly in the middle of our
sample, we are not able to concentrate on years solely before or solely after it, but we will
carefully investigate to make sure that this event is not behind our results.34
Trends in electronic filing by income category over this period are particularly interesting. For income groups in the 0-30K category, the proportion of electronic filers is higher
throughout this period indicative of the fact that poorer people are more likely to file electronically. The proportion of electronic filers in the higher income groups is generally below
10% throughout this period with the exception of the period 1997-1999 when on-line filing becomes a popular method of filing. Figure 1 shows the overall trends in the major
variables.
The last four columns of Table 1a summarize the proportion of tax returns that were
completed with the help of a paid tax preparer by income brackets and over time. Somewhat
surprisingly, the average number of people relying on outside help in preparing their tax
returns is around 50% and comparable across income groups. Perhaps this reflects the
balancing of two separate effects: people in lower income groups have a harder time filling
out their returns without help from preparers but people with higher incomes have more
complicated returns. However, the lower income groups experienced the largest uptake in
relying on tax professionals and this increase is likely the result of the expansions of the
EITC program during this period.
The extent of reliance on professional tax services among EITC claimants is described in
Table 1b. Among EITC recipients, the proportion of EITC claims submitted electronically
is large, growing over time and averages about 30%. The proportion of EITC recipients who
do not prepare their own tax returns is also increasing and exceeding 60% by the end of the
period. These trends for the 10-30K category are depicted in Figure 2. In conclusion, these
summary statistics provide strong evidence that people in income groups that claim EITC
on their federal tax returns are very likely to submit their tax returns electronically and
usually with the help of a tax preparer. Therefore any policy intervention that would reduce
the cost of filing electronically, as is the case with the introduction of electronic filing of
state taxes discussed above, could potentially have an effect on the number of EITC claims.

4.2

Empirical Strategy

We use information provided by the IRS to code the existence of a program allowing electronic filing of state income taxes and to date the introduction of such programs.35 We
33

David Cay Johnston, “IRS and Lender Settle Dispute on Refunds,” New York Times, March 4, 1995.
One might also note that there is no similar effect for EITC claims. Table 1a shows that there was
virtually no change in the EITC claims between 1993 and 1994 for the 10-30K category.
35
http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-utl/state2.pdf, accessed December 15, 2003.
34

15

verified this information (and corrected when necessary) against the IRS press releases.36
Of the fifty states and the District of Columbia, nine do not have a state income tax:
Alaska, Florida, Nevada, New Hampshire, South Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Washington
and Wyoming. In addition, two states North Dakota and Ohio introduced electronic filing
in 1999, the last year for which the data are available, whereas Hawaii and Vermont only
adopted this procedure in 2001. Of the remaining 38 states, six states (California, Illinois,
Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts and Minnesota) first introduced their own independent
program for electronic submission of state taxes but the electronic submission was not done
jointly with the federal returns. The remaining states introduced joint electronic filing of
federal and state income tax returns, under the IRS supervised Federal/State Electronic
Filing Program. Of the six “independent” states Illinois and Maryland joined the StateFed
program in 1995 while the four other states continue their separate programs.
Table 1c shows the timing of introduction of the electronic filing programs. In almost
all cases, in the year of the introduction the program was tested on a small population and,
therefore, our treatment variable is equal to one if the given year is strictly greater than
the year shown in the table.37 There is substantial variation in the timing of state e-filing
programs. Minnesota introduced its program in 1989, while South Carolina, Maryland
and Illinois did so in 1990 (of these, only South Carolina’s program was a part of the
Federal/State Electronic Filing Program). Another 4 states implemented the program in
1991, 10 in 1992, 8 in 1993 and 7 in 1994. Implementation in the remaining nine states was
spread over the following six years, with Vermont and Hawaii adopting in 2001.38
Our identification strategy uses the variation resulting from the staggered timing of
the introduction of electronic filing of state taxes as a way to estimate the effects of these
programs on electronic filing of federal income taxes and its impact on federal EITC participation. Furthermore, we are also interested in understanding to what extent any potential
increases in EITC uptake are explained by noncompliance. Our key identifying assumption is that once we include controls, the timing of the introduction of the state electronic
filing programs is not correlated with other factors that might have an effect on our outcome variables. Figure 3 shows estimates of non-participation rates in 1996 as estimated
by the Internal Revenue Service (2002) against the timing of the introduction of the state
electronic filing programs. There is no obvious relationship between the two variables and
there is also very significant variation in non-participation rates suggesting that the nonparticipation rates were unrelated to the decision to introduce a state e-filing program. The
non-participation rate for states treated pre-1996 should be affected due to early introduction of the programs, obscuring the interpretation of this picture. However the remaining
36

Available from www.unclefed.com
The table also shows the year of introduction of state TeleFiling programs and the timing of joint
Federal/State Programs.
38
As a robustness check, we also perform our analysis by defining all states without a state income tax as
never treated. Alternatively, we also define our treatment as the introduction of the Federal/State Electronic
Filing Program since this program is arguably uniformly applied across states.
37

16

large variation in the non-participation rates suggests that the pre-existing differences are
not likely to explain the timing of the programs. Similarly, we plot in Figure 4 the average
number of EITC recipients by state in 1989 against the timing of the state electronic filing
programs and also find no visible relation between these two variables.
One way to test the identifying assumption is to study if the timing of the state programs
is related to any trends in our variables of interest. To preview our results, we show in
Figures 5a, 5b, 6a, 6b that once controls are included in the regression framework, the timing
of state electronic filing programs is not related in a systematic way to trends in electronic
filing of federal returns prior to implementation or to trends in EITC participation. This
would be the case in a situation in which state electronic filing is implemented only after
federal electronic filing was increasing for other reasons.
We estimate OLS regressions of the following form:
outcomest = β0 +

X

i
αi statef ilingst
+ β1 δs + β2 τt + β3 tδs + st ,

(2)

i

where outcomest is one of our dependent variables of interest (usually, electronic filers or
EITC claimants), measured in logs or shares for each year and state cell in a given income
category. The variables statef iling i are a set of dummy variables equal to one if a state had
adopted state electronic filing i years ago39 and δs and τt are a set of dummy variables for
state and year respectively. Our preferred specification also controls for state-specific trends
(tδs ), which should account for other unobservable factors that might be slowly changing at
the state level over time. We often restrict our specifications to include only the treatment
dummy indicating whether a given state has an electronic filing program for state income
taxes (it corresponds to the assumption that αi = αj for any i, j > 0).
In our analysis, we run a number of alternative specifications in order to test the validity
of our results. We present figures based on the models that include both leads and lags
in order to better understand whether we appropriately control for any trends in the data
before the introduction of joint electronic filing. Since in our unbalanced panel not all
states have data available for each year relative to the implementation date of electronic
filing of state taxes, the number of states identifying a particular statef iling i coefficient
is not constant and these compositional changes could give rise to possible trends in the
data around the implementation date. Therefore, we also include specifications using a
“balanced” panel of 35 states that have at least 3 years of post treatment data. Finally
we provide a number of additional robustness checks: we define treatment based on the
timing of the joint federal/state filing programs rather than own independent electronic
filing system, we code states without a state income tax as “always treated”, we change
the income brackets of interest, and we also ran our main specifications omitting individual
states and years.
39

We restrict i not bigger than 4 and define the fourth dummy variable to equal one if the state was
treated four or more years ago.

17

In order to check the robustness of our results, we also allow for the possibility of a
different regime pre-1994, when the IRS tightened its enforcement of EITC and post-1996
following the welfare reform. We do that by introducing the interactions of state fixed effects
with pre-1994 and post-1996 dummy respectively. The tightening of enforcement could have
affected states where tax preparers were more prevalent more than other states and this
could bias our estimated coefficients. Furthermore, this approach allows us to potentially
check whether cheating is an important component of the effect we identify. The welfare
reform might have increased labor force participation (see Blank, 2002, for a review of the
literature) and therefore the pool of potential EITC recipients. Because reforms were statespecific, it is possible that these effects are not accounted for by the inclusion of year fixed
effects. If the parameters of state welfare reforms and therefore labor participation response
were coincidentally correlated with the introduction of electronic filing programs, this could
lead to a spurious relationship of EITC participation and the timing of state electronic filing
programs.
We define our outcome variables in two possible ways: shares or logs. Shares are defined
by dividing the number of individuals with a particular characteristic in the category of
interest by the total number of returns filed in the state during the given year. In other
words, these are shares of all tax filers. As a result, these numbers are directly comparable
and additive across income categories. This approach will make it straightforward to analyze
flows between income categories.
Defining our variables in logs is complicated by the fact that in the beginning of the
period (1988-1990) we have a small number of zeros in the sample.40 Therefore, in order
to take advantage of the convenient percentage interpretation of logged variables, for any
variable involving electronic filing we take logs of the number of individuals plus 1% of
state tax returns. This adjustment is mechanically customized to the state’s population and
addresses the problem of zeros. Some changes in our variables of interest may simultaneously
correspond to changes in the number of tax returns in a given state but will increase the
sensitivity of our variable to such changes by at most 1%. This adjustment should not
therefore affect our results in a quantitatively important way but it allows us to keep our
sample balanced.41
Throughout the remaining sections, we present results for both shares and logs. Depending on the question, the interpretation of one measure may be easier than the other.
In the case of the log specification, we either implicitly assume that the percentage effect
of treatment is uniform across states or alternatively we evaluate the average percentage
treatment. In the case of share specification, we make the corresponding assumption in
40

The exact breakdown of the number of zeros in a given year is as follows: 20 states in 1988, 2 in 1989, 1
in 1990 and 1991 and no zero values afterwards. As discussed later in the text, results are robust to dropping
zeros or starting in 1991.
41
Changes in the size of this adjustment within a reasonable range do not affect our results in an important
way. Also, as discussed later, dropping early years (when zeros occur) from the sample does not affect the
results.

18

terms of the share of state’s taxpayers. An added advantage of presenting the results in
both shares and logs is that we are providing a robustness check of the functional form
assumptions of our regression specifications.
Bertrand et al. (2004) have recently pointed out that due to error terms in empirical
frameworks similar to ours having unknown autocorrelation structure, regular standard errors are potentially very significantly biased (usually downwards). We address this problem
by reporting results from four different approaches. Our baseline standard errors are based
on the standard bootstrap procedure (using 10,000 iterations). Additionally, whenever we
include the dummy for the presence of a state e-filing program, we report p-values from
the block bootstrap procedure,42 the p-values based on the robust (“sandwich”) covariance
matrix estimator that allows for an unknown form of heteroskedasticity, the p-values based
on the estimate of the robust covariance matrix allowing for a general form autocorrelation
(i.e., clustered at the state level) and p-values from the randomization test.43 Our major
conclusions do not depend on the choice of the approach; due to the relatively small sample size we concentrate on bootstrapped standard errors that are usually (but not always)
smaller than the (asymptotically consistent but with unknown small sample properties)
clustered errors and larger than the robust ones.

5

Results: Effects on Electronic Filing and EITC Claims

5.1

Electronic Filing

In our basic analysis we concentrate on the 10-30K income category. The primary motivation for this restriction, as discussed earlier and presented in Table 1a, is that in 1994, the
EITC eligibility criteria for very low-income individuals were extended and the number of
EITC claims in the 0-10K category jumped discontinuously. No similar complications are
present for the 10-30K category.
We show the results of the effect of the introduction of electronic filing programs for state
taxes on the number of federal tax returns filed electronically estimated using specification
of the type described by equation 2 in Table 2a (using shares) and Table 2b (using logs). In
column (1) we show a specification allowing for the set of four post-reform dummy variables,
while in column (2) we show the results of a specification that further restricts the effect of
42

P-values are based on bootstrapping the studentized coefficient on the treatment dummy. As discussed
by Horowitz (2000), if possible, one should bootstrap a “pivotal” statistic such as the t-value rather than
bootstrapping directly non-pivotal statistics such as a regression parameter.
43
We implement the randomization test by randomly reassigning the actual dates of treatment across states
and re-estimating the same specification. The p-value is the fraction of estimates (based on 10000 draws)
with the absolute value that was higher than the baseline one. The randomization p-values address the
critique of Bertrand et al. (2004) head on by showing the fraction of similar (artificial) experiments that
would result in even higher estimates. While this approach can mechanically assure the right size of the
test, its results cannot be interpreted in a standard way. See Kennedy (1995) for the discussion of their use
in econometrics.

19

the introduction of state electronic filing to be constant over time. Columns (3) and (4) are
similar to (1) and (2) but allow for state specific linear time trends in electronic filing. In
our preferred specifications which include state-specific time trends, we find that there is a
large and statistically significant increase in the number of federal electronic filers following
the introduction of such state programs.44
The share specification indicates that (in an average state) an additional 0.7 to 1 percentage points of the population files electronically, depending on whether or not state-specific
time trends are included. The log specification that allows for linear trends predicts a 10%
increase in e-filing following the introduction of the program. These effects are large and
statistically significant.
In columns 5-8 of tables 2a and 2b, we run the same specifications as in columns 1-4 but
we restrict ourselves only to those states which have at least three years of post treatment
data. The results from these specifications in which the first three statef iling dummies are
identified using a constant number of states, are very similar to our earlier results. They
suggest that our findings are not driven by compositional changes that might arise in an
unbalanced panel. The results with state-specific time trends are very close to the ones in
the baseline specification. Leaving out state trends has only a minor effect on the estimated
coefficients. In the final specification we additionally include states without the income
tax.45 Given that the treatment for these states does not vary during the period, these
additional observations are solely used to identify the year effects. This extension has no
impact on the estimated coefficients that remain significant and very close to the values
estimated based on the sample of states with income tax.
These results provide clear evidence that the state electronic filing indeed had a significant impact on the number of federal returns that are filed electronically and thus we
conclude that these changes provide an opportunity to identify the economic impact of
electronic filing in general. One technical observation is that state-specific time trends play
an important role in the log-specification. This is not particularly surprising because it is
certainly possible that the number of e-filers grows at a different speed in different states
either because of differences in the rates of population growth or because of differences in
the composition of population that affect the rate of adoption of this approach. We pursue
our further analysis while allowing for state-specific trends in all of our specifications.46
Table 3 presents the results for other income categories. The effect of electronic filing is
44

In fact of the specifications that we discuss in tables 2a and 2b the only insignificant result is the
regression for the logs that do not allow for state-specific time trends. This is the most questionable
specification because electronic filing is heavily trending during this period and assuming no differences
in trends across states is not appealing.
45
It is easy to verify that the results must be identical regardless of whether these states are assumed to
be always or never treated.
46
This approach occasionally makes a difference for our results in log specifications that involve dependent
variables related to e-filing. The case for using state-specific time trends in the share specifications is weaker
and results with and without them are quite similar.

20

significant only in the 10-20K category. The lack of response for the wealthier individuals is
not particularly surprising because the impact of changes in electronic filing was unlikely to
have played a significant role for them. The value of receiving a refund quickly most likely
falls with income and therefore it appears unlikely that many higher income individuals
would be motivated to e-file by the introduction of state e-filing. The informational aspects
that we highlighted in the discussion of the tax preparation industry have very limited
applicability in the context of higher income individuals who file their taxes anyway. Finally,
the alternative methods of e-filing, such as filing through own software from home in the mid1990s or using the Internet in the late 1990s, are most likely driven by other considerations
such as being technology savvy (Goolsbee, 2002).
It is more surprising to observe that e-filing in neither the 0-10K category nor the
20-30K category appears responsive to the policy changes. Regardless of the reason (one
problem is a discrete change in eligibility for the 0-10K category in 1994), it suggests that
any response to treatment of our other variables of interest in these categories (such as
EITC claims) should be treated with caution and could indicate that the relationships we
estimate are spurious. However, there are possible explanations for a lack of response in
e-filing in these categories that is consistent with observing effects in the other variables.
As an example, it may be that increased e-filing in, say, the 0-10K category is coupled with
behavioral responses that lead many individuals to shift to the 10-20K category. Such a
behavioral response could in principle lead to e-filing being relatively stable, but it would
simultaneously lead to the a reduction in the number of individuals in the 0-10K category.
We will return to this issue in the next section. Finally, the EITC-related motives for e-filing
are strongest in the 10-20K category, because it includes the plateau region where benefits
are maximized.

5.2

EITC Claims

Next we turn to the impact on EITC claims. Tables 4a and 4b present results for the share
and log specifications respectively. These tables follow the same pattern as the tables for
electronic filing. The results show the existence of a large positive effect of our treatment
on the number of people claiming EITC on their federal returns and, similarly to the effect
on electronic filing, this effect persists for the first four years after implementation of these
programs. These are the main results of this paper. The following analysis will be devoted
to making sure that they are robust and to understanding the economic responses behind
them.
The results in Tables 4a are only slightly sensitive to the inclusion of state-specific
time trends and trends play no role in the log specification presented in Table 4b.47 The
results using a “balanced” panel of all states are very similar to the baseline ones. The
47

Contrary to e-filing, EITC claims are not strongly trending and therefore state differences in the rate
of growth of EITC claims are not too important. Aggregate trends appear to control appropriately for any
time effects

21

final specification shows the instrumental variable estimate of the effect of e-filing on EITC
participation using the four statefiling dummies as instruments. The instrumental variable
estimate in the share specification has a straightforward interpretation: 77% of an increase
in e-filing due to the introduction of e-filing programs corresponds to new EITC participants.
The estimate from the log specification suggest that between 1988 and 1999 a 1% increase
in the number of e-filers leads, on average, to a 1% increase in the number of EITC claims.
This estimate should be interpreted as the average treatment effect over the period. It
should also be noted that in all specifications in this paper states are weighted equally.48
In Table 5, we present the results by income categories. Consistently with the findings
for electronic filing, we find no evidence of response in neither the 0-10K category nor 20-30K
category. We also consider the impact of the treatment on the number of individuals not
receiving EITC. We find that the number of such individuals (in the log specification) does
not respond to the treatment while their share as a fraction of the total population appears
to decrease (albeit the coefficients are not significant). This suggests that the increase in
EITC participation that we find is driven by new filers rather than by the existing regular
filers who were previously unaware of the program.49
Since our identification strategy relies on the differential timing of the implementation
of these programs, we also added four leads to our specification in order to better understand if the shift in electronic filing and EITC claims happens around the time of program
introduction. The coefficient estimates for these regressions, which use our preferred specification that includes state-specific time trends from the unbalanced panel, can be easily
presented graphically. Figures 5a and 5b plots the coefficients from the regressions using
electronic filing as the dependent variable both for the log and the share specification, while
Figure 6a and 6b does the same for EITC claims. The graphs are normalized relative to
the zero coefficient on the omitted dummy for the year immediately preceding treatment
(year zero); and they also include confidence intervals (at the 90 percent level) for these
coefficients from the regressions. Graphs for electronic filing show estimates for the whole
population, the 0-30K, 0-10K and 10-30K category. There is a clear pattern of the effect
at time zero for both 10-30K and 0-30K categories, and although confidence intervals are
generally large (unsurprisingly, restricting instead lags to zero and leads to be equal to each
other as in our tables increases precision of estimates), many of the post treatment dummies are marginally significant at the 90 percent level. The number of electronic filers in
the period prior to the implementation is constant and statistically indistinguishable from
zero.
Similar patterns are evident in Figures 6a and 6b, which plot EITC claims around
program implementation. Despite relatively wide confidence intervals, the pattern of an
48

We found some evidence that the effect is stronger for smaller states.
Because the denominator represents the sum of filers in all income categories, the presence of new filers
increases the denominator and, if the number of non-recipients of EITC stays constant, it should decrease
their share.
49

22

increase in EITC claims following time zero is visible for the 10-30K category and, somewhat
less clearly, for the 0-30K category. There is no evidence of a similar response for either the
0-10K category or the non-EITC participants. These figures substantiate the main result
of our analysis: the introduction of electronic state income tax filing programs resulted in
more people claiming the Earned Income Tax Credit.
In Tables 6a and 6b we present a few additional specification checks. A few major events
affecting the low-income individuals took place in the 1990s. The EITC was expanded twice
during the 1990s and in 1996 the welfare system was overhauled. Aggregate changes such as
the expansions of the EITC in 1991 and 1994 should be in principle captured by year effects.
We test whether it is so. EITC benefits were increased as of 1991. The first column shows
our specification estimated using observations starting in 1991. Despite reduced number
of observations, the estimated coefficients on e-filing and EITC claims remain significant
and of similar magnitude as those estimated using the whole sample.50 The following two
columns present two attempts to control for the impact of the 1996 welfare reform. States
designed their own programs meeting TANF requirements between September of 1996 and
March of 1997. These changes likely affected labor supply and participation and therefore
EITC eligibility of low income individuals (Blank, 2002). These effects were state-specific
and therefore may not be appropriately controlled for by year fixed effects. We re-estimate
our baseline specification on the pre-1997 observations (column 2) and, as an alternative, we
include the interactions of state fixed effects with the post-1996 dummy that are supposed
to control for state-specific shifts in the number of eligible EITC claimants (column 3).
Neither of these changes affected our estimates. Finally, Schoeni and Blank (2000) argue
that state-specific welfare waivers passed in the early 1990s affected labor force participation
and that the incremental impact of the 1996 reform was small. We have re-estimated our
specifications while controlling for the pre-1997 presence of a state waiver (column 4). Our
results were virtually unaffected even though the state waiver dummy had an effect on EITC
participation but not on e-filing. The introduction of waivers is a relevant consideration for
studying EITC participation, but appears orthogonal to the introduction of state e-filing
changes.
Two major EITC-related events took place in 1994: the program was expanded and the
IRS undertook efforts to reduce cheating. In particular, the IRS began to require that taxpayers include the Social Security number of a qualifying child and reduced its cooperation
with tax preparers. There is anecdotal evidence that this change significantly reduced the
number of (fraudulent) EITC claims, although no strong effect on EITC participation can
be detected in Table 1a. However, as discussed earlier, this change significantly affected the
number of e-filers.
50

This specification also addresses an earlier concern regarding the existence of a number of zeros in the
early years of the sample, since all but one occur before 1991. In another specification that we do not report
in the table, we dropped all the cells that have a value of zero and this change also did not affect our main
findings.

23

Since both of these events are aggregate, the inclusion of year fixed effects should in
principle control for their impact.51 In addition we pursue two additional specification
checks. In column 5 we allow for state-specific pre-1994 dummies to allow for a flexible
regime change in 1994. This change has a relatively minor impact on our estimates. In
column 6, we allow for the interaction of the treatment dummy with a pre-1994 dummy to
allow for the possibility of a change in the effect of treatment. Given that many opportunities
for tax evasion were eliminated in 1994, one might expect that the effect of the treatment is
stronger pre-1994 if tax evasion was an important part of the response. The interaction is
always insignificant and, if anything, it has a negative impact on EITC participation.52 This
specification provides little support for the importance of tax evasion in our results (although
it does not eliminate it as an explanation), but it strongly suggests that, despite their
magnitude, the 1994 events are appropriately accounted for in our baseline specification.
In column 7 of Tables 6a and 6b we investigate the relevance of another 1994 event. As
a part of the IRS’s anti-fraud policy, the use of the Direct Deposit Indicator was suspended
and IRS cooperation with the tax preparation industry was limited. This policy began to
be relaxed as early as in 1995. As explained earlier, this event increased the riskiness of
RALs and therefore might have led to a reduction in the attractiveness of electronic filing
services. We eliminated 1994 from our sample to test for the importance of this event and
it does not appear to have a quantitatively important effect. We interpret it as indicating
that year effects appropriately control for this event (i.e., that its impact did not vary in a
way that’s correlated with our treatment).
In column 8 we run our basic specification by defining treatment solely on whether
and when a state introduced the Federal/State Electronic Filing Program. As mentioned
earlier, we initially defined our treatment date as the year when a state first introduced
any state electronic filing program. While for most states the first such program was the
Federal/State Electronic Filing Program implemented in a uniform way in collaboration with
the IRS, a number of states (California, Illinois, Maryland, Massachusetts and Minnesota)
first introduced their own independent programs separate from the IRS, while Maine’s
first state electronic income tax filing program was TeleFiling. The results, based on these
particular IRS sponsored programs that arguably did not differ across states, are again very
similar to the other columns of the tables. In column 9, we control for the presence of a
state level EITC program and it appears to have no effect on federal EITC claims. Finally,
in column 10 we control for the possibility of TeleFiling which is an alternative to electronic
filing by a tax preparer. Returns filed through TeleFile are included in our measure of e-filing
and TeleFiling could only be used for non-complicated returns and did not allow for claiming
51

We attempted splitting the sample in 1994. These results were insignificant with point estimates that
were different from our baseline for both subsamples. However, both of them are based on only six years of
data and, furthermore, few states were treated post-1994.
52
The negative sign is consistent with the possibility that the lower number of e-filers pre-1994 corresponds
to a weaker effect of the introduction of state e-filing on EITC claims pre-1994.

24

EITC. States were introducing their own TeleFiling programs throughout the 1990s, but
usually much later than their regular e-filing programs. By 1995 only 3 states had the
program in place and 11 states were yet to implement the program in 2001. Unsurprisingly,
but very consistently with our story, we find that TeleFiling affects the number of returns
filed electronically. It does not however affect the number of EITC claims — an expected
finding given that TeleFiling cannot be used by taxpayers with dependents, who are the
only ones eligible for EITC in the 10-30K income category.
In other robustness tests (not shown in the paper), we dropped particular years or states
from our sample and found the main results unaffected by these changes. We also included
state labor force participation rates, the unemployment rate, the logarithm of employment
and crime rates as dependent variables and found no evidence that they respond to the
timing of state e-filing programs. This provides an added comfort that we are not picking
up the effect of some omitted variable that affected state socio-economic conditions in a
way correlated with the timing of our treatment.
In Table 7, we present a number of additional specifications intended to verify if the
pattern of increases in EITC claims is consistent with the electronic filing story. To do
so, we divide EITC recipients using two criteria: whether one used electronic filing and
whether a professional prepared the tax return. Any of these four categories is possible.
One should be reminded here that the electronic filing with a self-prepared return category
still corresponds to using a tax professional. In fact, such behavior is very common and
one could argue that this type of filing behavior should be most appealing to low income
individuals who want to minimize their cost but are interested in a quick refund. Our data
does not contain information about using a paid tax preparer for 1989 and 1990, and in
1988 there were very few e-filers; therefore, once the group of e-filers is split by the tax
preparation status, we end up with many zeros. Therefore, we pursue this analysis starting
with 1991.
The estimates for electronic filing and EITC based on this restricted sample which starts
in 1991 are presented in columns 1 and 2 of Table 7 and are very close to those based on the
full sample. In the following two columns of this table (3 and 4) we confirm that the whole
growth in EITC claims is due to e-filers. This provides further evidence consistent with
interpreting our estimates as the causal effect of changes in state electronic filing programs.
In columns 5 and 6 of Table 7 we decompose the effects by tax preparation status. There
is some evidence that the main source of growth in EITC claims are taxpayers who do not
rely on a paid tax preparer to fill out their tax return. As discussed earlier, this category
includes taxpayers who are choosing to only file electronically and who are an essential part
of our story. The remaining four columns present further decomposition by splitting the
sample four-ways. There is statistically significant evidence (in columns 7 of Table 7) of
the growth in EITC claims for the professional-help and e-filing group. Not surprisingly,
in column 8 of the same table, the number of taxpayers who use a paid tax preparer but
choose not to file electronically appears to decline (although the estimates are insignificant
25

in both specifications), suggesting that the introduction of state filing programs also might
have had an effect on how the existing customers of paid tax preparers file their taxes. The
estimate of an increase in the number of taxpayers who e-file and self-prepare their tax
returns is positive but insignificant. In the final column of Table 7, there is no statistically
significant evidence of an increase in EITC claims among taxpayers who file taxes fully on
their own.
If one took the (insignificant) coefficient of 0.225 in the share specification seriously, a
back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests that the spill-over effect (the informational/network
effect on taxpayers who learn about EITC but do not use a paid professional) was approximately 0.225/0.752 ≈ 30%.53

6

Discussion

6.1

The source of new claims

While our analysis so far has focused mainly on identifying the effect on electronic filing
and EITC claims of the introduction of state electronic filing, we did not address a number
of questions that are crucial for the understanding and interpretation of our results: (1)
Are they new filers of taxes or regular filers of taxes who did not claim EITC before? (2)
More generally, who are the new EITC claimers? (3) Are the new filers from families who
qualify for the program but for some reason did not claim the benefits they were entitled
to, or are they simply part of the potentially large number of cheaters who did not comply
with the eligibility criteria of the program?
We have seen before that there is no evidence of a reduction in the number of EITC
recipients in response to state electronic filing programs. The direct way of testing whether
the new EITC claimers are also new to filing federal taxes is to run our regression analysis
using the number of people filing. Simultaneously, this approach will allow us to address the
possibility of a behavioral response resulting in shifting across categories. Table 8 contains
the results of this exercise. The results are somewhat imprecise but supportive of the
hypothesis that the increase corresponds to new filers. The number of total tax recipients
in the 10-30K category increases by 3%, and is statistically significant at 10% level. This
is consistent with the hypothesis that the whole growth in claims is due to increased filing
by non-filers: given that the number of EITC recipients in this category varied between
twenty-one and twenty-six percent during the period and given the baseline estimate of the
impact on EITC participation of 12.6%, the corresponding increase in the number of tax
returns if all EITC claims are external should be between 2.6% and 3.3%.
There is also no evidence of a decrease in the number of filers in the 0-10K category
53

We also estimated the dynamics of the responses by category using specifications with leads and lags.
Estimates for these specifications were imprecise but not showing any evidence of pre-trends that would
suggest a misspecification.

26

refuting the possibility that the whole growth in EITC claims was just driven by the response
of lower income individuals motivated by the possibility of obtaining higher EITC benefits
and shifting to the 10-30K category. As a consistency check, there is also no evidence
that the number of returns for taxpayers with incomes above the EITC phase-out limit
responded to our treatment. The estimates based on the share specification are insignificant
but consistent with the ones based on logs. These results do not exclude the possibility that
there was indeed some behavioral response stimulated by the increased awareness of EITC
due to the introduction of electronic filing opportunities. The 10-20K category contains
the region where benefits are maximized. As a result, it is possible that claims increased
for non-filers who would belong to either of the three income categories, but that these
non-filers simultaneously responded by adjusting their incomes so that they fall into the
maximum benefit range.
The difference between the share estimates for the 10-30K category (approximately 0.6)
in Table 3 and the total effect on EITC claims (approximately 0.9), measures the number
of new EITC recipients who used to file their tax returns: the difference is about 0.3 and
it is 1/3 of the total increase in EITC claims. Given the lack of precision of estimates in
Table 3 this is only suggestive of the size of this type of response.

6.2

Cheating

Any increase in participation may be reflective of increased cheating. There are two different
margins on which cheating could operate. Cheaters may have come from either the pool
of filers or the pool of non-filers. Certain types of cheating by usual filers have observable
implications. Claiming ineligible children is the major source of noncompliance (Holtzblatt
and McCubbin, 2003). It may increase the number of children reported on the tax returns.
Another important aspect of non-compliance involves changing filing status. For example,
filing separately from the spouse as single or head of household (married filing separately
are not eligible for EITC) in many cases would lead to an increase in the EITC benefits,
but this is illegal. Nevertheless, to the extent that it takes place, one would expect, ceteris
paribus, a decrease in the number of joint filers.
We have already attempted two specification checks related to cheating in Tables 6a
and 6b: we found no evidence of a differential effect surrounding or following the 1994
change in enforcement policies. However, this is not a definitive finding, because it is
possible that these changes had a relatively uniform effect on tax fraud regardless of the
treatment status of the states.
We attempt to shed further light on the importance of cheating. In Table 9 we concentrate on the possibility of adjusting marital status in order to claim higher benefits. In
the first column we compare estimates for the total number of returns with the estimates
for the total number of people constructed by double-counting joint tax returns. If there is
cheating by manipulation of the filing status, we would expect the number of returns to in-

27

crease by more than the number of people. In the extreme case the number of people could
stay constant with the number of returns increasing. We find no such evidence: estimates
for the number of returns and the number of bodies are indistinguishable. In the following
three columns we decompose the change in the number of returns into the response of different filing categories to see if there are possible compositional shifts. The only category
that appears to be strongly responding are heads of households (although estimates are not
statistically significant), while none of the other coefficients is negative. Therefore, there is
little support for the possibility that taxpayers adjusted their filing status to claim higher
benefits. The following three columns show the results for the EITC recipients only. There
is evidence there that there was a significant growth in both the number of joint filers and
heads of household. There is no similar evidence for single EITC recipients, but it should
be noted that this group is somewhat peculiar: single (non head-of-household) filers can
receive EITC while in the 10-30K income category only if they have qualifying children.
Therefore, these are taxpayers who claim qualifying children for EITC purposes but not a
dependent exemption. One might have expected that cheaters would pursue this path, but
there is no evidence that this actually happened.
The comparison of estimates for the number of returns and the number of recipients by
marital status categories is revealing. While the number of EITC recipients who are jointly
filing increases, the total number of joint filers does not. Given no evidence of endogenous
changes in marital status, it suggests therefore that the new jointly filing EITC recipients
used to file in the past. This is in contrast to the estimates for heads of households: there is
a similar increase in the total number of taxpayers claiming this status and in the number
of EITC recipients that claim it. As a result, it appears that the EITC response may in fact
reflect both increased filing and learning by existing filers: the first effect applies to singles
with children while the latter is the domain of joint filers.
In Table 10 we investigate the possibility of cheating by claiming non-qualifying children.
The ideal measure for this purpose would be the number of qualifying children for EITC
purposes, but this measure is not available in our data. As mentioned earlier, different
qualifying criteria are used for EITC and tax exemption purposes. Nevertheless, if there is
systematic and large scale over-reporting of ineligible children we might expect this to be
accompanied by overstating dependent exemptions as well.
In the first column of Table 10, we investigate the effect of the treatment on the total
number of child exemptions. It is somewhat imprecisely estimated but relatively large
(and borderline significant in the log specification). The relevant reference point for this
coefficient is the increase in the number of tax returns reported in Table 9. The comparison
of the points estimates in the share specification suggests that the number of children
increases by slightly more than the number of tax returns. In other words, the additional
filers appear to have on average slightly more than one child. The log specifications suggest
that the number of children increases at the rate twice as large as the number of returns.
The following two columns show the impact on the number of children by the EITC
28

status. These results might be interpreted as suggesting that the increased EITC participation involved some reshuffling of children, potentially corresponding to cheating. The
estimated increase in the total number of children of EITC recipients is of the order of 1% of
the total number of returns. This estimate is higher than the increase in the total number
of child exemptions and, correspondingly, we observe a negative coefficient on the number
of children among the non-EITC recipients. Recall that the total number of non-EITC
recipients decreased slightly in the share specification and was flat in the log specification
(Table 5). A decrease in the number of children of non-EITC recipients would have to then
correspond to shifting of children to EITC recipients. Even though this is suggestive of
possible cheating, all of these estimates are insignificant and small relative to the increase
in the number of children among EITC recipients.
Our evidence on cheating can be summarized as follows. We did not find any evidence
of cheating by adjusting the marital status. However, the decomposition by marital status
allowed us to conclude that heads of households are the main pool of nonfilers contributing
to increased EITC participation. We also find some evidence of a smaller but statistically
significant effect on participation of joint filers who used to file their tax returns. We
also investigated whether there is any evidence of cheating by manipulating the number of
reported children. There is very weak evidence that the number of children of non-EITC
recipients decreases somewhat even though the number of non-EITC recipients is stable
(in the log specification). This is suggestive of potential shifting of children from nonEITC recipients to EITC recipients. However these results are not statistically significant.
Stressing this caveat, the point estimates would imply that 1/3 of newly reported tax
exemptions by EITC recipients are for children who would have been claimed by someone
on a tax return anyway. Recalling, however, that we have already seen that there is a
weak evidence of the existence of a group of joint filers who used to file and yet did not
apply for the EITC before state electronic filing programs were introduced, the reduction
in the number of children by non EITC recipients may be simply due to this group of filers
changing EITC status.
In the last three columns of Table 10, we split the sample of EITC recipients by the
number of children. We find that the new claimants are mostly taxpayers with only one
child. We conclude therefore by observing that a typical new EITC participant is a single
taxpayer with one child filing as a head of household who used not to file before, arguably
the type of person that government programs are trying to reach. While these findings
imply that, based on the available observable characteristics, the new filers of EITC claims
are fairly similar to existing filers, we cannot entirely rule out the possibility that a portion
of these new filers are in fact cheaters who did not comply with the criteria of the federal
EITC program.

29

7

Conclusions and Implications

Our analysis provided evidence that the introduction of electronic filing led to an increase in
EITC participation. We demonstrated this link by showing that the increase in both federal
electronic filing and EITC participation was much stronger in states that introduced the
possibility of electronic filing of state income tax returns. Furthermore, we suggest that
this effect have been driven by a response of the tax preparation industry. In our analysis
we provided a large number of specification checks to test the robustness of the results and
to rule out competing explanations, such as other welfare, EITC and IRS related reforms
implemented during the 1990’s.
Additionally, we find that increased EITC participation draws mostly from the pool of
non-filers: individuals who otherwise would not file their tax returns. We do not find any
major evidence suggesting that cheating is an important part of the effects that we estimate.
While fraud certainly still exists in the system, it does not appear that cheating was further
stimulated by state electronic filing opportunities.
We make three additional observations that follow from our results. First, while our
results point to a potential benefit of the decentralized tax preparation industry, the use of
RAL’s and the role of tax preparation industry remain controversial, because they reduce
the actual benefits received by low-income individuals. We do not provide any evidence
related to the costs of their activity, but only point out that these costs should be evaluated against benefits from increased participation and the costs of alternative means of
providing information about EITC, such as government-sponsored outreach efforts.54 A full
evaluation of the role of the tax preparation industry would require additional information,
such as medium and long term responses within the tax preparation industry, the change
of eligibility criteria over time as well as the size and composition of uninformed taxpayers.
Second, the results illustrate that complexity is a serious issue in the program and
tax design. More precise targeting of benefits requires increased complexity, but increased
complexity will make it less likely that intended recipients would be able to benefit. In this
sense, concerns about complexity (separately from traditional efficiency arguments) may
limit the extent of effective redistribution. On the positive side, our results suggest that
such trade-offs are likely sensitive to institutional and technological environments that are
subject to change.
Finally, our analysis provides a cautionary note to the studies that rely on repeated
cross-sections of taxpayers. We found that it is not prudent to assume that taxpayers in
every year are drawn from the same distribution. In particular, our results suggest that
during the 1990s the lower end of the distribution of individuals who are captured by tax
statistics expanded.

54

See Aizer (2004) for the evidence of effectiveness of state-run outreach and advertising campaigns in the
context of Medicaid.

30

References
Aizer, Anna, “Advertising, Medicaid and Child Health,” March 2004. Brown University,
mimeo.
Akerlof, George A., “The Economics of ”Tagging” as Applied to Optimal Income Tax,
Welfare Programs, and Manpower Planning,” American Economic Review, March 1978,
68 (1), 8–19.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan, “How Much Should
We Trust Differences-in-Differences Estimates?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 2004, 119 (1), 249–275.
Berube, Alan, Anne Kim, Benjamin Forman, and Megan Burns, “The Price of
Paying Taxes: How Tax Preparation and Refund Loans Erode the Benefits of the EITC,”
Survey Series, Center on Urban & Metropolitan Policy, The Brookings Institute and The
Progressive Policy Institute May 2002.
Blank, Rebecca M., “Evaluating Welfare Reform in the United States,” Journal of Economic Literature, December 2002, 40 (4), 1105–1166.
Currie, Janet, “The Take Up of Social Benefits,” Working Paper 10488, National Bureau
of Economic Research May 2004.
Davis, Shelley L., Unbridled Power: Inside the Secret Culture of the IRS, New York:
HarperBusiness (HarperCollins), 1998.
Electronic Tax Administration Advisory Committee, “Annual Report to Congress,”
Publication 3415 (Rev. 6-2002) June 30 2002. Retrieved May 17th , 2004 from the World
Wide Web: http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/p3415.pdf.
Erard, Brian and Chih Chin Ho, “Searching for Ghosts: Who Are the Nonfilers and
How Much Tax Do They Owe?,” Journal of Public Economics, July 2001, 81 (1), 25–50.
Fletcher, Patricia Diamond, “IRS E-File: Electronic Tax Administration in the United
States,” Case Study, Center for Technology in Government, University at Albany, SUNY
2003. Retrieved May 20th , 2004 from the World Wide Web: http://www.ctg.albany.
edu/publications/online/new_models/cases/irs.pdf.
Goolsbee, Austan, “The Turbo Tax Revolution? Evaluating the Ability of Technology
to Solve the Tax Complexity Dilemma,” January 2002. University of Chicago, mimeo.
Hill, Carolyn J., V. Joseph Hotz, Charles H. Mullin, and John Karl Scholz,
“EITC Eligibility, Participation and Compliance Rates for AFDC Households: Evidence
from the California Caseload,” April 1999. mimeo.

31

Holtzblatt, Janet and Janet McCubbin, “Complicated Lives: Tax Administrative
Issues Affecting Low-Income Filers,” mimeo, Department of the Treasury January 2003.
Horowitz, Joel L., “The Bootstrap,” in James J. Heckman and Edward Leamer, eds.,
Handbook of Econometrics, Vol. 5, Amsterdam; New York: Elsevier/North Holland, 2000.
Hotz, V. Joseph and John Karl Scholz, “The Earned Income Tax Credit,” in Robert A.
Moffitt, ed., Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States, University of Chicago
Press, 2003.
Internal Revenue Service, “Participation in the Earned Income Tax Credit Program for
Tax Year 1996,” Research Project 12.26, U.S. Department of Treasury January 31 2002.
Kennedy, Peter E., “Randomization Tests in Econometrics,” Journal of Business and
Economic Statistics, January 1995, 13 (1), 85–94.
Liebman, Jeffrey B., “The EITC compliance problem,” Poverty Research News, Summer
1998, 2 (3). http://www.jcpr.org/98summer/article3.html.
, “Who are the Ineligible EITC Recipients?,” National Tax Journal, December 2000, 53
(4), 1165–1185. Part 2.
Maag, Elaine, “Payint the Price? Low-Income Parents and the Use of Paid Tax Preparers,” New Federalism: National Survey of America’s Families B-64, Urban Institute
February 2005.
McCubbin, Janet, “EITC Noncompliance: The Determinants of the Misreporting of
Children,” National Tax Journal, December 2000, 53 (4), 1135–1164. Part 2.
Schoeni, Robert F. and Rebecca M. Blank, “What has Welfare Reform Accomplished?
Impacts on Welfare Participation, Employment, Income, Poverty and Family Structure,”
Working Paper 7267, National Bureau of Economic Research March 2000.
Scholz, John Karl, “The Earned Income Tax Credit: Participation, Compliance and
Anti-poverty Effectiveness,” National Tax Journal, March 1994, 48 (1), 59–81.
Wu, Chi Chi and Jean Ann Fox, “The High Cost of Quick Tax Money: Tax Preparation,
’Instant Refund’ Loans, and Check Cashing Fees Target the Working Poor,” Report,
National Consumer Law Center January 2003. Online at http://www.consumerfed.
org/2003_RAL_report.pdf.

32

Table 1a: EITC, E-Filers and Professionally Prepared Returns by Income Group and Year
% EITC

% E-filers

% Professionally
Prepared Return

Total 0-10K 10-30K >30K Total 0-10K 10-30K >30K Total 0-10K 10-30K >30K
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999

0.10
0.11
0.11
0.12
0.13
0.13
0.17
0.17
0.17
0.16
0.16
0.15

0.13
0.14
0.15
0.17
0.17
0.19
0.33
0.32
0.32
0.31
0.32
0.30

0.21
0.21
0.22
0.23
0.24
0.25
0.25
0.26
0.26
0.26
0.26
0.26

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.01
0.04
0.08
0.10
0.11
0.13
0.10
0.13
0.16
0.20
0.23
0.28

0.01
0.03
0.07
0.11
0.11
0.13
0.10
0.15
0.19
0.23
0.25
0.28

0.02
0.06
0.11
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.14
0.16
0.21
0.26
0.30
0.35

0.01
0.03
0.06
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.07
0.08
0.10
0.13
0.17
0.23

0.47

0.34

0.45

0.57

0.49
0.50
0.50
0.50
0.50
0.51
0.52
0.53
0.54

0.40
0.41
0.41
0.41
0.43
0.42
0.44
0.45
0.47

0.48
0.49
0.49
0.50
0.49
0.51
0.52
0.53
0.55

0.55
0.55
0.55
0.55
0.56
0.56
0.57
0.57
0.58

Table 1b: E-filing and Professionally Prepared Returns among EITC recipients
% E-filers

1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999

% Professionally
Prepared Returns

% E-filers and
Professional Returns

Total

0-10K

10-30K

Total

0-10K

10-30K

Total

0-10K

10-30K

0.04
0.13
0.25
0.36
0.40
0.42
0.26
0.29
0.36
0.42
0.45
0.54

0.04
0.11
0.24
0.36
0.39
0.39
0.19
0.25
0.33
0.38
0.42
0.49

0.04
0.13
0.24
0.33
0.38
0.40
0.30
0.30
0.37
0.42
0.47
0.56

0.43

0.39

0.45

0.03

0.03

0.02

0.51
0.55
0.55
0.52
0.54
0.57
0.60
0.62
0.67

0.53
0.52
0.53
0.46
0.52
0.53
0.57
0.57
0.63

0.51
0.55
0.56
0.56
0.55
0.60
0.62
0.65
0.69

0.23
0.27
0.29
0.19
0.21
0.28
0.34
0.37
0.45

0.24
0.26
0.26
0.14
0.19
0.24
0.30
0.33
0.40

0.21
0.25
0.28
0.22
0.22
0.30
0.35
0.39
0.47

Notes: Tables are based on authors’ calculations based on the Tax Model Files issued by the Statistics of Income
division of the IRS.

33

Table 1c: Summary Statistics, by State (1988-1999)

AL
AK
AZ
AR
CA
CO
CT
DE
DC
FL
GA
HI
ID
IL
IN
IA
KS
KY
LA
ME
MD
MA
MI
MN
MS
MO
MT
NE
NV
NH
NJ
NM
NY
NC
ND
OH
OK
OR
PA
RI
SC
SD
TN
TX
UT
VT
VA
WA
WV
WI
WY
Total

State EFI
1997
no tax
1997
1994
1994
1993
1993
1993
1996
no tax
1994
2001
1993
1990
1992
1993
1991
1992
1992
2000
1990
1992
1992
1989
1992
1993
1994
1993
no tax
no tax
1994
1992
1992
1991
1999
1999
1992
1993
1995
1994
1990
no tax
no tax
no tax
1992
2001
1994
no tax
1991
1991
no tax

Year of
Telefile
none
no tax
none
1997
1996
none
1998
1999
2000
no tax
2001
none
1999
1993
1999
none
1996
1999
1996
1996
2001
1995
1999
1998
1995
1997
1997
1998
no tax
no tax
1996
none
none
none
none
1997
2001
2001
1998
none
1997
no tax
no tax
no tax
1998
none
2000
no tax
2001
1998
no tax

StateFed
1997
no tax
1997
1994
never
1993
1993
1993
1996
no tax
1994
2001
1993
1995
1992
1993
1991
1992
1992
never
1995
never
1992
never
1992
1993
1994
1993
no tax
no tax
1994
1992
1992
1991
1999
1999
1992
1993
1995
1994
1990
no tax
no tax
no tax
1992
2001
1994
no tax
1991
1991
no tax

% of returns in
0-10K 10-30K
25.70
38.09
40.46
23.38
22.15
37.85
24.92
41.34
21.33
34.02
20.32
32.96
19.88
30.98
18.33
33.21
14.75
42.45
22.73
38.86
22.24
36.17
19.78
36.82
26.37
40.44
23.28
32.28
22.75
33.51
23.90
35.28
23.31
33.63
24.60
36.79
25.38
38.04
24.25
37.07
19.64
32.59
21.05
32.00
23.88
31.56
23.69
32.56
25.11
43.19
24.80
35.70
26.53
39.35
23.03
35.44
18.28
39.43
21.56
31.40
19.72
29.98
28.54
36.45
21.22
33.76
23.27
38.21
23.91
36.01
23.11
36.02
24.52
38.56
20.15
35.27
23.29
35.36
20.35
34.59
24.99
40.63
25.74
40.26
24.65
37.48
24.93
36.70
21.94
34.52
24.95
32.37
19.90
33.35
19.36
32.52
23.92
40.57
23.37
34.56
25.80
35.03
23.17
35.66

%
EITC
23.56
8.06
16.45
21.57
15.22
11.15
7.69
11.39
14.13
15.52
19.05
8.07
17.31
12.18
11.76
9.00
12.18
15.53
24.75
10.03
11.23
7.41
10.87
7.87
30.53
14.59
13.59
12.05
13.80
7.71
10.20
24.44
12.59
17.08
9.15
10.72
16.97
10.16
10.56
11.31
19.78
11.92
18.57
19.94
11.22
10.79
11.27
9.24
17.04
9.71
9.59
13.94

of returns with
E-file Prof. help
18.71
52.58
8.93
40.03
12.69
53.32
16.72
57.33
7.88
57.00
11.05
50.09
9.95
46.04
12.04
42.40
12.20
42.21
15.80
50.03
18.58
51.41
7.18
53.31
12.11
48.05
14.44
51.25
18.33
50.44
13.30
62.74
14.15
57.94
17.75
55.68
17.90
49.72
10.82
39.04
11.19
44.98
9.58
47.48
12.51
50.03
10.70
50.85
20.27
47.46
15.17
56.55
13.08
57.38
10.67
57.30
13.56
50.24
13.00
40.62
9.48
53.77
16.88
49.66
8.76
55.78
17.48
51.89
10.71
60.88
14.01
48.11
14.30
57.54
8.22
47.71
10.28
45.35
10.35
50.88
23.78
53.33
14.99
50.58
20.01
49.23
16.67
45.33
11.90
45.62
6.72
43.37
13.29
43.85
11.50
42.33
14.57
42.33
12.63
48.97
16.07
50.89
13.07
50.84

Notes: The first three columns refer to the date of the introduction of the first state electronic filing program (State
EFI), the state telefiling program (Telefile) and the IRS sponsored Federal/State Electronic Filing Program (StateFed).

34

35
504
42

504
42
yes
yes
no

N
States

Year dummies
State dummies
State trends

yes
yes
yes

504
42
yes
yes
yes

504
42

0.000
0.034
0.015
0.006

yes
yes
no

420
35

(0.785)

0.631

(0.646)

1.046

(0.562)

0.924

(0.351)∗∗∗

1.011

(5)

yes
yes
no

420
35

0.001
0.028
0.015
0.005

(0.421)∗∗

1.054

(6)

yes
yes
yes

420
35

(0.870)

0.706

(0.752)

1.176

(0.662)

1.046

(0.412)∗∗∗

1.119

(7)

yes
yes
yes

420
35

0.001
0.043
0.020
0.003

(0.490)∗∗

1.175

(8)

yes
yes
yes

612
51

0.001
0.039
0.020
0.007

(0.416)∗∗

0.983

(9)

Notes: The analysis is for the period 1988-1999. The dependent variables are measured in shares and refer to the 10-30K income category. All regressions include year and state
fixed effects and some specifications also include state specific time trends. State EFI refers to the average treatment effect, while State EFI (1) - State EFI (4) indicate the
effect in the first four years after program implementation. Standard errors are in parentheses and are based on the standard block bootstrap procedure. In addition, for the
main variable of interest (State EFI), the table also presents p-values based on robust standard errors, clustered standard errors (at the state level) as well as the randomization
test. ∗ ∗ ∗, ∗∗ and ∗ indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent levels, respectively.

yes
yes
no

0.008
0.088
0.058
0.040

0.408
(0.786)

0.202
(0.592)

0.943
(0.682)

0.721
(0.516)

0.908
(0.576)

0.709

(0.348)∗∗∗

(0.478)

0.971

(0.301)∗∗∗

(0.421)∗∗

0.808

1.049

(4)

(0.378)∗

(3)

0.716

(2)

Robust
Clustered
Bootstrap
Randomiz.

State EFI (4)

State EFI (3)

State EFI (2)

State EFI (1)

State EFI

(1)

Table 2a: Regression analysis: Electronic Filing (shares, 10-30K)

36
yes
yes
no

Year dummies
State dummies
State trends

yes
yes
yes

504
42
yes
yes
yes

504
42

0.146

yes
yes
no

420
35

(0.110)

yes
yes
no

420
35

0.008
0.113
0.076
0.034

yes
yes
yes

420
35

(0.114)

0.163

(0.101)∗∗

0.204

(0.089)

0.116

(0.058)∗∗

0.141

(7)

yes
yes
yes

420
35

0.007
0.078
0.040
0.026

(0.066)∗∗

0.138

(8)

yes
yes
yes

612
51

0.042
0.155
0.109
0.105

(0.056)

0.090

(9)

Notes: The analysis is for the period 1988-1999. The dependent variables are measured in logs and refer to the 10-30K income category. All regressions include year and state
fixed effects and some specifications also include state specific time trends. State EFI refers to the average treatment effect, while State EFI (1) State EFI (4) indicate the effect
in the first four years after program implementation. Standard errors are in parentheses and are based on the standard block bootstrap procedure. In addition, for the main
variable of interest (State EFI), the table also presents p-values based on robust standard errors, clustered standard errors (at the state level) as well as the randomization test.
∗ ∗ ∗, ∗∗ and ∗ indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent levels, respectively.

yes
yes
no

504
42

504
42

N
States

(0.105)

0.443
0.645
0.619
0.518

0.095
(0.104)

-0.026

0.192
(0.105)∗

0.152
(0.090)∗

0.066

0.016
0.106
0.062
0.056

0.107
(0.094)

(0.089)

0.080
(0.076)

(0.057)

0.006

(0.065)∗∗

(0.050)∗∗

(0.079)

0.134

0.108

(0.070)

0.054

(0.074)∗

(6)
0.132

(5)

(0.057)∗

(4)
0.108

(3)

0.035

(2)

Robust
Clustered
Bootstrap
Randomiz.

State EFI (4)

State EFI (3)

State EFI (2)

State EFI (1)

State EFI

(1)

Table 2b: Regression analysis: Electronic Filing (logs, 10-30K)

37
504
42
yes
yes
yes

N
States
Year dummies
State dummies
State trends

yes
yes
yes

504
42

0.062
0.177
0.119
0.140

(0.051)

yes
yes
yes

504
42

0.799
0.847
0.826
0.829

(0.066)

0.014

0-10K

0.600
0.708
0.669
0.657

yes
yes
yes

504
42

0.016
0.106
0.062
0.056

(0.057)∗

0.108

10-30K

Logs

0.000
0.034
0.015
0.006

(0.421)∗∗

1.049

10-30K

yes
yes
yes

504
42

0.002
0.068
0.034
0.005

(0.091)∗∗

0.192

10-20K

0.001
0.037
0.016
0.004

(0.331)∗∗

0.802

10-20K

yes
yes
yes

504
42

0.574
0.654
0.605
0.662

(0.053)

0.027

20-30K

0.131
0.215
0.155
0.216

(0.172)

0.247

20-30K

yes
yes
yes

504
42

0.784
0.827
0.811
0.827

(0.054)

0.013

30-100K

0.292
0.380
0.334
0.394

(0.196)

-0.191

30-100K

Notes: The analysis is for the period 1988-1999. The dependent variables are measured in either shares or logs. All regressions include year and state fixed effects and state
specific time trends. State EFI refers to the average treatment effect. Standard errors are in parentheses and are based on the standard block bootstrap procedure. In addition,
for the main variable of interest (State EFI), the table also presents p-values based on robust standard errors, clustered standard errors (at the state level) as well as the
randomization test. ∗ ∗ ∗, ∗∗ and ∗ indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent levels, respectively.

0.175
0.250
0.187
0.288

(0.040)

0.080

0-30K

All
0.052

0.013
0.113
0.064
0.053

(0.234)

(0.520)

0.149
0.289
0.222
0.232

-0.100

(0.518)∗

0-10K

0.949

0-30K

0.632

Robust
Clustered
Bootstrap
Randomiz.

State EFI

Robust
Clustered
Bootstrap
Randomiz.

State EFI

All

Shares

Table 3: Regressions: Impact on Electronic Filing by Income Group

38
504
42

504
42
yes
yes
no

N
States

Year dummies
State dummies
State trends

0.004
0.035
0.015
0.007

yes
yes
yes

504
42
yes
yes
yes

504
42

yes
yes
no

420
35

yes
yes
no

420
35

0.003
0.016
0.008
0.006

(0.365)∗∗∗

1.002

(6)

yes
yes
yes

420
35

(0.618)∗

1.054

(0.661)∗∗

1.486

(0.537)∗∗

1.242

(0.350)∗∗∗

0.954

(7)

yes
yes
yes

420
35

0.002
0.019
0.006
0.002

(0.407)∗∗∗

1.135

(8)

yes
yes
yes

612
51

0.003
0.029
0.012
0.005

(0.362)∗∗

0.903

(9)

yes
yes
yes

504
42

(0.042)∗∗∗

0.768

Second

IV

Notes: The analysis is for the period 1988-1999. The dependent variables are measured in shares and refer to the 10-30K income category. All regressions include year and state
fixed effects and some specifications also include state specific time trends. State EFI refers to the average treatment effect, while State EFI (1) - State EFI (4) indicate the
effect in the first four years after program implementation. Standard errors are in parentheses and are based on the standard block bootstrap procedure. In addition, for the
main variable of interest (State EFI), the table also presents p-values based on robust standard errors, clustered standard errors (at the state level) as well as the randomization
test. ∗ ∗ ∗, ∗∗ and ∗ indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent levels, respectively.

yes
yes
no

0.003
0.011
0.004
0.014

0.424
(0.555)

0.982
(0.551)∗

0.401

(0.573)∗∗

1.138

(0.474)∗∗

0.993

(0.319)∗∗

0.800

(5)

(0.373)

1.287
(0.594)∗∗

0.999
(0.448)∗∗

1.004
(0.467)∗∗

0.855

(0.328)∗∗

(0.259)∗∗∗

(0.349)∗∗

0.739

0.660

0.901
(0.367)∗∗

(4)

0.760

(3)

(0.265)∗∗∗

(2)

Robust
Clustered
Bootstrap
Randomiz.

State EFI (4)

State EFI (3)

State EFI (2)

State EFI (1)

Electronic filers

State EFI

(1)

Table 4a: Regression analysis: Participation in Earned Income Tax Credit (shares, 10-30K)

39
504
42

504
42
yes
yes
no

N
States

Year dummies
State dummies
State trends

yes
yes
yes

504
42
yes
yes
yes

504
42

0.003
0.027
0.013
0.004

yes
yes
no

420
35

(0.080)∗

0.146

(0.083)∗∗

0.195

(0.071)∗∗

0.150

(0.047)∗∗

0.119

(5)

yes
yes
no

420
35

0.002
0.027
0.011
0.002

(0.056)∗∗

0.140

(6)

yes
yes
yes

420
35

(0.073)∗∗

0.176

(0.081)∗∗∗

0.219

(0.069)∗∗

0.169

(0.047)∗∗∗

0.133

(7)

yes
yes
yes

420
35

0.002
0.019
0.005
0.001

(0.055)∗∗∗

0.154

(8)

yes
yes
yes

612
51

0.002
0.022
0.008
0.003

(0.048)∗∗∗

0.127

(9)

yes
yes
yes

504
42

(0.043)∗∗∗

1.022

Second

IV

Notes: The analysis is for the period 1988-1999. The dependent variables are measured in logs and refer to the 10-30K income category. All regressions include year and state
fixed effects and some specifications also include state specific time trends. State EFI refers to the average treatment effect, while State EFI (1) State EFI (4) indicate the effect
in the first four years after program implementation. Standard errors are in parentheses and are based on the standard block bootstrap procedure. In addition, for the main
variable of interest (State EFI), the table also presents p-values based on robust standard errors, clustered standard errors (at the state level) as well as the randomization test.
∗ ∗ ∗, ∗∗ and ∗ indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent levels, respectively.

yes
yes
no

0.001
0.007
0.003
0.003

0.171
(0.066)∗∗∗

0.120
(0.058)∗∗

0.197
(0.072)∗∗∗

0.164
(0.059)∗∗∗

0.145
(0.060)∗∗

0.130

(0.043)∗∗

(0.036)∗∗∗

(0.049)∗∗∗

0.106

0.098

0.126
(0.050)∗∗

(4)

0.121

(3)

(0.040)∗∗∗

(2)

Robust
Clustered
Bootstrap
Randomiz.

State EFI (4)

State EFI (3)

State EFI (2)

State EFI (1)

Electronic filers

State EFI

(1)

Table 4b: Regression analysis: Participation in Earned Income Tax Credit (logs, 10-30K)

40
yes
yes
yes

Year dummies
State dummies
State trends

yes
yes
yes

504
42
yes
yes
yes

504
42

0.006
0.014
0.005
0.004

yes
yes
yes

504
42

0.189
0.210
0.155
0.254

(0.048)

0.067

0.149
0.124
0.082
0.171

(0.148)∗

0.259

20-30K

yes
yes
yes

504
42

0.019
0.080
0.045
0.046

(0.033)∗∗

0.067

Logs

0.054
0.182
0.125
0.088

(0.456)

0.701

0-30K

yes
yes
yes

504
42

0.751
0.763
0.735
0.778

(0.013)

0.004

0.353
0.385
0.328
0.371

(0.482)

-0.468

No EITC, 0-30K

yes
yes
yes

504
42

0.854
0.867
0.851
0.879

(0.018)

0.003

0.561
0.590
0.550
0.602

(0.476)

-0.285

No EITC, 10-30K

Notes: The analysis is for the period 1988-1999. The dependent variables are measured in either shares or logs. All regressions include year and state fixed effects and state
specific time trends. State EFI refers to the average treatment effect. Standard errors are in parentheses and are based on the standard block bootstrap procedure. In addition,
for the main variable of interest (State EFI), the table also presents p-values based on robust standard errors, clustered standard errors (at the state level) as well as the
randomization test. ∗ ∗ ∗, ∗∗ and ∗ indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent levels, respectively.

504
42

N
States

0.003
0.027
0.013
0.004

(0.039)

0.764
0.765
0.732
0.798

(0.073)∗∗∗

(0.050)∗∗

Robust
Clustered
Bootstrap
Randomiz.

0.214

0.126

-0.013

0.015
0.048
0.022
0.015

State EFI

0.004
0.035
0.015
0.007

0.414
0.422
0.362
0.452

0.642
(0.278)∗∗

0.901
(0.367)∗∗

(0.220)

10-20K

-0.200

10-30K

Robust
Clustered
Bootstrap
Randomiz.

State EFI

0-10K

Shares

Table 5: Regressions: Impact on EITC by Income Group

41

Electronic Filing

Robust
Clustered
Bootstrap
Randomiz.
N
States

State Telefiling

State EITC

StateFed EFI

Pre-1994 EFI

State Waiver

Robust
Clustered
Bootstrap
Randomiz.
State EFI

State Telefiling

State EITC

StateFed EFI

Pre-1994 EFI

State Waiver

State EFI

0.005
0.026
0.007
0.008
378
42

(0.359)∗∗∗

(0.417)∗

0.046
0.122
0.074
0.045
378
42

0.005
0.067
0.029
0.023
0.954

(0.438)∗∗

(0.397)∗∗∗

0.001
0.019
0.006
0.003
0.752

(2)
0.972

(1)
1.135

0.008
0.037
0.013
0.013
504
42

(0.336)∗∗

0.007
0.088
0.038
0.033
0.849

(0.416)∗∗

0.004
0.031
0.013
0.007
504
42

(0.269)

0.342

(0.358)∗∗

0.000
0.034
0.015
0.006
0.903

(0.333)

0.052

(0.421)∗∗

0.061
0.216
0.141
0.090
504
42

(0.444)

0.007
0.118
0.060
0.028
0.659

(0.473)∗

0.032
0.066
0.035
0.016
504
42

(0.416)

-0.290

(0.508)∗∗

0.033
0.160
0.111
0.088
1.064

(0.633)

0.332

(0.542)

Table 6a: Specification checks (shares)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.873
1.049
0.898
0.862

0.007
0.041
0.014
0.021
462
42

(0.362)∗∗

0.000
0.030
0.011
0.005
0.880

(0.460)∗∗

(7)
1.185

0.006
0.039
0.018
0.009
504
42

(0.386)∗∗

0.928

0.000
0.033
0.015
0.004

(0.441)∗∗

1.107

(8)

0.004
0.035
0.015
0.007
504
42

(0.391)

-0.234

(0.366)∗∗

0.000
0.035
0.015
0.006
0.898

(0.809)

0.083

(0.422)∗∗

(9)
1.050

0.004
0.034
0.015
0.008
504
42

(0.094)

0.061

(0.363)∗∗

0.001
0.044
0.020
0.014
0.895

(0.132)∗∗∗

1.112

(0.397)∗∗

(10)
0.938

Notes: Notes to previous tables apply here as well. Specifications are as follows: (1) post 1990 data; (2) pre-1997 data; (3) post-1996 state-specific dummies; (4) pre-1996 state
welfare waiver present. (5) pre-1994 state-specific dummies; (6) pre-1994 e-filing treatment effect; (7) 1994 excluded; (8) treatment based on timing of State/Fed program; (9)
state EITC dummy; (10) Telefiling dummy.

Earned Income Tax Credit

42

Electronic Filing

Robust
Clustered
Bootstrap
Randomiz.
N
States

State Telefiling

State EITC

StateFed EFI

Pre-1994 EFI

State Waiver

Robust
Clustered
Bootstrap
Randomiz.
State EFI

State Telefiling

State EITC

StateFed EFI

Pre-1994 EFI

State Waiver

State EFI

0.003
0.031
0.012
0.005
378
42

0.006
0.043
0.016
0.008
504
42

(0.050)∗∗

(0.054)∗∗

(0.061)

0.056
0.167
0.111
0.060
378
42

0.092
0.240
0.158
0.153
0.121

(0.058)

0.085
0.220
0.149
0.144
0.137

(0.062)

(0.058)∗∗

0.011
0.075
0.034
0.026
0.098

(2)
0.091

(1)
0.123

0.002
0.021
0.010
0.004
504
42

(0.039)∗∗

0.083

(0.047)∗∗

0.016
0.109
0.063
0.057
0.127

(0.056)

-0.015

(0.058)∗

0.059
0.208
0.138
0.088
504
42

(0.060)

0.042
0.172
0.099
0.125
0.089

(0.061)∗

0.030
0.063
0.037
0.008
504
42

(0.065)

-0.061

(0.077)∗∗

0.165
0.305
0.250
0.208
0.160

(0.087)

0.033

(0.078)

Table 6b: Specification checks (logs)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.082
0.108
0.100
0.089

0.002
0.015
0.004
0.008
462
42

(0.043)∗∗∗

0.008
0.080
0.040
0.036
0.126

(0.061)∗∗

(7)
0.125

0.006
0.046
0.023
0.010
504
42

(0.052)∗∗

0.121

0.031
0.134
0.086
0.076

(0.057)∗

0.099

(8)

0.003
0.028
0.013
0.004
504
42

(0.050)

-0.014

(0.050)∗∗

0.015
0.113
0.065
0.053
0.126

(0.138)

0.114

(0.059)∗

(9)
0.109

0.003
0.026
0.013
0.004
504
42

(0.012)

0.001

(0.049)∗∗

0.028
0.129
0.077
0.090
0.126

(0.015)∗∗∗

0.119

(0.054)∗

(10)
0.096

Notes: Notes to previous tables apply here as well. Specifications are as follows: (1) post 1990 data; (2) pre-1997 data; (3) post-1996 state-specific dummies; (4) pre-1996 state
welfare waiver present. (5) pre-1994 state-specific dummies; (6) pre-1994 e-filing treatment effect; (7) 1994 excluded; (8) treatment based on timing of State/Fed program; (9)
state EITC dummy; (10) Telefiling dummy.

Earned Income Tax Credit

43

yes
yes
yes

Year dummies
State dummies
State trends
yes
yes
yes

378
42

(4)

yes
yes
yes

378
42

0.022
0.083
0.043
0.026

(0.081)∗∗

0.164

0.003
0.029
0.009
0.003

(0.309)∗∗∗

0.815

Yes

yes
yes
yes

378
42

0.997
0.998
0.997
0.998

(0.045)

-0.000

0.816
0.844
0.820
0.823

(0.274)

-0.063

No

Electronic Filing

(3)

(6)

0.254

yes
yes
yes

378
42

0.331
0.414
0.340
0.385

(0.049)

0.046

0.306
0.361
0.289
0.341

(0.240)

yes
yes
yes

378
42

0.121
0.292
0.222
0.170

(0.068)

0.083

Logs, 10-30K

0.028
0.117
0.065
0.034

(0.270)∗

0.498

Shares, 10-30K

Return Prepared by a
Professional
Yes
No

(5)

(8)

yes
yes
yes

378
42

0.059
0.097
0.050
0.024

(0.078)∗∗

0.156

0.023
0.063
0.023
0.008

(0.241)∗∗

0.542

yes
yes
yes

378
42

0.251
0.391
0.321
0.249

(0.067)

-0.067

0.187
0.321
0.245
0.150

(0.246)

-0.287

Return Prepared by a
Professional
EFI
No EFI

(7)

(10)

yes
yes
yes

378
42

0.090
0.193
0.135
0.075

(0.075)

0.113

0.064
0.191
0.130
0.046

(0.177)

0.273

EFI

yes
yes
yes

378
42

0.279
0.472
0.410
0.343

(0.069)

0.058

0.237
0.396
0.323
0.280

(0.225)

0.225

No EFI

Self-Prepared Return

(9)

Notes: The analysis is for the period 1988-1999. The dependent variables are measured in either shares or logs. All regressions include year and state fixed effects and state
specific time trends. State EFI refers to the average treatment effect. Standard errors are in parentheses and are based on the standard block bootstrap procedure. In addition,
for the main variable of interest (State EFI), the table also presents p-values based on robust standard errors, clustered standard errors (at the state level) as well as the
randomization test. ∗ ∗ ∗, ∗∗ and ∗ indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent levels, respectively.

378
42

N
States

0.056
0.167
0.111
0.060

(0.061)

0.011
0.075
0.034
0.026

0.098

(0.058)∗∗

0.046
0.122
0.074
0.045

0.123

0.001
0.019
0.006
0.003

0.752
(0.417)∗

1.135

(0.397)∗∗∗

EITC

EFI

Robust
Clustered
Bootstrap
Randomiz.

State EFI

Robust
Clustered
Bootstrap
Randomiz.

State EFI

(2)

(1)

Table 7: EITC Participation: Decomposition of Response

44
504
42
yes
yes
yes

N
States
Year dummies
State dummies
State trends

yes
yes
yes

504
42

0.145
0.293
0.231
0.191

10-30K

yes
yes
yes

504
42

0.976
0.979
0.976
0.981

(0.021)

-0.001

yes
yes
yes

504
42

0.040
0.121
0.077
0.056

yes
yes
yes

504
42

0.031
0.084
0.050
0.048

0.050
(0.025)∗∗

0.031

0.102
0.166
0.111
0.168

(0.390)

0.619

10-20K

(0.017)∗

Logs

0.157
0.243
0.184
0.218

(0.404)

0.325
0.405
0.343
0.418

0.616
(0.468)

-0.383

Shares

0-10K

yes
yes
yes

504
42

0.578
0.658
0.617
0.665

(0.027)

0.014

0.995
0.996
0.996
0.996

(0.427)

-0.003

20-30K

Notes: The analysis is for the period 1988-1999. The dependent variables measures the number of filers in a certain income group and is measured in either shares or logs. All
regressions include year and state fixed effects and state specific time trends. State EFI refers to the average treatment effect. Standard errors are in parentheses and are based
on the standard bootstrap procedure. In addition, the table also presents p-values based on robust standard errors, clustered standard errors (at the state level) as well as the
randomization test. ∗ ∗ ∗, ∗∗ and ∗ indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent levels, respectively.

0.451
0.528
0.478
0.599

Robust
Clustered
Bootstrap
Randomiz.

0.018
(0.015)

0.008
(0.011)

State EFI

0.572
0.676
0.645
0.647

(0.491)

0.572
0.676
0.645
0.647

0.233
(0.491)

-0.233

0-30K

Robust
Clustered
Bootstrap
Randomiz.

State EFI

Not 0-30K

Table 8: Number of filers

45
504
42
yes
yes
yes

N
States

Year dummies
State dummies
State trends

yes
yes
yes

504
42

0.034
0.097
0.057
0.054

0.014

yes
yes
yes

504
42

0.534
0.670
0.639
0.625

(0.030)

yes
yes
yes

504
42

0.600
0.630
0.593
0.660

(0.022)

0.012

0.921
0.927
0.920
0.933

(0.366)

(0.247)

0.805
0.844
0.823
0.841

0.037

Single

0.055

Joint

Joint EITC

0.058

yes
yes
yes

504
42

0.112
0.263
0.207
0.150

(0.046)

0.063

yes
yes
yes

504
42

0.087
0.190
0.140
0.135

(0.043)

yes
yes
yes

504
42

0.386
0.392
0.327
0.339

(0.033)

0.032

0.844
0.846
0.826
0.811

(0.052)

0.056
0.126
0.089
0.104

0.011

(0.172)∗

Single EITC

0.295

Logs, 10-30K

0.052
0.211
0.157
0.086

(0.326)

0.464

Shares, 10-30K

Head

yes
yes
yes

504
42

0.027
0.125
0.079
0.051

(0.053)∗

0.092

0.011
0.111
0.064
0.026

(0.324)∗

0.595

Head EITC

Notes: The analysis is for the period 1988-1999. The dependent variable measures the number of filers in the 10-30K category in a particular filing status category. The
variables are measured in either shares or logs. All regressions include year and state fixed effects and state specific time trends. State EFI refers to the average treatment
effect. Standard errors are in parentheses and are based on the standard bootstrap procedure. In addition, the table also presents p-values based on robust standard errors,
clustered standard errors (at the state level) as well as the randomization test. ∗ ∗ ∗, ∗∗ and ∗ indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent levels, respectively.

0.040
0.121
0.077
0.056

Robust
Clustered
Bootstrap
Randomiz.

0.031
(0.016)∗

0.031
(0.017)∗

State EFI

0.240
0.293
0.232
0.317

(0.564)

(0.468)

0.157
0.243
0.184
0.218

0.671

0.616

People

Robust
Clustered
Bootstrap
Randomiz.

State EFI

Returns

Table 9: Understanding the EITC response — Marital Status

46
yes
yes
yes

Year dummies
State dummies
State trends

yes
yes
yes

504
42

0.210
0.284
0.232
0.341

yes
yes
yes

504
42

0.388
0.348
0.288
0.425

yes
yes
yes

504
42

0.176
0.249
0.192
0.278

(0.037)

0.048

yes
yes
yes

504
42

0.004
0.022
0.009
0.009

(0.048)∗∗∗

0.128

0.007
0.031
0.012
0.012

(0.221)∗∗

0.556

One

yes
yes
yes

504
42

0.104
0.223
0.165
0.170

(0.046)

0.064

0.147
0.251
0.186
0.216

(0.214)

0.279

Two

Notes: The analysis is for the period 1988-1999. In the first three columns the dependent variable measures the number of child exemptions in the 10-30K category (and also
by EITC status). In the last three columns, the dependent variable is the number of EITC taxpayers with no, one and two children, respectively. The variables are measured
in either shares or logs. All regressions include year and state fixed effects and state specific time trends. State EFI refers to the average treatment effect. Standard errors are
in parentheses and are based on the standard bootstrap procedure. In addition, the table also presents p-values based on robust standard errors, clustered standard errors (at
the state level) as well as the randomization test. ∗ ∗ ∗, ∗∗ and ∗ indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent levels, respectively.

504
42

N
States

0.013
0.073
0.040
0.036

(0.042)

0.085
0.205
0.151
0.118

(0.045)

(0.051)∗∗

Robust
Clustered
Bootstrap
Randomiz.

-0.048

0.105

0.061

State EFI

0.067
(0.055)

Logs, 10-30K

0.214
0.242
0.189
0.278

(0.278)

0.188
0.326
0.262
0.260

-0.368

1.132
(0.653)∗

0.764
0.037
0.133
0.081
0.066

No

EITC taxpayers with

Shares, 10-30K

No EITC

(0.683)

EITC

Robust
Clustered
Bootstrap
Randomiz.

State EFI

Exempt

Number of children

Table 10: Understanding the EITC response — Children

Figure 1: EITC, Electronic Filing, Self-Prepared Returns — aggregate
Share of electronic filers
Share using prof. help

Share of EITC recipients
Share prof. help or e−file

1.00
0.90
0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00
1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993 1994
year

1995

1996

1997

1998 1999

Source: Author’s calculations based on the Tax Model Files issued by the Statistics of Income division of the IRS.

Figure 2: Electronic Filing and Professionally Prepared Returns, EITC recipients, 10-30K
Prof. help, efiling
No pref. help, efiling

Prof. help, no efiling
No prof. help, no efiling

0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00
1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993 1994
year

1995

1996

1997

1998 1999

Source: Author’s calculations based on the Tax Model Files issued by the Statistics of Income division of the IRS.

47

Figure 3: Non-participation rate
DC

26.4
CA
MT

OK
MI

NJ
NY

Non−filing rate

MN

MD

GA

HI

NC
KS

IL

NE
CT

WI

SC

AZ
UT
MA
KY
LA
NM
IN
MS

CO

VA
OH

AR
IA

ME

AL

VT

PA

OR
MO
WV

ID

2.8

RI

ND

1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001
State E−Filing Program
Source: The date of the introduction of a state e-filing program is taken from Table 1c. The non-participation rate
is for 1996 and taken from Internal Revenue Service (2002).

Figure 4: EITC in 1989
MS

27.0

EITC in 1989

NM
LA

AL

AR

GA
SC

WV
NC

KY
OK
IN
UT

IL
MD

KS
WI

NY
MI

MN

5.3

MA

AZ
MO
ID
OR
IA
CO
NE
DE

CT

CA
DC
VA
MT
NJ
RI

ND
OH

PA
ME

VT
HI

1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001
State E−Filing Program
Source: The date of the introduction of a state e-filing program is taken from Table 1c. The percent of EITC
recipients in 1989 is based on the author’s calculations based on the Tax Model Files issued by the Statistics of
48
Income division of the IRS.

Figure 5a: Electronic Filing, shares

Treatment effect

2.481

Treatment effect

2.481

−2.024

−2.024
−4

0
Years from reform

−4

4

All

0
Years from reform

4

0
Years from reform

4

0
Years from reform

4

0
Years from reform

4

0−30K

Treatment effect

2.481

Treatment effect

2.481

−2.024

−2.024
−4

0
Years from reform

−4

4

0−10K

10−30K

Figure 5b: Electronic Filing, logs

Treatment effect

.362

Treatment effect

.362

−.44

−.44
−4

0
Years from reform

−4

4

All

0−30K

Treatment effect

.362

Treatment effect

.362

−.44

−.44
−4

0
Years from reform

−4

4

0−10K

10−30K

Notes: The figures show the coefficients from a version of equation 2 that includes both leads and lags, as well as
state-specific trends. The figures also show the 95% confidence intervals constructed using the bootstrap technique
(pointwise).

49

Figure 6a: EITC, shares

Treatment effect

2.958

Treatment effect

2.958

−2.53

−2.53
−4

0
Years from reform

−4

4

0−30K

0
Years from reform

4

0
Years from reform

4

0
Years from reform

4

0
Years from reform

4

0−10K

Treatment effect

2.958

Treatment effect

2.958

−2.53

−2.53
−4

0
Years from reform

−4

4

10−30K

No EITC, 0−30K

Figure 6b: EITC, logs

Treatment effect

.261

Treatment effect

.261

−.413

−.413
−4

0
Years from reform

−4

4

0−30K

0−10K

Treatment effect

.261

Treatment effect

.261

−.413

−.413
−4

0
Years from reform

−4

4

10−30K

No EITC, 0−30K

Notes: The figures show the coefficients from a version of equation 2 that includes both leads and lags, as well as
state-specific trends. The figures also show the 90% confidence intervals constructed using the bootstrap technique
(pointwise).

50

