NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHAT DEFINES ‘NEWS’ IN FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKETS?
Kathryn Dominguez
Freyan Panthaki
Working Paper 11769
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11769
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2005

We are grateful to Marcel Fratzscher, Lutz Kilian and Paolo Vitale as well as seminar participants at the
University of Michigan and the JIMF / CRIF / TAFI Conference on “Foreign Exchange Markets” for useful
comments and suggestions. We thank FMG at LSE for providing the Reuters D2000-2 data, and Ryan Love
for sharing his mastery of the data with us. The views expressed in this document are the authors’ and do not
necessarily reflect those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Kathryn Dominguez and Freyan Panthaki. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

What Defines ‘News’ in Foreign Exchange Markets?
Kathryn Dominguez and Freyan Panthaki
NBER Working Paper No. 11769
November 2005
JEL No. F31, F37, G15
ABSTRACT
This paper examines whether the traditional sets of macro surprises, that most of the literature
considers, are the only sorts of news that can explain exchange rate movements. We examine the
intra-daily influence of a broad set of news reports, including variables which are not typically
considered "fundamentals" in the context of standard models of exchange rate determination, and
ask whether they too help predict exchange rate behavior. We also examine whether "news" not only
impacts exchange rates directly, but also influences exchange rates via order flow (signed trade
volume). Our results indicate that along with the standard fundamentals, both non-fundamental news
and order flow matter, suggesting that future models of exchange rate determination ought to include
all three types of explanatory variables.
Kathryn Dominguez
University of Michigan School of Public Policy
440 Lorch Hall
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
kathrynd@umich.edu
Freyan Panthaki
London School of Economics
Financial Markets Group
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
United Kingdom
freyan@bus.umich.edu

1. Introduction
This paper examines intra-day foreign exchange market reactions to a wide array
of “news” reported in the financial press. A number of previous studies have shown that
in order to find significant reactions in the foreign exchange market to the
macroeconomic variables that theory suggests should matter, one needs to measure the
precise impact of macro surprises at the intra-day level. While these studies provide
evidence that macro news influences both returns and volatility, because these
announcements occur very infrequently (typically once a month or quarter) they cannot
go far in explaining the bulk of foreign exchange rate movements. In this paper, we ask
whether a much broader definition of “news” influences currency values and ought to be
included in our models of exchange rate determination. Using Reuters’ time-stamped
newswire reports, we include all news stories that provide information relevant to foreign
exchange markets. The stories are then classified by information source (policymaker or
market participant), geographic region (Euro zone, Japan, U.S. or U.K.) and substance
(both actual events and rumors involving fundamentals and non-fundamentals). Our
“news” data include the scheduled macro announcements that have been used in previous
studies to allow us to compare the effects of our broader definition of news against these
more “traditional” variables.
The intra-day foreign exchange data used in this study are transactions prices and
quote spreads in the usd-euro and usd-gbp market from the Reuters D2000-2 electronic
trading system. The data do not include information on traded quantities, but they do
indicate whether trades were initiated by a buyer or seller, allowing us to measure order
flow as well as returns and volatility. We use a 20 minute sampling frequency for each
exchange rate and we measure order flow as the cumulative number of buyer initiated
trades minus the cumulative number of seller initiated trades over the same 20 minutes.
These data allow us to test a number of interesting hypotheses. First, we test
whether non-scheduled “news” of different sorts has similar impact effects on returns and
volatility as compared to (the already heavily studied) scheduled macro announcements.
Theory suggests that ambiguous information may lead to stronger differences of opinion
about the implications of the information (and, in turn, larger increases in volatility). In
our application, we can distinguish between scheduled (and presumably better1

understood) macro announcements and more ambiguous news (for example, market
rumors of impending interest rate changes). Second, we test whether news that is
typically not considered “fundamental” in the context of standard models of exchange
rate determination (for example, news related to technical analysis), helps to explain
exchange rate movements. Third, we examine whether any of the price discovery
process in reaction to news occurs via order flow. Previous studies have found evidence
that a substantial proportion of the market reaction to macro-announcements occurs via
order flow. By examining how a broader set of news events influences order flow – we
can begin to better understand how this measure relates to price and volatility movements
in the foreign exchange markets.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the links between
macroeconomic fundamentals and exchange rates in standard models, the lack of
empirical support for these links, and alternative modeling strategies that may improve
our understanding of what drives exchange rate movements. Section 3 describes the
exchange rate and order flow data from Reuters D2000-2 used in our empirical analysis.
Section 4 provides results of our event study analysis of the influence of our broader
definition of news on exchange rate returns and volatility. Section 5 introduces our order
flow information and examines its role in explaining exchange rate movements. Section
6 examines the influence of news on returns and order flow simultaneously in the context
of a VAR analysis. Section 7 concludes.
2.

News and Exchange Rates
The asset approach to exchange rate determination suggests that exchange rates

are forward looking asset prices that react to changes in the market’s expectation of
future fundamentals. Empirical tests of the asset approach examine in various ways
whether changes in the macroeconomic variables that are considered fundamentals
explain exchange rate movements.1 These tests generally find that macroeconomic
variables, which tend to have fairly stable time series properties, can explain little of the
(sometimes dramatic) variation in exchange rate movements. This line of research is best

1

Examples of “fundamentals” include: income (or output) differentials, money differentials, interest rate
differentials, inflation differentials and the trade balance.

2

summarized by a series of papers by Meese and Rogoff (1983a,b) which find that
forecasts of exchange rates based on a random walk model of exchange rate
determination do better than forecasts that are based on macro-economic models.2
In the wake of the Meese and Rogoff papers3, one branch of empirical research
has focused on the possibility that their result was more a function of estimation
imprecision than an indictment of the asset approach.4 If the window of time around the
shock to fundamentals is too wide, other news hitting the market will confound the
econometrician’s ability to precisely estimate the effects of the change in fundamentals
on exchange rates. One solution is to use intra-daily exchange rate data that will allow a
narrow enough window around the time of macro announcements to be able to set up a
natural experiment. A number of papers, including Anderson, Bollerslev, Diebold and
Vega (2003), find that when a narrow window is used, they are able to find a strong
relationship between certain macro-surprises and exchange rate returns.5 An alternative
approach is taken by Fair (2003) who identifies large intra-day changes in exchange rates
(and stock and bond prices) over the period 1982 through 1999 and then looks for “news”
that hit markets around the large changes to connect exchange rates movements to
changes in macro fundamentals.
This paper takes the results in Anderson, Bollerslev, Diebold and Vega (2003) as
a benchmark, and asks three important follow-on questions. First, are the traditional sets
of macro surprises that most of the literature considers the only sorts of news that can

2

Engel and West (forthcoming) provide an explanation for the Meese-Rogoff result based on the present
value relationship that follows from the asset approach. They show that if the discount factor is near one,
exchange rates will be largely driven by expected fundamentals far out into the future, which will be
dominated by their random walk component. Other studies that re-examine the Meese-Rogoff result for
long-horizon forecasts include Mark (1995), Kilian (1999), and Kilian and Taylor (2003).
3
A number of researchers have re-investigated the original Meese and Rogoff (1983ab) result and have
generally found it to be robust. See, for example, Flood and Rose (1995) and Cheung, Chinn and Pascual
(forthcoming).
4
An alternative approach assumes that the underlying reason for the Meese-Rogoff result is that the foreign
exchange market is either not efficient, or that market participants are not rational. The fact that many
foreign exchange traders follow technical trading rules that are unrelated to the types of variables found in
standard exchange rate determination models provides suggestive evidence that this approach may have
some merit. See Osler (2003) for an example of this approach.
5
The enormous literature measuring the effects of macro news on intra-daily exchange rates includes
Hakkio and Pearce (1985), Ito and Roley (1987), Ederington and Lee (1993), DeGennaro and Shrieves
(1997), Almeida, Goodhart and Payne (1998), Andersen and Bollerslev (1998), Melvin and Yin (2000),
Faust, Rogers, Wang and Wright (2003), Love and Payne (2003), Love (2004), Chaboud, Chernenko,
Howorka, Iyer, Liu and Wright (2004) and Ben Omrane, Bauwens and Giot (forthcoming).

3

explain exchange rate movements? We examine the intra-daily influence of a broad set
of news reports, including variables which are not typically considered “fundamentals” in
the context of standard models of exchange rate determination, and ask whether they too
help explain exchange rate movements.6 If we find that non-fundamental variables
matter, the “positive” results that many researchers have found for the influence of macro
announcements on exchange rates at intra-daily frequencies may need to be reinterpreted. If all sorts of news influence exchange rates, the “narrow window”
explanation for why low frequency empirical tests of standard models are inappropriate,
is no longer sufficient. Or, put another way, we are back again to the Meese-Rogoff
result that it is not macro-fundamentals that best predict exchange rate behavior. Second,
we ask whether using a broader definition of news, we are able to explain a significant
portion of the overall variation of exchange rate movements. Macro-announcements
occur relatively infrequently, so that even if they explain 100% of the short-term
movements in exchange rates, this translates into explaining less than 1% of overall
exchange rate movements. The third question we consider is whether “news” not only
impacts exchange rates directly, but also influences exchange rates via order flow (signed
trade volume). Like non-fundamental news, order flow plays no role in standard models
of exchange rate determination, so a finding that order flow matters will provide evidence
in favor of a different modeling strategy for exchange rate determination (at least for very
short term movements).7
There are a number of reasons for questioning whether macro announcements are
the best real-time source of information on fundamentals. First, macro announcements
are retrospective, in the sense that they provide information about past changes in
variables. Second, announcements are often revised substantially so that the first (or
preliminary) report is not necessarily a good indication of the true (or final) report. When
macro announcements are used in empirical studies they are generally measured relative
to market expectations. Money Market Services International’s median survey responses
6

A number of papers have considered the influence of central bank interventions and official policy
statements on exchange rates. These papers include: Dominguez (1998, 2003, forthcoming), Cai, Cheung,
Lee and Melvin (2001), Evans and Lyons (2003), Fatum and Hutchison (2003), Fratzscher (2004), Panthaki
(2004), Sager and Taylor (2004), Ehrmann and Fratzscher (2005) and Jansen and De Haan (2005).
7
Evans and Lyons (2002) is one of the first studies that found a link between order flow and exchange rate
movements. We will be examining these same links though with a very different data set and time period.

4

are used to calculate the “surprise” component, based on the assumption that market
participants (and survey participants) are rational and the foreign exchange market is
efficient, so that only unexpected news matters. There are a number of reasons to be
skeptical that the median survey response accurately reflects market expectations.8 So
that both the announcements and the proxy used to measure the expectation of the
announcements may be noisy indicators of actual macro surprises.9
In practice, dealers in the foreign exchange market receive information from
numerous different sources, including their own customers, electronic brokerage systems,
squawk boxes, and newswire services. Newswire services report the macro
announcements described previously along with various other sorts of news which
sometimes are also directly related to macro fundamentals. One of the major distinctions
that can be made between macro announcements and other news is that the
announcements are typically made on a schedule, so that market participants can plan
their reactions in advance (depending on realizations). Non-scheduled news is by its
nature less likely to be anticipated by the market. It may also be the case that market
participants are less able to quickly interpret the implications of non-scheduled news for
exchange rates, potentially leading to more heterogeneity in their responses to the news.10
Whether news is scheduled or non-scheduled its influence on exchange rates may
be related to the state of the market at the time of the news arrival.11 News that arrives
during periods of high uncertainty may have different effects on the exchange rate, than

8

For example, the median survey participant may not be representative of “market” opinion, or survey
participants may have strategic reasons not to reveal their true expectation.
9
Chaboud, Chernenko, Howorka, Iyer, Liu and Wright (2004) and Laakkonen (2004) find that even if there
is no macro surprise (so that the expectation exactly matches the announcement) volatility (and trading
volume) tends to rise after the release of the (unsurprising) announcement. These results could either be
interpreted as suggesting our measure of macro surprise is flawed, or that market reactions to news do not
conform to our standard models.
10
Of course, an increase in market heterogeneity may also occur in reaction to scheduled announcements.
Kondor (2004) shows that if traders display confirmatory bias, the release of public information may
increase divergence in opinion. The main insight is that sometimes (public) information implies something
different when it is coupled with different (private) pieces of existing information. Bacchetta and van
Wincoop (2003) also model the influence of higher-order expectations in reaction to news.
11
For example, Dominguez (2003) shows that the influence of central bank interventions on exchange rate
returns depends on the intra-day timing of intervention operations (whether they occur during heavy trading
volume, or are closely timed to scheduled macro announcements) as well as whether the operations are
coordinated with another central bank.

5

news that arrives in calmer periods.12 It may also be the case that the frequency of news
arrival itself will influence the relative importance of individual news releases.13
In this paper we allow for the possibility that exchange rates react to a wide
spectrum of “news”, including, but not exclusively, macro announcements. We also
allow for the possibility that information on the “state of the market” will influence the
way that news influences exchange rates. Finally, we allow for the possibility that the
trading process itself serves to convey information to the market via order flow.
One way to think about why order flow might matter is suggested in the Kyle
(1985) model which focuses on the strategic aspects of informed trading in a market
microstructure model. Informed traders in Kyle’s model can be thought of as information
monopolists who act to exploit this advantage by maximizing the value of private
information. In the model, Kyle introduces the concept of a price impact coefficient
which reflects how much the market adjusts prices to reflect the information content of
trades. The model suggests that since the more liquid a market, the less individual trades
will impact price, informed traders will prefer to “hide” their private information by
trading during periods of high liquidity. In this context private information will
eventually become known (and be reflected in price) but the process of information
revelation takes place gradually via order flow. Standard exchange rate models give no
role to private information (or order flow) because the assumption is that the sorts of
information that matter, macro fundamentals, are common knowledge and are
incorporated into price instantaneously.
An alternative view is that individual traders are not “informed” in the sense that
they have a better understanding of future market movements than other traders, but that
their own trading motives (based on real trade, profit repatriation, speculation, portfolio
rebalancing) may be correlated with other traders, eventually leading to aggregate
changes in fundamentals. In this context, dealers who have information about order flow
12

Andersen, Bollerslev, Diebold and Vega (2003) find evidence that “bad” news in good times (economic
expansions) have greater impacts than good news in good times, suggesting that good news in good times
confirms beliefs but bad news in good times comes as more of a surprise. Our short sample period will not
allow us to test this hypothesis directly, though in future work we intend to test whether “confirming”
versus “surprising” news have different effects.
13
A dramatic example of this occurred during the period in late 1995 when the US government was shut
down and macro announcements went unreported. During this period traders apparently reacted to “news”
(such as the shoe manufacturer’s monthly sales survey) which in normal periods have little influence.

6

may learn about fundamentals before they are officially announced. Evans and Lyons
(2004) test this proposition using a data set that allows them to disaggregate order flow
among various end-user segments (non-financial corporations, investors, leveraged
traders); they find evidence that order flow information forecasts macro fundamentals.
We are not able to directly measure the “private” information available to
individual dealers, but we have collected a relatively rich measure of public (timestamped) news from Reuters’s newswire reports14 as well as the order flow information
available from Reuters D2000-2. We use these two sources of “common knowledge”
news, as well as the macro announcements typically used in the literature, to test some
intra-daily implications of standard exchange rate models.
Tables 1 through 3 provide information about: (1) the scheduled macro news
announcements from the UK, the US, and the Euro-zone, (2) the broad categories of nonscheduled fundamental news, and (3) the broad categories of non-scheduled nonfundamental news that we include in our empirical analysis. Our news variables were
created using a search criteria which retrieved newswire articles under the broad subject
areas of “money”, “foreign exchange” and “economics” over the period 15 November
1999 through 18 January 2000. We excluded all re-published news, recurring price and
market data, articles covering obituaries, sports, calendars of events, letters, diaries,
weather, cooking and personal announcements. We then coded and grouped15 news
articles according to source (policymaker or market participant), geographic region
(Euro-zone, U.S. or Japan) and substance (related to fundamentals or non-fundamentals).
On average there were 4 news items per day so that approximately 5% of our 72 20minute return intervals per day include a news report. Approximately 65% of these news
reports were categorized as related to ‘fundamentals’, while 35% were coded as nonfundamental news.
News that we code as “non-scheduled non-fundamental” largely falls into six
main sub-categories. The first four categories: the options market, technical analysis,
14

These data are from the Factiva database and, unfortunately, do not include the headline news that run
over the Reuters and Bloomberg ticker second by second, but they include the major economic news events
that occur over a given day.
15
In theory each “news” report may have a different one-time influence on exchange rates. We group
similar news items together in order to examine whether certain “types” of news have a systematic
influence on exchange rate behavior.

7

market characteristics and market sentiment, are all related specifically to the foreign
exchange market, and are often based on interviews with or quotes from market
participants who trade based on “technical” rather than “fundamental” information16.
Our non-fundamental news also includes news related to the private sector (often focused
on restructuring, and mergers and acquisitions), and politics. While it is possible that
some of this news is indirectly related to fundamentals (when firms restructure they may
improve profitability, and, in turn this may lead to higher country-level growth) our sense
is that these sorts of news reports do not fit the traditional definition of “fundamentals”.
It is also likely that there is more heterogeneity in market participant’s interpretations of
the importance of this sort of news relative to, for example, scheduled macro
announcements. In any case, given that a significant portion of newswire reports fall into
this category of non-scheduled non-fundamental news, it seems worth examining whether
their influence on exchange rates differs from fundamentals related news.
3. Exchange Market Data
Our intra-day exchange rate and order flow data cover a ten-month period, from
06 Oct 1999 through 24 July 2000 for the usd-euro and usd-gbp.17 The data are from the
brokered segment of the inter-dealer exchange rate market as captured by the Reuters
D2000-2 electronic trading system.18 Electronic brokers were first introduced in 1992
and since that time their market share has increased rapidly. In the early 1990s the interdealer market was split evenly between direct and voice-broker trading but by the late
16

For example here are some quotes from market participants: “Price action today was dictated by
technical factors, options related factors”; “Dealers said the euro would likely struggle to break key
technical levels near $1.0350”; “Analysts said only a breach of key chart resistance located around $1.03
could give an incentive to market bulls for betting on the euro”; “Liquidity is still pretty poor... but it is a
market that is moving as more people get sucked in, so inevitably momentum can build up and we can get a
reasonably sharp move”.
17
EBS, the other major electronic brokerage system, has a much larger share of total trading in the usdeuro market potentially leading the Reuters data for the usd-euro to be less representative. Reuters usdeuro order flow data, in particular, may not well capture average trading behavior in that market outside of
European hours. Reuters dominates EBS in the usd-gbp market.
18
See Rime (2004) for a detailed description of electronic trading systems and Lyons (2001, chapter 3) for
a full description of the three basic types of trades in the foreign exchange market. Direct inter-dealer
trading was traditionally the most liquid part of the foreign exchange market – it typically is used for large
size trades (above $10 million) and spreads are typically only one to two basis points. Brokered interdealer trades are a growing segment of the market, and typically involve slightly higher spreads of 2-3 basis
points (especially for trades below $10 million). Customer-dealer trades involve 3-7 basis point spreads for
“good” customers.

8

1990s the two top electronic brokerage systems, Reuters and EBS, made up over 50
percent of the market.
Inter-dealer brokering systems provide prices that are advertised to all member
dealers (though the identity of the quoting dealer is only available once the quote is hit).
Dealers can submit a buy or sell quote or “hit” a quote of another dealer. Only the highest
bid and lowest ask (the touch) are shown on the Reuters screen.19 The quantity available
at each (best) bid and ask is also shown (which may involve more than one bank), and
when a bid or ask is hit the quantities available at that price are adjusted if they dip below
$10 million. When multiple banks have entered the same bid or ask price, and the price is
hit, offers are met on a first come basis (meaning that the dealer who first input the price
gets the deal first and if more quantity is needed, the dealer that next submitted the same
price fills the order, and so on). All transactions are made at either the posted bid or
ask.20 Table 4 provides a snap-shot (from Rime (2004)) of what the Reuters D2000-2
screen might look like to a dealer at a point in time. Figure 1 shows bid and ask quotes
for the usd-euro and usd-gbp rates over our sample period along with the quote mid-point
It is worth noting that the usd-gbp rate was relatively stable over this sample period, with
a fluctuation range of between 1.47 and 1.68. The usd-euro rate was roughly twice as
variable, with trades ranging from 0.82 to 1.26.
While dealers in individual banks will know their own customer order flow – they
do not have access to information on customer orders of other banks. One of the reasons
that inter-dealer brokerage systems have become so popular is that they provide an
important source of real time information on both market quotes and overall market order
flow. The Reuters D2000-2 system classifies transactions as buyer-initiated or sellerinitiated, providing dealers with a real time proxy of signed trading volume.21 We
measure order flow in this study as the difference between the number of buyer-initiated
trades and seller-initiated trades in each 20-minute interval. Figure 2 shows the number

19

Limit orders with prices below the best bid or above the best offer are not observable on Reuters D20002 but are shown on Minex.
20
One advantage of the (shrinking) voice-brokered market is that it allows for some communication
between dealers and brokers which allows for negotiation over price.
21
The dealer posting the quote is considered the non-initiating side. Reuters does not provide information
on the size of each trade.

9

of buy and sell orders separately as well as our measure of order flow for the usd-euro
and usd-gbp rates.
The intra-day price series used in this study incorporates information from both
transactions prices (actual trades) and (tradeable) bid and ask quotes submitted by dealers
(but not hit).22 We use tradeable quotes in addition to actual transactions prices to create
a 20-minute price series for each of our two exchange rates that spans the period over
which we have “news” data.23 We measure exchange rate returns, ∆sti , as the log
difference in 20-minute (midpoint) prices and exchange rate volatility, Vti as the absolute
value of the 20-minute returns. Figure 3 shows usd-euro and usd-gbp returns and
volatility over our sample period. The volatility series displays the strong seasonal
pattern that is typically found in intra-day exchange rate volatility data which, in turn,
largely reflects the opening and closing of the three main trading markets in Tokyo,
Europe and New York. We de-seasonalize the volatility series using the Andersen and
Bollerslev (1997ab, 1998) flexible fourier form (FFF) regression method which involves
decomposing the demeaned i-minute exchange rate returns, into a daily volatility factor, a
periodic component for the ith intraday interval and an i.i.d. mean zero unit variance
innovation term all divided by the square root of the number of uncorrelated intraday
return components.24 Figure 4 shows the average absolute usd-euro and usd-gbp return in
each 20-minute interval over the 24-hour GMT time scale along side the estimated FFF
seasonal. Figure 5 shows average daily usd-euro and usd-gbp returns, order flow and
news arrival also over the 24-hour GMT time scale. It is worth noting that news arrival is
fairly evenly spread over the day, while order flow for the usd-euro market is relatively
light outside of European trading hours, presumably reflecting that EBS holds a dominant
share of trading volume in that market. There is little evidence of a within day trend in
average returns for either exchange rate.
22

Tradeable quotes differ from indicative quotes, which have been used in a number of previous studies, in
that they provide “firm” prices. Indicative quotes provide market information for non-dealers.
23
There are a periods of low liquidity on Reuters D2000-2 due to technical problems (the feed failing),
holidays, and during Asian trading hours. Some studies simply drop these time periods from the sample.
Our approach is to interpolate a 20 minute time series (using a piecewise cubic Hermite interpolating
function which preserves the monotonicity and shape of the data) from all available quotes in order to fully
span our “news” data set. Reuters does not include weekend data so any news that arrives over a weekend
is moved to the first 20-minute interval on the nearest Monday.
24
See Dominguez (forthcoming) for a detailed description of how this was implemented.

10

Table 5 provides descriptive statistics for our 20-minute usd-euro and usd-gbp
exchange rates, returns25 and volatility, order flow and order flow volatility, and
transaction frequency (measured as the number of transactions in a given 20-minute
interval). The usd-euro exchange rate returns series only display first-order
autocorrelation, suggesting that future exchange rate changes cannot be predicted from
past changes beyond a 20 minute horizon. There is no evidence of autocorrelation for the
usd-gbp returns. Intra-day return volatility and transaction frequency for both currencies
shows evidence of strong and persistent autocorrelation. While buy and sell orders are
highly autocorrelated, order-flow (buy orders minus sell orders) does not display
significant autocorrelation for either currency.
Table 6 presents contemporaneous correlations among our key variables:
exchange rate returns and volatility, order flow and order flow volatility as well as a
measure of news arrival (measured as the number of news articles in a given 20-minute
interval) and trading frequency.26 The correlations indicate that there exists a strong
contemporaneous association between exchange rate returns and order flow and order
flow volatility and transaction frequency for both currencies. For the usd-gbp rate the
correlations between exchange rate volatility, order flow volatility, and transaction
frequency are also high. Beyond these contemporaneous correlations, we might expect
longer-lived correlation between news and the other variables if traders have different
views of the implications (and information content) of the news.
4. Effects of Different Categories of News on Returns and Volatility
The standard approach in the empirical exchange rate literature is to run the
following sort of “event study” style regression27 of the conditional mean of i-minute

25

We compute returns (approximately) as the percentage change in the exchange rate multiplied by 100, so
the units can be thought of as basis points.
26
Evans and Lyons (2003) document strong contemporaneous correlation between news arrival, transaction
frequency and order flow volatility. Melvin and Yin (2000) find a positive correlation between trading
frequency (using indicative quotes) and the rate of flow of public information.
27
An alternative approach based on state dependent heteroscedasticity is used by Rigobon and Sack (2002)
and Evans and Lyons (2003).

11

exchange rate returns, ∆sti , on j leads28 and lags of each of the k “news” announcements
and g lags of past returns (to account for the autocorrelation we found in table 5); that is:
k
k
∆s t i = α 0 + ∑ k ∑ jα 1, j N t i− j + ∑ gα 2, g ∆s t i− g + ε t i

(1)

where ∆sti denotes the change in the natural log of the i-minute (spot market) exchange rate
on day t and N denotes the (time-stamped to the nearest i-minute) “news”29. We use the
Schwarz (1978) criteria to fix the lag length on returns and the lead/lag length on “news”,
and we correct for heteroskedasticity and serial correlation in the error term using the
Newey and West (1987) approach. Using this general regression specification it is possible
to test for the impact and intra-day effects of news on exchange rate returns by examining
whether the Nks are individually and jointly statistically significant. The α1,k j s in this
context measure the typical effect of the kth news announcement at time j (on day t) on
exchange rate returns in the same (narrow) 20-minute window. It is worth noting that in
order to be able to interpret the α1,k j s in this way we need to assume that the variables in the
regression can be viewed as fixed over the 20-minute period (which is less likely to be
realistic for low-frequency data windows). It is also the case that the α1,k j s will measure the
linear combination of exchange rate return effects associated with the market’s assessment
of both the “news” and how the news will influence the economy.30
Our “news” variable includes three distinct categories of news: (1) scheduled macro
surprises, (2) non-scheduled but fundamentals-driven news, and (3) non-scheduled nonfundamental based news. Within categories (2) and (3) news was further broken down by
source (policy-maker or market participant), geographic region (Euro-zone, Japan, US or
UK), substance (subcategories of fundamentals and non-fundamentals) and expected
direction of influence (whether the news is expected to appreciate or depreciate the
28

We include leads in order to take into account the possibility that the time-stamp on our “news” lags the
actual timing of when market participants first learn about the news. We find evidence of significant lead
effects for many of our variables for up to two hours prior to the Reuters’ time-stamp.
29
The Reuters news variables are (0,1) dummy variables. The macro surprises are measured as the
difference between the specific announcement and the ex-ante expectation of the announcement (based on
the median response to a survey conducted by Money Market Services International) divided by the sample
standard deviation of each announcement (this serves to normalize the surprises so that comparisons of the
relative size of coefficients is feasible).
30
For a nice discussion of the underlying assumptions in this sort of event study analysis see Faust, Rogers,
Wand and Wright (2003) pages 6-9.

12

exchange rate)31. Category (2) and (3) news are in binary dummy variable form which is
likely to downward bias our results if these sorts of news are sometimes anticipated by the
market.
Table 7 presents results of our regression of usd-euro and usd-gbp returns on
various categories of “news”. The first and third columns in table 7 present the results of
our benchmark regression which include only the macro surprises as “news” for the usdeuro (first column) and usd-gbp (third column). As has been found in previous studies,
the macro surprises significantly influence both usd-euro and usd-gbp returns, though the
relatively low regression goodness-of-fit (especially for the usd-gbp) suggests that macro
surprises account for a small fraction of the overall variability of returns.32 The second
and fourth columns in table 7 present results of regressions that include our broader
definition of news. These columns include, along with the macro surprises, nonscheduled news reports that are related to fundamentals and news that is not related to
fundamentals. In the usd-euro regressions Euro-zone macro surprises are only statistically
significant when other “news” is not included (first column). For the usd-gbp regressions
both UK and Euro-zone macro surprises matter, even when other “news” is included
(third and fourth column). US macro surprises did not enter significantly in any of the
regressions.
Looking first at the influence of non-scheduled fundamentals, we find that a
number of these “news” reports matter in terms of statistical significance. The first
variable that shows up significant in the usd-euro regression is contemporaneous “Eurozone monetary fundamentals” with a coefficient of -0.02, which can be interpreted as
indicating that these news reports (which tended to mention Euro-zone interest rates or
inflation) led to a 2 basis point appreciation of the dollar relative to the euro. It is

31

We attempted to group news into variables in such a way as to insure that we would not be combining
news that would be expected to lead to opposite effects on exchange rates. The coefficients on these
disaggregated news variables are then aggregated into broader groupings of variables (monetary
fundamentals, fiscal fundamentals, growth and unemployment, options market, technical analysis, private
sector) in order to keep our tables readable. Regression results with the disaggregated news categories are
available upon request.
32
The macro surprises are disaggregated by region (so that all U.S. surprises are included as one variable).
As robustness checks we also included disaggregated macro surprises (by type and region, e.g. US PPI,
etc…) as well as aggregating the surprises (all US, UK and European surprises included as one variable).
Results were qualitatively similar across the three levels of aggregation. The non-reported results
(disaggregated by type and region, and fully aggregated) are available upon request.

13

interesting to note that reports of Japanese interventions (which were aimed at weakening
the yen over this time period)33 led to a contemporaneous 3.8 basis point appreciation of
the dollar relative to the euro and a similar size influence on the dollar relative to the
pound (though in the 20 minutes prior to the Reuters time-stamp). Focusing next on the
influence of non-fundamentals related news, we find evidence that reports connected to
all our included categories (option market, technical analysis, sentiment, private sector
and politics) enter significantly. Moreover, the coefficient estimates on non-fundamental
news are similar in size to those found for fundamentals-related news. We also find
strong evidence of both lead (especially for the usd-gbp)34 and lag effects on the nonscheduled news variables, suggesting both that some traders learn of the news before our
Reuters’ time-stamp and that market reaction to “news” is often not instantaneous.
The results in table 7 indicate that both scheduled macro surprises and nonscheduled fundamental and non-fundamental news influences returns. In order to further
examine how information is processed by the market under different market conditions,
we test for two types of interaction effects. First, we ask whether news is more (or less)
likely to influence returns during periods when lots of other news is hitting the market.
We create an indicator variable that takes on the value 1 during 20-minute intervals when
the number of news reports exceeds the sample average by two standard deviations. The
first two columns of table 8 suggest that for both usd-euro and usd-gbp returns “news”
often had a larger impact on returns when it arrived during heavy news periods. Our
results are even more dramatic when we test whether news has a stronger impact during
periods of high market uncertainty (proxied by high volatility). We create an indicator
variable that takes on the value 1 during 20-minute intervals when volatility (measured as
the absolute value of returns) exceeds the sample average by two standard deviations.
The second two columns in table 8 present regression results that show that during
periods when the market is most uncertain “news” (of all types) had a significantly larger
influence on returns than was the case when news arrived during normal periods.
33

The Japanese government intervened on 4 occasions during our sample period, all of these were dollar
strengthening operations. A number of unrequited interventions (interventions that the market expected but
did not occur) also influenced returns over this period. See Dominguez and Panthaki (2005) for a more
detailed examination of the influence of actual and unrequited interventions.
34
One explanation for why lead effects are more important for the usd-gbp market is that the source of our
data, Reuters, is the dominant player (in terms of market share) in this currency market.

14

The regression results presented in tables 7 and 8 indicate that “news” both
narrowly defined as macro surprises, and more broadly defined, has an influence on intradaily exchange rate returns. However, the relatively low regression goodness-of-fit
suggests that even our broader measure of news does not go very far in explaining overall
exchange rate movements. It is possible that our binary coding of news is partly to blame
for our inability to explain a larger fraction of exchange rate variation. It may be that
while we are not able to “sign” exchange rate movements using such a crude indicator of
information flow, our “news” variables will be more successful at explaining exchange
rate volatility. It may also be that news (however measured) does not impact price
directly, but that its influence is mediated through order flow. We investigate both these
possibilities in the next two sets of regressions.
In order to examine whether our broader definition of news helps to explain the
absolute value of exchange rate returns, we regress de-seasonalized intra-day volatility,

Vtis , on the same set of explanatory “news” variables:
Vtis = λ 0 + ∑ k ∑ j λ 1,k j N tki − j + ∑ gλ2, gVtis− g + η t i

(2)

Andersen and Bollerslev (1998) find that three factors influence intra-daily
exchange rate volatility: calendar effects and volatility dependencies (both of which are
captured in the FFF seasonal) and macro surprises, with macro surprises providing the
least explanatory power. We examine the influence of our broader definition of news on
de-seasonalized35 volatility and allow for a longer lag structure to test whether the effects
of non-scheduled news reports are longer-lived. We use the Schwarz (1978) criteria to fix
the leads and lags in the regression specification and correct for potential heteroskedasticity
and serial correlation in the error term using the Newey and West (1987) approach.
Table 9 presents our volatility regression results using the same column format as
we did in table 7. The first thing to note about these results, is that many more of our
fundamental-related news reports, and especially our non-fundamentals related news
reports, have a statistically significant effect on de-seasonalized volatility.36 This provides
35

It could be that the intra-day seasonal is explained by news arrival. We test for this possibility by
including our news variables directly in the FFF regression and find no evidence of correlation between the
daily seasonal and our news variables.
36
It is also worth noting that the regression goodness-of-fit is dramatically higher, due in part to the strong
AR component of volatility

15

suggestive evidence that non-scheduled news, perhaps because it is more ambiguous,
leads to stronger differences in opinions about the implications of the information. None
of the macro surprises are significant in the usd-euro regressions, while US macro
surprises enter with a high degree of statistical significance in the usd-gbp regressions
both when entered alone and when included with the other “news” variables.
5. What Does Order Flow Reveal?
In standard models of exchange rate behavior when “positive” news arrives for a
currency, demand for that currency rises, causing the relative value (the price) of the
currency to rise. In these models there is no reason for order flow to rise in reaction to
news because price is assumed to instantaneously reflect the news. Trading volume may
rise in reaction to news, but as long as the new price is efficient, there is no reason for
these trades to be biased in favor of purchases or sales. So that in standard models the
arrival of “news” should increase volume, but be orthogonal to changes in order flow.37
We use transaction frequency, TF, as a proxy for volume, and first test whether
the arrival of “news” in our sample is positively related to transaction frequency.
k
k
TF t i = γ 0 + ∑ k ∑ j γ 1, j N ti − j + ∑ g TFti − g +ν t i

(3)

We find strong evidence of a positive association between “news” and transaction
frequency. Interestingly, macro surprises were sometimes associated with a decrease in
transactions, while all other “news” (and especially non-fundamental news) generally
were positively associated with transaction frequency. In the usd-euro regression macro
surprises had no influence on transaction frequency, but other news, and again especially
non-fundamentals related news, led to increases in transaction frequency.
Under what circumstance might “news” cause a change not just in volume, but in
order flow? One reason that price might not immediately (or fully) react is if the “news”
either is not common knowledge, or if different market participants interpret the news
differently. In this case, order flow might convey this information to the market (rather
37

One view of the relationship between order flow and prices is that it is only a temporary phenomenon.
Order flow in this context reflects trader “digestion effects” in reaction to news, so that once the news is
fully “digested”, any order flow induced price effects will revert back. Work by Evans and Lyons (2002)
and Danielsson, Payne and Luo (2002), however, shows that order flow continues to explain changes in
foreign exchange returns well after 24 hours, suggesting either that digestion is very slow, or more likely,
that the influence of order flow on prices is not temporary.

16

than price). Further, if underlying demand for currencies is driven not by news per se,
but by changes in risk aversion or hedging technologies, again it might be order flow that
will convey this information to the market.38
A simple linear regression specification that relates foreign exchange returns to
order flow is:

∆s t i = β 0 + ∑ j β1, j OFti − j + ∑ g β 2, g ∆s t i−g + µ t i

(4)

Table 10 presents results for a regression of usd-euro and usd-gbp returns on
contemporaneous and lagged order flow. The first thing to note in the table is that our
measure of regression goodness-of-fit is now markedly higher. Our estimates suggest
that order flow explains over 25% of the variation in 20-minute usd-gbp returns and
almost 40% in the usd-euro market.39 These results are strongly suggestive that order
flow belongs in our empirical models of exchange rate determination. Indeed,
Danielsson, Payne and Luo (2002) and Evans and Lyons (2005) perform Meese-Rogoff
style RMSE comparisons to examine whether forecasting out-of-sample exchange rate
returns with order flow outperforms the random walk model (using future realized values
of order flow) and find strong evidence in favor of the order-flow model.40
Our results so far suggest that news, broadly defined, influences exchange rate
returns and volatility, and that order flow influences returns. The next question to ask is
what drives order flow? Previous studies have found a link between macro surprises and
order flow, which runs counter to standard models that would suggest that common
knowledge news, such as macro surprises, should be instantly incorporated in price. We
test whether this result also holds for our data sample, and whether our broader definition
of news is also linked to order flow, OF.
k
k
OF t i = γ 0 + ∑ k ∑ j γ 1, j N ti − j + ∑ g OFti − g +ν t i

(5)

38

Recent papers that have studied the link between “news” and order flow are Love (2004), Love and
Payne (2003), Melvin and Yin (2000), and Evans and Lyons (2003, 2004, and 2005a). Breedon and Vitale
(2005) examine the connection between order flow and liquidity risk.
39

2

Danielsson, Payne and Luo (2002) compare the R for this sort of regression over multiple sampling
frequencies (from 5 minutes to one week) and find that for the usd-euro rate the percent variation is fairly
stable (around 40%) over all frequencies.
40
However, when Danielsson et al (2002) only use order flow information available at the forecast date, the
RMSE of the order flow forecast model falls below the RMSE for the random walk model. Using
disaggregated order flow information over a longer horizon (10 days or longer) Evans and Lyons (2005)
find that the forecasting ability of their order flow model is significantly better than the random walk
model.

17

Table 11 presents results for the regression of usd-euro and usd-gbp order flow on
various categories of news. The first and third columns provide results for our benchmark
specification which only includes the macro surprises. European macro surprises are
highly statistically significant for usd-euro order flow but none of the macro surprises are
significant in the usd-gbp order flow regression. The results in the second and fourth
columns indicate that many of the non-scheduled fundamental and non-fundamental
related news enter significantly for both currencies. However, “news” explains a
relatively small fraction of the overall variation in order flow. Our regression goodnessof-fit measure never rises above 0.05 for either currency, indicating that our measure of
order flow is largely not being driven by our measures of “news”.41 However, if we
allow for interaction effects as we did previously in our returns regression, we find
stronger evidence of a relationship between “news” and order flow. This is particularly
true when we interact “news” with “high volatility” periods, where the regression
goodness-of-fit rises to 0.14 for usd-euro order flow and 0.13 for usd-gbp order flow.
6. VAR Analysis
In the previous section we analyzed the relationships between returns (or
volatility), order flow and various categories of news using single equation methods. It is
probably more appropriate, however, to think of these variables as part of an interrelated
economic system. News hits the market and influences trader expectations, which in turn
impacts prices (and returns), volume, and order flow.42 It is also clear that order flow
(imbalances in buy and sell orders) influence returns. This suggests the following twoequation system:

41

This result is at odds with results in Evans and Lyons (2004) which find a strong connection between
disaggregated order flow and news. It is possible that the difference in results is due to the fact that our
order flow information is only reflecting inter-dealer trades.
42
In standard macro models “news” should only influence prices and volume, not order flow. However,
our single equation results strongly suggest that the influence of news is, at least in part, mediated through
order flow, as well as directly affecting prices. Previous work by Evans and Lyons (2003) has attempted to
disentangle the effects of news on prices and order flow by assuming that (common-knowledge) news is
orthogonal to (dispersed information) order flow. Our approach is to assume that news influences both
prices and order flow and focus more on the total influence of news – rather than attempting to disentangle
its separate effects.

18

k
k
∆s t i = α 0 + ∑ k ∑ jα 1, j N t i − j + ∑ gα 2, g ∆s t i − g + ∑ gα 3,k OFti − k + ε t i

OFti = β 0 + ∑k ∑ j β1,k j N

k
ti − j

(6)

+ ∑ gβ 2, g ∆s t i − g + ∑ gβ 3,k OFti −k + ν t i

Our identifying assumption is that order flow does not depend on
contemporaneous returns, so that β2,0=0. This assumption is not innocuous. If returns are
mean-reverting, feedback trading would be profitable and would in turn lead returns to
influence order flow.
VAR regression results indicate that order flow enters with a very high degree of
statistical significance in the returns regression, as was true in our single equation
estimates. An increase in usd-euro order flow (an increase in net purchases of euros)
leads on average to an increase in the usd-euro rate (an euro appreciation relative to the
dollar) of 0.4 basis points. Similarly, in the usd-gbp market an increase in net purchases
of pounds leads, on average, to a 0.3 basis point appreciation of the pound relative to the
dollar. While it is clear that most of the explanatory power in the returns regression is
coming from order flow, “news” and especially non-scheduled “news”, continues to also
matter. Or, put another way, the inclusion of order flow does not wipe out the influence
of “news”. Likewise, all three types of “news” enter significantly in the order flow
equations. Figures 6 and 7 present examples of the intra-day impulse responses of
returns and order flow to “news”.
7. Conclusions
In this paper we examine the role of news in exchange rate determination.
Previous studies have found that scheduled macro announcements, when measured in
surprise form, help to explain intra-daily exchange rate behavior. These results, in turn,
have breathed new life into the post Meese-Rogoff empirical exchange rate literature. We
measure news much more broadly, and include both fundamentals-related and nonfundamentals-related news reports to examine whether it is macro announcements, or
simply intra-daily data (and a more “narrow window”), that accounts for these positive
results. Overall, our results do not suggest that our broader definition of news provides a
vast improvement over the macro surprises in explaining exchange rate behavior, giving
yet more credence to the importance of macro variables in standard models. We do,

19

however, find that non-scheduled news, and intriguingly, non-scheduled nonfundamentals-related news has a statistically significant influence on both intra-day
exchange rate returns and volatility. Further, we find that news has its largest impact
during periods of higher than normal news arrival and higher market uncertainty.
We also examine the role of order flow in exchange rate determination. In
standard models there is no reason for order flow to rise in reaction to news because price
is assumed to instantaneously adjust. Trading volume may rise in reaction to news, but
as long as the new price is efficient, there is no reason for trades to be biased in favor of
purchases or sales. We find that order flow explains a large fraction of the variation in
both usd-euro and usd-gbp exchange rate returns, suggesting that prices are, at the very
least, slow to adjust. At the same time, we find that our measure of “news” explains a
relatively small fraction of the total variation in order flow. Overall, our results indicate
that along with the standard fundamentals, both non-fundamentals-related news and order
flow matter, suggesting that future models of exchange rate determination ought to
include all three types of explanatory variables.

20

References
Almeida, A., Goodhart, C., Payne, R., 1998. The effects of macroeconomic news on high
frequency exchange rate behavior. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 33 (3),
383-408.
Andersen, T., Bollerslev, T., 1997a. Intraday periodicity and volatility persistence in
financial markets. Journal of Empirical Finance 4, 115-158.
Andersen, T., Bollerslev, T., 1997b. Heterogeneous information arrivals and return
volatility dynamics: uncovering the long-run in high frequency returns. Journal of
Finance 52 (3), 975-1005.
Andersen, T., and T. Bollerslev, 1998. Deutsche mark-dollar volatility: Intraday activity
patterns, macroeconomic announcements, and longer run dependencies,
Journal of Finance, 53: 219-265.
Andersen, T., T. Bollerslev, F. Diebold, C. Vega, 2003. Micro effects of macro
announcements: Real-time price discovery in foreign exchange, American
Economic Review, 93: 38-62.
Bacchetta, P., van Wincoop, E., 2003. Can information heterogeneity explain the
exchange rate determination puzzle? NBER Working Paper #9498, February.
Ben Omrane, W., Bauwens, L., Giot, P., forthcoming. News announcements, market
activity and volatility in the euro/dollar foreign exchange market. Journal of International
Money and Finance.
Bollerslev, T., Domowitz, I., 1993. Trading patterns and prices in the interbank foreign
exchange market. Journal of Finance 48, 1421-1443.
Breedon, F., Vitale, P., 2005. An empirical study of liquidity and information effects of
order flow on exchange rates, mimeo, Imperial College London.
Cai, J., Cheung, Y., Lee, R., Melvin, M., 2001. ‘Once-in-a-generation’ yen volatility in
1998: fundamentals, intervention and order flow. Journal of International Money and
Finance 20, 327-347.
Chaboud, A., Chernenko, S., Howorka, E., Iyer, R., Liu, D., Wright, J., 2004. The highfrequency effects of U.S. macroeconomic data releases on prices and trading activity in the
global interdealer foreign exchange market, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System, IFDP No. 823, November.
Cheung, Y., Chinn, M., and A. Pascual, forthcoming. Empirical exchange rate models of
the nineties: are any fit to survive? Journal of International Money and Finance.

21

Danielsson, J., Payne, R., and J. Luo, 2002. Exchange rate determination and inter-market
order flow effects, FMG mimeo, London School of Economics.
DeGennaro, R., and R. Shrieves, 1997. Public information releases, private information
arrival, and volatility in the foreign exchange market, Journal of
Empirical Finance, 4: 295-315.
Dominguez, K., 1998. Central bank intervention and exchange rate volatility. Journal of
International Money and Finance 17, 161-190.
Dominguez, K., 2003. The market microstructure of central bank intervention. Journal of
International Economics 59, 25-45.
Dominguez, K., forthcoming, When Do Central Bank Interventions Influence Intra-Daily
and Longer-Term Exchange Rate Movements? Journal of International Money and
Finance.
Dominguez, K. and F. Panthaki, 2005. The Influence of Actual and Unrequited
Interventions, mimeo, University of Michigan.
Ederington, L., and J. Lee, 1995. The short-run dynamics of price adjustment to new
information, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 30: 117-134.
Ehrmann, M., and M. Fratzscher, 2005. Exchange rates and fundamentals: new evidence
from real-time data, Journal of International Money and Finance, 24, 317-341.
Engel, C., and K. West, forthcoming. Exchange rates and fundamentals, Journal of
Political Economy.
Evans, M., and R. Lyons, 2002. Order flow and exchange rate dynamics, Journal of
Political Economy, 110: 170-180.
Evans, M., and R. Lyons, 2003. How is macro news transmitted to exchange rates?,
mimeo.
Evans, M., and R. Lyons, 2004. Exchange rate fundamentals and order flow, mimeo,
Georgetown University.
Evans, M., and R. Lyons, 2005a. Do currency markets absorb news quickly?, Journal of
International Money and Finance, 24, 197-217.
Evans, M., and R. Lyons, 2005b. Meese-Rogoff Redux: Micro-based exchange rate
forecasting, NBER working paper 11042.
Fatum, R. and M. Hutchison, 2003. Is sterilized foreign exchange intervention effective
after all? An event study approach, Economic Journal, 113, 487, 390-411.

22

Fair, R., 2003. Shock effects on stocks, bonds and exchange rates, Journal of
International Money and Finance, 22, 307-341.
Faust, J., Rogers, J., Wang, S., Wright, J., 2003. The high-frequency response of
exchange rates and interest rates to macroeconomics announcements, Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System, IFDP No. 784, October.
Flood, R., and A. Rose, 1995. Fixing exchange rates: A virtual quest for fundamentals,
Journal of Monetary Economics 36, 3-37.
Fratzscher, M., 2004. Communication and exchange rate policy. ECB working paper 363,
May.
Hakkio, C., and D.K. Pearce, 1985. The reaction of exchange rates to economic news.
Economic Inquiry, 23, 4, 621-636.
Inoue, A., and Kilian, K., forthcoming. On the Selection of Forecasting Models. Journal of
Econometrics.
Ito, T., and V. Roley, 1987. News from the US and Japan: which moves the yen/dollar
exchange rate?, Journal of Monetary Economics, 19, 2, 255-277.
Jansen, D-J., and J. De Haan, 2005. Talking heads: the effects of ECB statements on the
euro-dollar exchange rate, Journal of international Money and Finance, 24, 343-361.
Kilian, L., 1999. Exchange rates and monetary fundamentals: what do we learn from long
horizon regressions?, Journal of Applied Econometrics, 14, 491-510.
Kilian, L. and M. Taylor, 2003. Why is it so difficult to beat the random walk forecast of
exchange rates? Journal of International Economics, 60 (1), 85-107.
Kondor, P., 2004. The more we know, the less we agree, mimeo FMG, London School of
Economics.
Kyle, A. 1985. Continuous auctions and insider trading, Econometrica, 53:1315-35.
Laakkonen, H., 2004. The impact of macroeconomic news on exchange rate volatility,
Bank of Finland discussion paper 24.
Love, R., 2004. First and second moment effects of macro news in high frequency
foreign exchange data, mimeo FMG, London School of Economics.
Love, R., and R. Payne, 2003. Macroeconomic news, order flows, and exchange rates,
Discussion Paper 475, FMG, London School of Economics.
Lyons, R., 2001. The Microstructure Approach to Exchange Rates, MIT Press.

23

Mark, N., 1995. Exchange rates and fundamentals: Evidence on long-horizon
predictability, American Economic Review, 85: 201-218.
Meese, R., and K. Rogoff, 1983a. Empirical exchange rate models of the seventies,
Journal of International Economics, 14: 3-24.
Meese, R., and K. Rogoff, 1983b, The out-of-sample failure of empirical exchange rate
models, in J. Frenkel (ed.), Exchange Rate and International Macroeconomics, University
of Chicago Press: Chicago.
Melvin, M., and X. Yin, 2000. Public information arrival, exchange rate volatility, and
quote frequency, Economic Journal, 110: 644-661.
Newey, W., and K. West, 1987. A simple, positive semidefinite, heteroskedasticity and
autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix, Econometrica, 55, 703-708.
Osler, C., 2003. Currency orders and exchange-rate dynamics: An explanation for the
predictive success of technical analysis, Journal of Finance, 58: 1791-1820.
Panthaki, F., 2004. Exchange rate volatility and central bank interventions, mimeo FMG,
London School of Economics.
Rigabon, R. and B. Sack, 2002. The impact of monetary policy on asset prices, NBER
Working paper #8794.
Rime, D., 2003. New electronic trading systems in foreign exchange markets, typescript,
Norges Bank, January.
Sager, M., and M.P. Taylor, 2004. The impact of European central bank governing
council announcements on the foreign exchange market: a microstructural analysis,
Journal of International Money and Finance, 23, 1043-1051.
Schwarz, G., 1978. Estimating the dimension of a model, Annals of Statistics, 6, 461464.
Vitale, P., 2003. New exchange rate economics. Mimeo, Dottarato di Ricerca: Universita
di Tor Vergata.

24

Figure 1: Reuters D2000-2 USD-GBP Bid, Ask and Mid Quotes
1a. USD-EUR Bid & Ask Quotes

1b. USD-EUR Mid Quote

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4
Feb-00

Jan-00

Dec-99

Sep-99

Jun-00

Apr-00

May-00

Mar-00

Jan-00

Feb-00

Dec-99

Oct-99

Nov-99

Sep-99

2a. USD-GBP Bid & Ask Quotes

Jun-00

0.8

Apr-00

1.2

May-00

1.2

Mar-00

1.2

1.2

Oct-99

1.6

1.6

Nov-99

1.6

1.6

2b. USD-GBP Mid Quote

1.5

1.4

1.4

1.4

1.4
Sep-99

Jun-00

May-00

Apr-00

Mar-00

Feb-00

Jan-00

Dec-99

Nov-99

Oct-99

Sep-99

May-00

1.5

Apr-00

1.5

Mar-00

1.5

Feb-00

1.6

Jan-00

1.6

Dec-99

1.6

1.6

Nov-99

1.7

1.7

Oct-99

1.7

1.7

Notes: The data cover the ten month period from 06 Oct 1999 to 24 July 2000. Both currencies are
defined as the number of dollars per foreign currency (euro and sterling, respectively). The mid quote is
calculated as the average of the bid and ask quotes.

25

Figure 2: Total Buys, Total Sells and Order Flow

Jun-00

Apr-00

May-00

Mar-00

Jan-00

Feb-00

Dec-99

Oct-99

Jun-00

Apr-00

May-00

Mar-00

Feb-00

Jan-00

Dec-99

350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
Sep-99

Jun-00

Nov-99

350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
Nov-99

350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0

350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
Sep-99

350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0

Oct-99

350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0

Jun-00

May-00

Apr-00
Apr-00

May-00

Mar-00
Mar-00

Jan-00

Dec-99

Feb-00
Feb-00

Jan-00

Dec-99

Oct-99

Nov-99
Nov-99

Sep-99

USD-GBP

Jun-00

Jun-00

May-00

-150
Apr-00

-150
Mar-00

-150

Feb-00

-50

-150

Jan-00

-50
Nov-99

-50

Dec-99

50

-50

Oct-99

50

Sep-99

50

May-00

150

50

Apr-00

150

Mar-00

150

Feb-00

250

150

Jan-00

350

250

Nov-99

350

250

Dec-99

350

250

Oct-99

350

Sep-99

Order Flow

Sep-99
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0

Oct-99

Total Buy

350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0

Total Sell

USD-EUR

Notes: The data cover the ten month period from 06 Oct 1999 to 24 July 2000. Order flow is the
net of the total buys and total sells, where a buy (sell) refers to a trade in which the initiator is a
purchaser (seller) of the denominator currency (euro for USD-EUR and sterling for USD-GBP).

26

Figure 3: Exchange Rate Returns and Volatility
(in basis points)

1b. USD-EUR Volatility

Jun-00

May-00

Apr-00

Sep-99

Mar-00

0.0
Feb-00

0.0
Jan-00

0.5

Nov-99

0.5

Dec-99

1.0

Jun-00

0.0
May-00

0.0
Apr-00

0.2

Mar-00

0.2

Feb-00

0.4

Jan-00

0.4

Nov-99

0.6

Dec-99

0.6

Sep-99

Jun-00

Apr-00

May-00

Mar-00

Jan-00

Feb-00

Nov-99

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6
Dec-99

1.0

2b. USD-GBP Volatility

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6
Oct-99

1.5

Oct-99

2a. USD-GBP Return

Sep-99

1.5

Jun-00

Apr-00

May-00

Mar-00

Jan-00

Feb-00

Nov-99

Dec-99

Oct-99

1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0
-1.5
Sep-99

1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0
-1.5

Oct-99

1a. USD-EUR Return

Notes: The data cover the ten month period from 06 Oct 1999 to 24 July 2000 and are sampled at 20minute frequency. Both currencies are defined as the number of dollars per foreign currency (euro and
sterling, respectively). Returns are defined as 100 times the log difference of the mid quote where the mid
quote is calculated as the average of the bid and ask quotes. Volatility is defined as the absolute return.

27

Figure 4: Average Daily Volatility and FFF Seasonal
(in basis points)
USD-EUR

0.02

0.02
9:00
PM

0.04

6:00
PM

0.04

3:00
PM

0.06

12:00
PM

0.06

9:00
AM

0.08

6:00
AM

0.08

3:00
AM

0.10

12:00
AM

0.10

USD-GBP

9:00
PM

0.00
6:00
PM

0.00
3:00
PM

0.02

12:00
PM

0.02

9:00
AM

0.04

6:00
AM

0.04

3:00
AM

0.06

12:00
AM

0.06

Notes: The data cover the ten month period from 06 Oct 1999 to 24 July 2000
and are sampled at 20-minute frequency. Both currencies are defined as the
number of dollars per foreign currency (euro and sterling, respectively). The
figures plot the average intra-daily pattern of volatility (jagged line) and the
Flexible Fourier Form seasonal (smooth line) over a 24-hour period. Volatility
is defined as the absolute return, where returns are calculated as 100 times
the log difference of the mid quote. The mid quote is calculated as the
average of the bid and ask quotes.

28

Figure 5: Average Daily USD-GBP Returns, Order Flow and News Arrival
USD-GBP

-0.01

-0.04

-0.04

-0.02

-0.02
0:00

21:00

-0.01

18:00

-0.01

15:00

-0.01

12:00

0.00

9:00

0.00

6:00

0.02

3:00

0.02

21:00

0.01

18:00

0.01

15:00

0.05

12:00

0.05

9:00

0.02

6:00

0.02

3:00

0.08

0:00

0.08

-2

-4

-4

-4

-4

21:00

21:00

-2
18:00

-2

15:00

0

-2

12:00

2

0

9:00

2

0

6:00

2

0

3:00

2

0:00

4

18:00

4

15:00

4

12:00

6

4

9:00

8

6

6:00

8

6

3:00

8

6

0:00

8

0.00

0.00

21:00

21:00

0.00

18:00

0.00

15:00

0.02

12:00

0.02

9:00

0.02

6:00

0.02

3:00

0.04

0:00

0.04

18:00

0.04

15:00

0.04

12:00

0.06

9:00

0.06

6:00

0.06

3:00

0.06

0:00

Average News Arrival

Average Order Flow

Average Return

USD-EUR

Notes: The data cover the ten month period from 06 Oct 1999 to 24 July 2000 and are sampled at
20-min frequency. Both currencies are defined as the number of dollars per foreign currency (euro
and sterling, respectively). The figures plot the average intra-daily pattern of returns, order flow
and news arrival over a 24-hour period. Returns are calculated as 100 times the log difference of
the mid quote where the mid quote is calculated as the average of the bid and ask quotes. Order
flow is the net of the total buys and total sells, where a buy (sell) refers to a trade in which the
initiator is a purchaser (seller) of the denominator currency (euro for USD-EUR and sterling for
USD-GBP). News Arrival is the number of Reuters news articles in each 20- min period.

29

Figure 6: Intra-day Effects of Order Flow and News on USD-EUR and USD-GBP Returns

Order Flow

USD-EUR

USD-GBP

0.006

0.006

0.004

0.004

0.002

0.002

0.000

0.000

-0.002

-0.002

Good news regarding US Unemployment
Good news regarding Technical Factors

Non-Fundamentals

Fundamentals

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

0

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.0

0.0

1

2

3

4

5

6

-0.2

-0.2
-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.0

0.0

-0.2

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

-0.2
-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Note: These figures show the cumulative effects of order flow (up to two hours after) and examples of fundamental
and non-fundamental "news" (two hours before and two hours after) on returns (where the Reuters news report
occurs at time 0). The dashed lines show the 95% confidence interval.

30

Figure 7: Intra-day Effects of News on USD-EUR and USD-GBP Order Flow
USD-EUR

USD-GBP

Good news regarding US unemployment
Good news regarding technical factors

Non-Fundamentals

Fundamentals

60

50
40

40

30
20

20

10
0

0

-10
-20

-20

-30
-40

-40
-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0.0

0.0

-0.1

-0.1

-0.2

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

-0.2
-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Note: These figures show the cumulative effects of two examples of fundamental and non-fundamental "news" (two
hours before and two hours after) on order flow (where the Reuters news report occurs at time 0). The dashed lines
show the 95% confidence interval.

31

Table 1: Summary Statistics of Macro News Announcements
Announcement

Reported as

Local time

UK Announcements (total = 80)
RPIX
Retail Sales
Global trade
Provisional M4
PPI
Industrial Production
Unemployment
Current Account

Y/Y % change
M/M % change
GBP (billion)
M/M % change
M/M % change NSA
M/M % change
thousands
GBP (billion)

08:30 GMT
08:30 GMT
08:30 GMT
08:30 GMT
08:30 GMT
08:30 GMT
08:30 GMT
08:30 GMT

US Announcements (total = 80)
PPI
CPI
Industrial Production
Monthly M3
Goods & Services Trade Balance
Civilian Unemployment Rate
Nonfarm Payrolls
Retail Sales

M/M % change
M/M % change
M/M % change
change $ Bln
USD (billion)
percent
thousands
M/M % change

08:30 ET
08:30 ET
09:15 ET
16:30 ET
08:30 ET
08:30 ET
08:30 ET
08:30 ET

Euro Area Announcements (total = 58)
PPI
Harmonised CPI
Ind Production
M3
Trade ex-EMU prel. EUR
Unemployment rate

M/M % change
M/M % change
3M/3M % change
Y/Y % change
EUR (billion)
percent

11:00 GMT
11:00 GMT
11:00 GMT
09:00 GMT
11:00 GMT
11:00 GMT

Notes: The data cover the ten month period from 06 Oct 1999 to 24 July 2000. M/M% change refers to
month-on-month percentage change. 3M/3M% change is three month-on-three month percentage change.
Y/Y% change is year-on-year percentage change. NSA refers to non-seasonally adjusted.

32

Table 2: Broad Categories of Non-Scheduled Fundamental-Related News

Monetary Fundamentals
inflation (rise/fall)
interest rates (rise/fall)
bias (loosening/tightening)

Fiscal Fundamentals

Growth and Unemployment

trade (surplus/deficit)
fiscal position (good/bad)

growth (positive/negative)
unemployment (good/bad)
real effective exchange rate
housing (weak/strong)

Differences b/w Economies
growth gap increase/decrease
B/w Europe-US
B/w Europe-Japan

Exchange Rate Policy
Fundamentals
exchange rate target
intervention
Intervention (potential weapon)
joint intervention
no intervention
strong dollar policy

Table 3: Broad Categories of Non-Scheduled Non-Fundamental-Related News
Options Market

Technical Analysis

Market Characteristics

Market Sentiment

Private Sector

options market (support/no support)
demand for barrier options (up/down)
market for current contracts (thin/liquid)
trading (at/below) par

technical factors (good/bad)
technical magnetism of parity
window dressing
exposure driven trading
lack of momentum
institutional selling

year end
month end
Y2K
thin/concentrated markets
risks from large orders
aggressive selling (curbed)
stop-loss selling/orders executed
investors/traders cut losses
long positions (opened/closed)
trading (choppy, lively, jittery)
exchange rate volatility (up/down)
spreads (wider/narrower)

europe (pos/neg)
US (pos/neg)

restructuring good/bad news
government intvn in corporate sector
Holzman
M&A
Mannesman-Orange
Vodafone-Mannesman
Coca-Cola-Orangina
Novartis-AstraZeneca
Banking M&A
attempts to block M&A
speculation about flows due to M&A
deals (more/large)

34

Table 4: Sample Reuters D2000 Screen

Source: Rime (2004, page 17). This screen shows the Reuters Dealing 2000 system. The middle section contains the D2000-1 system for direct bilateral trading,
and the top section is the D2000-2 electronic broker. The dealer chooses which exchange rates to display and whether to display the best prices in the market
(column marked best) and/or the best available to him (from credit-approved banks only). In the D2000-1 section the dealer has been contacted for a quote for
USD 4 million against DEM. The dealer replies with the quote “05 08”, which is understood to be bid 1.8305 and ask 1.8308. The contacting dealer responds
with “I BUY,” and the system automatically fills in the line “TO CONFIRM AT 1.8308. . .”. In the lower right corner of the screen, the dealer can see the price
and direction of the last trades through the D2000-2 system.

35

Table 5: Summary Statistics for USD-EUR and USD-GBP Quotes,
Returns, Volatility, Order Flow and Transaction Frequency
a. USD-EUR

Mean
Variance
Skewness
Kurtosis
Autocorrelation lags
1
5
10
20

Volatility

Net
Order
Flow

Order
Flow
Volatility

Transaction
Frequency

0.14
11.27
0.23
16.24

6.08
9.49
3.53
20.64

0.33
13.55
0.50
15.85

1.22
1.76
1.84
9.72

32.90
54.09
2.13
9.76

0.26
0.04
-0.01
-0.01

0.51
0.24
0.14
0.07

0.04
0.02
-0.01
0.00

0.86
0.60
0.35
-0.06

0.85
0.54
0.29
-0.06

Return

Volatility

Net
Order
Flow

Order
Flow
Volatility

Transaction
Frequency

-0.04
5.71
0.09
9.25

3.51
4.50
2.57
11.91

0.81
10.39
0.66
10.78

1.33
1.34
1.27
4.65

38.52
53.96
2.30
10.23

-0.02
-0.01
0.01
-0.03

0.33
0.20
0.12
0.08

0.02
0.02
0.00
-0.01

0.80
0.57
0.37
0.08

0.80
0.52
0.30
0.02

Mid
Quote

Return

0.98
0.05
0.25
2.40
0.99
0.99
0.98
0.98

b. USD-GBP
Mid
Quote
Mean
1.58
Variance
0.05
Skewness
-0.42
Kurtosis
1.99
Autocorrelation lags
1
1.00
5
1.00
10
1.00
20
1.00

Notes: The data cover the ten month period from 06 Oct 1999 to 24 July 2000 and
are sampled at 20-minute frequency. Both currencies are defined as the number of
dollars per foreign currency (euro and sterling, respectively). The mid quote is
calculated as the average of the bid and ask quotes. Returns are defined as 100
times the log difference of the mid quote. Volatility is defined as the absolute return.
Order flow is the net of the total buys and total sells, where a buy (sell) refers to a
trade in which the initiator is a purchaser (seller) of the denominator currency (euro
for USD-EUR and sterling for USD-GBP). Order flow volatility is the standard
deviation of order flow. Transaction frequency is the number of transactions in the 20minute period.

36

Table 6: Contemporaneous Correlations Between Returns,
Volatility, Order Flow, Transactions and News Arrival
a. USD-EUR
Order
Flow

Return Volatility
Return
1
Volatility
0.055
Order Flow
0.451
Order Flow Volatility
-0.027
Transaction Frequency -0.019
Reuters News Arrival
0.008

…
1
0.007
0.233
0.248
-0.007

…
…
1
0.034
0.063
0.001

Order
Reuters
Flow
Transaction News
Volatility Frequency
Arrival
…
…
…
1
0.956
-0.005

…
…
…
…
1
-0.004

…
…
…
…
…
1

b. USD-GBP
Order
Flow

Return Volatility
Return
1
Volatility
0.005
Order Flow
0.471
Order Flow Volatility
-0.030
Transaction Frequency -0.025
Reuters News Arrival
-0.004

…
1
0.073
0.506
0.534
-0.018

…
…
1
0.084
0.112
-0.011

Order
Reuters
Flow
Transaction News
Volatility Frequency
Arrival
…
…
…
1
0.923
-0.017

…
…
…
…
1
-0.017

…
…
…
…
…
1

Notes: The data cover the ten month period from 06 Oct 1999 to 24 July 2000 and are
sampled at 20-minute frequency. Both currencies are defined as the number of
dollars per foreign currency (euro and sterling, respectively). Returns are defined as
100 times the log difference of the mid quote where the mid quote is calculated as the
average of the bid and ask quotes. Volatility is defined as the absolute return. Order
flow is the net of the total buys and total sells, where a buy (sell) refers to a trade in
which the initiator is a purchaser (seller) of the denominator currency (euro for USDEUR and sterling for USD-GBP). Order flow volatility is the standard deviation of order
flow. Transaction frequency is the number of transactions in each 20-minute period
and Reuters News Arrival is the number of news articles in each 20 minute period.

37

Table 7: The Influence of "News" on USD-EUR and USD-GBP Returns
USD-EUR
Independent Variables

Benchmark

USD-GBP

Benchmark +
Reuters

Benchmark

Benchmark +
Reuters

Non-News
Constant
Lagged Dependent Variable
lag 1
lag 2

…

…

…

…

0.2693
0.1813

***
***

0.2562
0.1673

***
**

-0.1159 ***
…
…

-0.1365 ***
…
…

Macro Surprises
UK
US
Euro-zone

…
…
…
…
-0.0329 ***

…
…
…

…
…
…

0.0292
*
…
…
-0.0441 ***

0.0331
…
-0.0222

**
…
**

-0.0221
-0.0111
…

*
*
…

…
…
0.0125

…
…
*

…
…

…
…

0.0203
-0.0116

**
*

…
-0.0403
…

…
*
…

0.0241
…
-0.0240

*
…
**

Monetary Fundamentals
Euro-zone contemporaneous
US leads 2-6
US contemporaneous
Other Asset Markets
Euro-zone lead 1
US contemporaneous
Fiscal Fundamentals
US lead 1
US contemporaneous
US lags 2-6

…

…

…

…

Exchange Rate Policy Fundamentals
US leads 2-6
Japan contemporaneous
Japan lag 1
Actual Intervention
Japan leads 2-6
Japan lead 1
Japan contemporaneous

…
0.0385
-0.0253

…
**
*

0.0234
…
-0.0130

**
…
*

…
…
-0.0479

…
…
**

-0.0125
0.0384
…

**
**
…

Other Macro Fundamentals1
Euro-zone lag 1
US lag 1
Japan lag 1

…
-0.0246
-0.0713

…
**
**

0.0134
…
-0.0287

*
…
*

…
-0.0240
…

…
**
…

-0.0058
…
0.0112

*
…
**

…

…

-0.0155

*

…
…
…
…
…
…
-0.0330 ***

0.0233
0.0455
0.0555
…

***
***
***
…

Non-Fundamentals
Options Market
leads 2-6
lag 1
lags 2-6
Technical Analysis
contemporaneous
Market Sentiment
Euro-zone lags 2-6
US leads 2-6
US lead 1
US lag 1
Private Sector
lags 2-6
Politics
lead 1
contemporaneous
R-squared
Rbar-squared

0.1374
0.1360

…

…

-0.0058 ***

…
-0.0439

…
*

0.0266
…

0.1478
0.1168

0.0156
0.0140

*
…

0.061
0.027

Notes: Returns are calculated at 20 minute frequency and are defined as 100 times the log difference of the mid quote
where the mid quote is calculated as the average of the bid and ask quotes. *, ** and *** represent significance at 10,
5 and 1 percent levels respectively and "…" indicates that the coefficient is insignificant. For each regressor the sum of
leads 2-6, lead 1, contemporaneous, lag 1 and the sum of lags 2-6 are included in the regression but for reasons of
space only the significant coefficients are reported.
1. This category of news includes growth, unemployment, and the real effective exchange rate.

Table 8: The Influence of "News" on USD-EUR and USD-GBP Returns in "High News
Arrival" and "High Volatility" Periods
"High News Arrival"

"High Volatility"

Independent Variables

USD-EUR

USD-GBP

USD-EUR

USD-GBP

Non-News
Lagged Dependent Variable
lag 1
lag 2

0.2557 ***
0.1716 **

-0.1359 ***
…
…

0.1592 **
0.1055 *

-0.1196 ***
…
…

Macro Surprises
UK
US
Euro-zone
Monetary Fundamentals
Euro-zone contemporaneous
Euro-zone lags 2-6
US leads 2-6
US lag 1
US lags 2-6
Other Asset Markets
Euro-zone lead 1
Japan leads 2-6
Japan lag 1
Fiscal Fundamentals
Euro-zone lead 1
US leads 2-6
US lag 1
US lags 2-6
Exchange Rate Policy Fundamentals
US leads 2-6
US lag 1
Japan contemporaneous
Japan lag 1
Actual Intervention
Japan leads 2-6
Japan lead 1
Japan contemporaneous
Japan lags 2-6
Other Macro Fundamentals1
Euro-zone leads 2-6
Euro-zone contemporaneous
Euro-zone lag 1
US lag 1
US lags 2-6
Japan contemporaneous
Japan lag 1

…
…
…

…
…
…

-0.0263
…
…
…
…

*
…
…
…
…

…
…
…
…
0.0697 *

0.0331 **
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…

…
…
…
…
…

…
…
…

…
…
…

0.0336 **
…
…
-0.0226 **

-0.0183
…
-0.0087
…
0.0050

*
…
**
…
*

…
0.0053
…
0.0103
…

…
*
…
**
…

0.0211 **
0.0115 **
…
…

0.0240 *
…
…
…
…

0.0216 ***
…
…
…
…

…
…
…
…

…
…
…
…

…
…
…
-0.0222

…
…
…
**

…
-0.0184
0.0435
-0.0224

…
*
**
*

-0.0152
…
…
-0.0267

**
…
…
***

…
…
0.0350
-0.0253

…
…
**
*

0.0196
…
…
-0.0128

**
…
…
*

…
-0.0503
…
…

…
**
…
…

0.0141
-0.0433
…
-0.0124

*
***
…
*

…
…
-0.0642
…

…
…
*
…

-0.0121
0.0385
…
…

**
*
…
…

…
0.0303
-0.0347
…

…
**
*
…

-0.0069
0.0160
…
-0.0064

**
**
…
**

…
…
…
-0.0311
…
…
…

…
…
…
**
…
…
…

…
0.0144
…
…
…
-0.0879
-0.0303

…
**
…
…
…
***
**

-0.0071
…
…
…
…
…
…

*
…
…
…
…
…
…

…
…
0.0133
…
-0.0036
…
…

…
…
**
…
*
…
…

(contd.)

39

Table 8: The Influence of "News" on USD-EUR and USD-GBP Returns in "High News
Arrival" and "High Volatility" Periods (contd.)
"High News Arrival"
Independent Variables
Non-Fundamentals
Options Market
leads 2-6
lag 1
lags 2-6
Market Sentiment
Euro-zone lags 2-6
US leads 2-6
US lead 1
US contemporaneous
US lag 1
Private Sector
lead 1
contemporaneous
lags 2-6
Politics
leads 2-6
lead 1
contemporaneous
Interaction Terms
Monetary Fundamentals
US leads 2-6
US lags 2-6
Other Asset Markets
Japan leads 2-6
Japan lag 1

USD-EUR

USD-GBP

USD-EUR

USD-GBP

…
…
-0.0421 ***
…
…

-0.0052 *
…
…
0.0142 ***

…
…
-0.0192 *
0.0069 *

-0.0052 *
…
…
…
…

…
…
…
-0.8874
-0.0337

…
…
…
*
***

0.0258
0.0500
-0.1420
-1.0732
…

…
0.0340
…
-0.0419
-0.0474

…
**
…
*
***

…
0.0267
0.0428
…
…

…
…
…

…
…
…

…
…
-0.0077 *
-0.0053 **

…
…
…

…
…
…

-0.0157 ***
-0.0083 **
-0.0056 ***

…
…
…
…
-0.0676 **

…
…
0.0281 *
…
…

0.0223 *
…
…
-0.0538 **

…
…
0.0402 ***
…
…

…
…

…
…

…
…
-0.8273 ***

Fiscal Fundamentals
US lags 2-6

…

…

Exchange Rate Policy Fundamentals
Actual Intervention
Japan lead 1
Other Macro Fundamentals
Euro-zone leads 2-6
Non-Fundamentals
Options Market
lags 2-6
R-squared
Rbar-squared

"High Volatility"

…
…

***
***
*
***
…

…
***
***
…
…

…
…

0.9797 ***
-0.1100 ***

…
…

…
…

-0.1767 ***
-0.7267 ***

0.2342 ***
0.3322 ***

…

…

…

…

0.0458 **

-0.5274 *

0.3910 ***

0.5289 ***

0.3010 ***

1

…

…

…

…

0.1627
0.1150

…

…

-0.0591 **
0.0814
0.0293

0.4087 ***

…

…

0.3156
0.2833

…

…

0.0779

*

0.2117
0.1716

Notes: Returns are calculated at 20 minute frequency and are defined as 100 times the log difference of the
mid quote where the mid quote is calculated as the average of the bid and ask quotes. *, ** and *** represent
significance at 10, 5 and 1 percent levels respectively and "…" indicates that the coefficient is insignificant. For
each regressor the sum of leads 2-6, lead 1, contemporaneous, lag 1 and the sum of lags 2-6 are included in
the regression but for reasons of space only the significant coefficients are reported. "High News Arrival" is an
indicator variable which takes the value 1 during 20-min intervals when the number of news reports exceeds
the sample average by two standard deviations. "High Volatility" is an indicator variable which takes the value 1
during 20-min intervals when volatility exceeds the sample average by two standard deviations.
1. This category of news includes growth, unemployment, and the real effective exchange rate.

40

Table 9: The Influence of "News" on USD-EUR and USD-GBP Volatility
USD-EUR
Independent Variables
Non-News
Constant
Lagged Dependent Variable
lag 1
lag 2
lag 3
lag 4
lag 5
lag 6
Macro Surprises
UK
US
Euro-zone

Benchmark

Benchmark

Benchmark +
Reuters News

-0.0035

*

-0.0042

**

-0.0033

***

-0.0042

***

0.4674
0.0903
0.0971
0.0586
…
…

***
*
***
**
…
…

0.4604
0.0877
0.0958
0.0552
…
…

***
*
***
**
…
…

0.2181
0.1308
0.0486
0.0943
0.0518
0.0528

***
***
**
***
*
*

0.2023
0.1219
0.0421
0.0943
0.0477
0.0525

***
***
*
***
*
*

…
…
…

…
…
…

…
…
…

…
…
…

…
-0.0376
…

…
***
…

…
-0.0379
…

…
***
…

…

…

0.0039

*

…
…
…
…

…
…
…
…

0.0067
0.0108
-0.0115
-0.0130

*
**
***
*

…
-0.0365
…
-0.0442
…

…
***
…
**
…

-0.0105
…
-0.0110
-0.0196
0.0254

**
…
**
**
*

…
…
…
…

…
…
…
…

0.0056
-0.0133
-0.0081
-0.0044

***
*
**
**

-0.0118
-0.0159
…

**
**
…

…
…
-0.0045

…
…
**

…
0.0106
0.0106

…
**
*

-0.0058
…
-0.0061

*
…
**

-0.0147

*

…

…

…
0.0336
-0.0674
-0.0451
0.0221
…

…
*
***
**
**
…

-0.0240
0.0102
…
-0.0487
-0.0138
0.0132

**
*
…
***
**
*

…
…
…

…
…
…

-0.0029
0.0057
0.0053

**
**
*

…

…

-0.0199

**

Monetary Fundamentals
US lags 2-6
Other Asset Markets
Euro-zone leads 2-6
US lag 1
Japan leads 2-6
Japan lag 1
Fiscal Fundamentals
Euro-zone leads 2-6
Euro-zone lag 1
Euro-zone lags 2-6
US lead 1
US contemporaneous
Exchange Rate Policy Fundamentals
Euro-zone lags 2-6
US leads 2-6
Japan lag 1
Japan lags 2-6
Other Macro Fundamentals1
Euro-zone contemporaneous
US lag 1
US lags 2-6
Non-Fundamentals
Options Market
leads 2-6
contemporaneous
lag 1
Technical Analysis
contemporaneous
Market Sentiment
Euro-zone lead 1
US leads 2-6
US lead 1
US contemporaneous
US lag 1
US lags 2-6
Private Sector
leads 2-6
lead 1
contemporaneous
Politics
contemporaneous
R-squared
Rbar-squared

USD-GBP

Benchmark +
Reuters News

0.3871
0.3853

0.3860
0.3628

0.1528
0.1503

0.185
0.154

Notes: Volatility is calculated at 20 minute frequency and is defined as the absolute return where returns are calculated as
100 times the log difference of the mid quote .The mid quote is calculated as the average of the bid and ask quotes. *, **
and *** represent significance at 10, 5 and 1 percent levels respectively and "…" indicates that the coefficient is
insignificant. For each regressor the sum of leads 2-6, lead 1, contemporaneous, lag 1 and the sum of lags 2-6 are
included in the regression but for reasons of space only the significant coefficients are reported.
1. This category of news includes growth, unemployment, and the real effective exchange rate.

41

Table 10: The Influence of Order Flow on USD-EUR and USDGBP Returns

Independent Variables
Non-News
Constant
Lagged Dependent Variable
lag 1
lag 2

USD-EUR

USD-GBP

Return on
order flow

Return on
order flow

…

…

0.3765 ***
0.1422 ***

-0.0022 ***
…
…

…
…

Order Flow
Contemporaneous
lag1
lags 2-6

0.0041 ***
-0.0019 ***
…
…

0.0028 ***
-0.0003 *
…
…

R-squared
Rbar-squared

0.3906
0.3895

0.2614
0.2601

Notes: Returns and order flow are calculated at 20 minute frequency.
Returns are defined as 100 times the log difference of the mid quote .The
mid quote is calculated as the average of the bid and ask quotes. Order
flow is the net of the total buys and total sells, where a buy (sell) refers to a
trade in which the initiator is a purchaser (seller) of the denominator
currency (euro for USD-EUR and sterling for USD-GBP). *, ** and ***
represent significance at 10, 5 and 1 percent levels respectively and "…"
indicates that the coefficient is insignificant. For each regressor the sum of
leads 2-6, lead 1, contemporaneous, lag 1 and the sum of lags 2-6 are
included in the regression but for reasons of space only the significant
coefficients are reported.

42

Table 11: The Influence of "News" on USD-EUR and USD-GBP Order Flow
USD-EUR
Independent Variables
Non-News
Constant
Lagged Dependent Variable
lag 2
Macro Surprises
UK
US
Euro-zone

USD-GBP

Benchmark +
Reuters News

Benchmark

Benchmark

Benchmark +
Reuters News

…

…

…

…

0.7134

***

0.6438

***

…

…

…

…

0.0612

**

…

…

…
…
-8.1623

…
…
***

…
…
…

…
…
…

…
…
…

…
…
…

…
…
…
…
-14.3592 ***

Monetary Fundamentals
Euro-zone lead 1
Euro-zone lag 1
Euro-zone lags 2-6
US lags 2-6
Other Asset Markets
Euro-zone leads 2-6
Euro-zone lead 1
Euro-zone lags 2-6
US lead 1
Japan lead 1

-4.6384
…
-2.0149
1.1211

**
…
*
**

-3.0961
-3.8553
-1.4698
…

***
***
*
…

…
8.5026
-2.6458
…
-8.4890

…
***
*
…
***

-1.4982
…
…
2.0473
…

**
…
…
**
…

Fiscal Fundamentals
Euro-zone lead 1
US leads 2-6
US lag 1

-6.1345
-3.6302
…

*
*
…

…
…
6.5694

…
…
**

Exchange Rate Policy Fundamentals
Euro-zone lead 1
Euro-zone contemporaneous
Euro-zone lags 2-6
US leads 2-6
US lags 2-6
Japan lags 2-6

2.2783
…
…
…
-6.6751
…

*
…
…
…
*
…

1.3134
-2.1597
1.0142
5.1489
-4.1263
-0.8216

*
**
**
***
**
*

…

…

2.3196

*

…
1.8932

…
*

-0.0058
…

*
…

-1.1253

*

…

…

4.4319
8.2922
18.1050
13.0734
…

**
***
***
***
…

…
…
…
…
3.0685

…
…
…
…
*

…

…

-0.7336

*

3.3832
-5.8603

*
**

…
-4.2438

…
*

Other Macro Fundamentals1
Euro-zone lag 1
Non-Fundamentals
Options Market
leads 2-6
lags 2-6
Technical Analysis
lags 2-6
Market Sentiment
Euro-zone lags 2-6
US leads 2-6
US lead 1
US lag 1
US lags 2-6
Private Sector
lags 2-6
Politics
leads 2-6
lag 1
R-squared
Rbar-squared

0.0037
0.0020

0.0547
0.0203

0.0065
0.0048

0.047
0.012

Notes: Order flows are the net of the total buys and total sells at 20 minute frequency, where a buy (sell) refers to a trade in
which the initiator is a purchaser (seller) of the denominator currency (euro for USD-EUR and sterling for USD-GBP). *, **
and *** represent significance at 10, 5 and 1 percent levels respectively and "…" indicates that the coefficient is insignificant.
For each regressor the sum of leads 2-6, lead 1, contemporaneous, lag 1 and the sum of lags 2-6 are included in the
regression but for reasons of space only the significant coefficients are reported.
1. This category of news includes growth, unemployment, and the real effective exchange rate.

43

