                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         UNOBSERVED ACTIONS OF MUTUAL FUNDS

                                           Marcin Kacperczyk
                                            Clemens Sialm
                                               Lu Zheng

                                          Working Paper 11766
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11766


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2005




Kacperczyk is at the Sauder School of Business at the University of British Columbia; 2053 Main Mall;
Vancouver, BC, Canada V6T 1Z2; Phone: (604) 822-8490; marcin.kacperczyk@sauder.ubc.ca. Sialm is at
the Stephen M. Ross School of Business at the University of Michigan; 701 Tappan Street; Ann Arbor, MI
48109-1234; Phone: (734) 764-3196; sialm@umich.edu. Zheng is at the Stephen M. Ross School of Business
at the University of Michigan; 701 Tappan Street; Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234; Phone: (734) 763-5392;
luzheng@umich.edu. We thank Sreedhar Bharath, Susan Christoffersen, Elroy Dimson, Katrina Ellis,
William Goetzmann, Jennifer Huang, Roger Ibbotson, Jackie King, Massimo Massa, Iwan Meier, M.P.
Narayanan, Luboš Pástor, Antii Petajisto, Pablo Ruiz-Verdu, Ernst Schaumburg, Matthew Spiegel, Steven
Todd, Li Wei, Ruhui Yang, Ning Zhu, Eric Zitzewitz, and seminar participants at INSEAD, Northwestern
University, the UC Davis Conference on Valuation in Financial Markets, University of Carlos III de Madrid,
University of Lausanne, University of Michigan, University of Zurich, 2005 China International Conference
in Finance, the 2005 European Finance Association Meetings, and the 2005 International Conference on
Delegated Portfolio Management and Investor Behavior for helpful comments and suggestions. We
acknowledge financial support from Mitsui Life Center and Inquire Europe. Kacperczyk acknowledges
research support from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2005 by Marcin Kacperczyk, Clemens Sialm, and Lu Zheng. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Unobserved Actions of Mutual Funds
Marcin Kacperczyk, Clemens Sialm, and Lu Zheng
NBER Working Paper No. 11765
November 2005
JEL No. G1, G2

                                            ABSTRACT

Despite extensive disclosure requirements, mutual fund investors do not observe all actions of fund
managers. We estimate the impact of unobserved actions on fund returns using the return gap, which
is defined as the difference between the reported fund return and the return of a portfolio that invests
in the previously disclosed holdings after adjusting for expenses. Analyzing monthly return data on
more than 2,500 unique U.S. equity funds over the period 1984-2003, we document a substantial
cross-sectional heterogeneity and time-series persistence in the return gap, thus demonstrating that
unobserved actions of some funds persistently create value, while such actions of others destroy
value. Most important, we show that the return gap helps to predict future fund performance and
conclude that fund investors should use the return gap as an additional measure to evaluate the
performance of mutual funds.

Marcin Kacperczyk
Sauder School of Business
University of British Columbia
2053 Main Mall
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z2
Canada
marcin.kacperczyk@sauder.ubc.ca

Clemens Sialm
Ross School of Business
University of Michigan
701 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
and NBER
sialm@umich.edu

Lu Zheng
Ross School of Business
University of Michigan
701 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
luzheng@umich.edu
Mutual fund investors do not observe all actions of fund managers despite extensive disclosure

requirements. They do not observe the exact timing of the purchases and the sales of securities

and the corresponding transaction costs. On the one hand, fund investors bear hidden costs, such

as trading costs,1 agency costs,2 and negative investor externalities.3 On the other hand, they can

benefit from unobserved interim trades by skilled fund managers who can use their informational

advantage to time the purchases and the sales of individual stocks optimally.4 In this paper, we

test the hypothesis that past unobserved actions have a significant predictive power for future

returns of mutual funds.

        We estimate the impact of unobserved actions on fund returns using the return gap. The

return gap is defined as the difference between the reported return of a fund to their investors and

the return of a hypothetical buy and hold portfolio that invests in the previously disclosed

holdings after adjusting for reported expense ratios. Our intuition behind this measure is

straightforward: The impact of unobserved actions is captured in the investor return but not in

the hypothetical return of the previously disclosed portfolio. For example, commissions paid by

mutual funds to their brokers or stale-price arbitrage losses do not affect directly the returns of

the holdings, but they do adversely affect the returns to investors, because these costs are

effectively subtracted from the assets of a fund. On the other hand, if the interim trades of a fund

create sufficient value, then we should observe that the disclosed fund return exceeds the return


1
  See, for example, Livingston and O’Neal (1996); Chalmers, Edelen, and Kadlec (1999); Wermers (2000); and
Karceski, Livingston, and O’Neal (2005) for studies of the trading costs of mutual funds. Mahoney (2004) describes
the various costs in more detail.
2
  See, for example, Brown, Harlow, and Starks (1996); Chevalier and Ellison (1997); Carhart, Kaniel, Musto, and
Reed (2002); Gaspar, Massa, and Matos (2004); Meier and Schaumburg (2004); Nanda, Wang, and Zheng (2004);
and Davis and Kim (2005).
3
  See, for example, Edelen (1999); Dickson, Shoven, and Sialm (2000); Goetzmann, Ivkovic, and Rouwenhorst
(2001); Greene and Hodges (2002); Rakowski (2002); Zitzewitz (2003); Johnson (2004); and Nanda, Wang, and
Zheng (2005).
4
  See, for example, Grinblatt and Titman (1989, 1993); Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (1997); Chen,
Jagadeesh, Wermers (2000); and Ferson and Khang (2002).

                                                                                                                2
of a hypothetical portfolio that invests in the previously disclosed holdings. As a result, the

return gap should be negatively related to the hidden costs and positively related to the hidden

benefits of a mutual fund.

        One issue with using portfolio holdings data to evaluate fund manager performance is

that the disclosed data reveal information only about the major equity positions on particular

dates but do not indicate the exact purchase and sale dates. As a result, the exact holding period

of securities is unknown. Furthermore, as shown by Meier and Schaumburg (2004), some funds

window-dress their portfolios to hide their actual investment strategy from their investors or

from competing funds. Thus, studies analyzing only the returns of the disclosed holdings might

be subject to significant measurement error since they do not capture the impact of interim trades

and various hidden costs. Our paper focuses on the difference between holdings and investor

returns and argues that this difference captures important determinants of mutual fund

performance, which cannot be detected by merely considering holdings returns.

        Even though estimating the impact of unobserved actions may serve as a helpful tool to

evaluate mutual funds, an alternative and simpler way to judge any fund’s actions could be to

just consider its net returns. We argue that, by benchmarking the investor returns against the

holdings returns, we filter out the impact of common shocks to both returns and are able to

obtain a more precise measure of the short-term unobserved actions.5 Further, we hypothesize

that if the unobserved actions are persistent over time, then the return gap is likely to contain

relevant information about future fund performance. However, the return gap does not capture

5
  An extensive literature examines the performance of mutual funds based on net returns and holdings returns. The
studies based on net returns generally conclude that mutual funds underperform passive benchmarks. On the other
hand, studies based on the holdings returns show that fund managers often have investment ability. Some papers on
fund performance include Jensen (1968); Grinblatt and Titman (1989, 1993); Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers
(1995); Malkiel (1995); Gruber (1996); Ferson and Schadt (1996); Carhart (1997); Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and
Wermers (1997); Chen, Jagadeesh, and Wermers (2000); Wermers (2000); Baks, Metrick, and Wachter (2001);


                                                                                                               3
longer-term investment abilities, such as longer-term abnormal performance due to active stock

picking or style timing, which is captured by the established performance measures, e.g., one-

factor, three-factor, four-factor alphas and holding-based measures.

        Analyzing monthly return data on more than 2,500 unique U.S. equity funds over the

period 1984-2003, we show that the average return gap is very close to zero. In particular, the

value-weighted return gap for all mutual funds in our sample is –1.0 basis points per month,

while the equally weighted return gap is 1.1 basis points per month. These results indicate that

the magnitude of unobserved actions is relatively small in the aggregate sample. In contrast, we

document a substantial cross-sectional variation in the return gap, indicating that hidden costs are

more important for some funds while hidden benefits are more pronounced for other funds. We

also find strong persistence in the return gap for up to five years ahead, which suggests that the

return gap is driven by systematic factors. Moreover, we find persistence in the return gap not

only for the worst performers, but also for the best performers.

        Consistent with our main hypothesis, we find that the past return gap helps to predict

future fund performance. Funds with favorable past return gaps tend to perform consistently

better before and after adjusting for differences in their risks and styles. Specifically, the decile

portfolio of funds with the highest lagged return gap yields an average excess return of 1.2

percent per year relative to the market return, whereas the decile portfolio of funds with the

lowest return gap yields an average excess return of –2.2 percent per year. The return difference

between the two portfolios is statistically and economically significant. To mitigate the potential

impact of measurement error on the returns to our trading strategy we apply a simple filtering

technique, originally proposed by Mamaysky, Spiegel, and Zhang (2005). The results using this


Kosowski, Timmermann, White, and Wermers (2001); Mamaysky, Spiegel, and Zhang (2004, 2005); Cohen, Coval,
and Pástor (2005); Baker, Litov, Wachter, and Wurgler (2005); and Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng (2005).

                                                                                                       4
method exhibit a substantial increase in the performance difference between the top and bottom

deciles. Furthermore, their filtering technique allows us to identify mutual funds that

significantly outperform passive benchmarks even after taking into account fund expenses. We

confirm the relationship between a fund’s return gap and its subsequent performance via pooling

regressions with clustered standard errors, controlling for other fund characteristics and time

fixed effects.

        Next, we examine the determinants of the return gap. Consistent with our interpretation

of the return gap, we find that trading costs are an important component of the return gap.

Specifically, trading costs, estimated following Wermers (2000), reduce the returns to investors

by about 60 basis points per year.

        Most funds in our sample exhibit a relatively large correlation between the hypothetical

holdings returns and the investor returns, indicating that their actual investment strategies do not

differ significantly from their disclosed strategies. However, some funds have relatively low

correlations between holdings and investor returns. Since funds with low correlations are more

opaque, unobserved actions are more important for these funds. Our results indicate that such

opaque funds tend to exhibit particularly low return gaps. This result suggests that these funds

are subject to more agency problems, which induce them to camouflage their effective portfolio

strategies.

        Finally, we show that the return gap is positively related to the recent IPO holdings of a

fund, suggesting the existence of cross-subsidization strategies among funds, as described by

Gaspar, Massa, and Matos (2005) and Reuter (2005). In addition, the return gap is related to

other fund attributes, such as size, age, and average new money growth, which have been

previously shown to affect fund performance. Further, we examine whether the return gap is



                                                                                                  5
related to funds’ trading securities between different industries and styles. We do not find a

significant relationship between the industry and the style turnover and the return gap.

       Several papers have compared the reported fund returns to hypothetical fund returns

based on disclosed portfolio holdings. Grinblatt and Titman (1989) is the first paper that

compares reported fund returns to holdings returns. They use the difference to estimate the

average fund transaction costs for a sample of 157 mutual funds during the period 1975 to 1984.

They document that the average difference before subtracting fund expense ratio is about 1.68

percent per year using Jensen’s alpha. The authors further point out that the estimated difference

can also be affected by interim trades within a quarter and possible window dressing activities.

Analyzing a large sample of diversified equity mutual fund for the period 1975 to 1994,

Wermers (2000) decomposes fund performance into stock-picking talent, style selection,

transaction costs, and expenses. He finds an average 2.3 percent difference between the gross

returns of the hypothetical portfolio and the reported fund returns. He further indicates that 0.7

percent of this difference is due to nonstock holdings and the remaining 1.6 percent is due to

expenses, transaction costs and other unreported costs. Frank, Poterba, Shackelford, and Shoven

(2004) show that “copy-cat” funds – funds that purchase the same assets as actively managed

funds as soon as these asset holdings are disclosed – can earn returns net of expenses similar to

those of the funds they are copying. More recently, Meier and Schaumburg (2004) compare the

actual return of a fund with the return of a hypothetical portfolio based on the future holdings to

investigate whether funds window-dress their portfolios to hide their actual investment strategy

from their investors or from competing funds. Our paper differs from the above studies in that

we primarily analyze the cross-sectional properties of the unobserved actions of mutual funds.

Moreover, we investigate whether investors, when choosing mutual funds, could benefit from



                                                                                                 6
taking into account such unobserved actions. Finally, we analyze which fund characteristics

affect these unobserved actions.

       The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 motivates the use of the return gap in

assessing the scope of unobserved actions and quantifies the return gap. Section 2 studies the

impact of unobserved actions on future fund performance and discusses the economic

significance of this predictability. Section 3 investigates the determinants of the return gap using

a regression analysis. Section 4 concludes.



1. The Return Gap

To uncover the role of unobserved actions, we define the return gap as the difference between

the net investor return and the gross return of the fund holdings after adjusting for expenses. This

section describes the computation of the return gap and summarizes the distribution of the return

gap for our sample of mutual funds.



1.1. Methodology

The net return of the fund f at time t (RF) is computed as the relative change in the net asset

value of the fund shares (NAV), including the total dividend (D) and capital gains (CG)

distributions:


            f    NAVt f + Dt f + CGt f − NAVt −f 1
        RFt =                                        .                                           (1)
                             NAVt −f 1

       Fund managers subtract management fees and other expenses on a regular basis from the

assets under management. Thus, these fees will reduce the total return of the investors, RF.




                                                                                                  7
       On the other hand, the gross return of the fund’s holdings (RH) is defined as the total

return of a hypothetical buy and hold portfolio that is invested in the most recently disclosed

stock positions:

                      N
        RH t f = ∑ w
                   ~f R .
                    i, t −1 i , t                                                             (2)
                      i =1

       If a fund discloses its holdings in the previous month, then the weights of the individual

asset classes depend on the number of stocks held by the fund (N) and the stock price (P):

                        N i,ft −1 Pi, t −1
        ~f
        wi, t −1 =     N
                                              .                                               (3)
                            f
                       ∑ N i, t −1Pi, t −1
                      i =1

       On the other hand, if the holdings disclosure occurs more than one month prior to a

specific month t, then we use the most recent holdings disclosed at time t-τ and update the

weights assuming that the fund manager follows a buy and hold strategy:

                                             τ −1
                                                  (
                          N i,ft −τ Pi, t −τ ∏ 1 + Ri, t − j   )
        ~f                                   j =1
        wi , t −1 =                            τ −1
                                                                       .                      (4)
                                                      (            )
                       N
                            f
                       ∑ N i, t −τ Pi, t −τ ∏ 1 + Ri, t − j
                      i =1                  j =1


       Based on the above, we define the return gap (RG) as a difference between net and gross

returns after adjusting for expenses:

        RGt f = RFt f − ( RH t f − EXPt f ) .                                                 (5)

       We adjust the difference in investor returns and holdings returns for expenses, because

mutual funds have to disclose their expenses to their shareholders on a regular basis.

       As mentioned in the introduction, the investor returns and holdings returns have been

previously compared by Grinblatt and Titman (1989), Wermers (2000), Frank, Poterba,


                                                                                               8
Shackelford, and Shoven (2004), and Meier and Schaumburg (2004). Meier and Schaumburg

(2004) compute the difference between the investor returns and the hypothetical returns based on

both the previous and the future holdings to investigate the prevalence of window-dressing in the

mutual fund industry. In our paper, we report test results using the previously disclosed portfolio

holdings to compute the holdings returns. We do not discuss the return gap using forward-

looking holdings because we want to compare the actual net fund returns to the returns of a

passive strategy that continues to hold the previously disclosed securities.6

         The return gap captures the unobserved actions of funds, which include hidden costs and

interim trading benefits to their shareholders:


         RGt f    = Unobserved Actionstf =
                                                                                                                  (6)
                  = Interim Tradestf − Hidden Coststf

         Following Ferson and Khang (2002), we term one component of the unobserved actions

the interim trading benefits of a fund. The interim trading benefits depend primarily on the

profitability of the intermediate trades of a fund. Even though we can observe fund holdings only

at specific points in time, funds may trade actively between these disclosure dates. If these

interim trades create value, then the return of the fund (RF) will increase, while the return of the

disclosed holdings (RH) will remain unaffected. For example, if a fund purchases a well-

performing stock, then the abnormal return will only be reflected in the return of the fund and not

in the holdings return until the stock position is disclosed. Furthermore, if a fund obtains an IPO


6
  In unreported tests, we also compute hypothetical portfolio returns based on the future holdings. We find that these
forward-looking holding returns are, on average, about three percentage points per year higher than the backward-
looking holdings returns, because many mutual funds tend to invest in stocks that recently performed well either
because they follow momentum strategies or because they window-dress their portfolios toward recent winners. We
also find that the forward-looking holdings return is less correlated with the reported return than the backward-
looking holdings return, indicating that the backward-looking return is a better proxy of the effective holdings of a
fund than the forward-looking return. We do not discuss these forward-looking holdings returns in more detail
because of potential look-ahead biases.

                                                                                                                    9
allocation, then the interim trading benefit will be positive on the first trading day if the market

price of a newly listed stock increases relative to its IPO allocation price.

       The other component of the unobserved actions is the hidden costs of a fund, which

include trading costs, commissions paid by the mutual fund to brokers, and potential agency

costs. For example, funds that are subject to a higher price impact or funds that are exposed to

higher commissions will have higher hidden costs.

       Neither the hidden costs nor the interim trading benefits of a mutual fund are observable,

and therefore it is not possible to fully disentangle hidden costs and interim trading benefits.

Thus, the primary interest of this study is the overall impact of unobserved actions. By analyzing

the sign and the magnitude of the return gap, we can infer their relative importance for a given

fund. Given that unobserved actions may have an impact on fund return one would expect that

such actions, if persistent in a fund strategy, would have a significant predictive power for fund

performance.



1.2. Data and Summary Statistics

Our sample is an updated version of the data used in Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng (2005) and

covers the time period between 1984 and 2003. The main set of data has been created by

merging the CRSP Survivorship Bias Free Mutual Fund Database with the CDA/Spectrum

holdings database and the CRSP stock price data.

       The CRSP Mutual Fund Database includes information on fund returns, total net assets,

different types of fees, investment objectives, and other fund characteristics. The CDA database

provides stockholdings of mutual funds. The data are collected both from reports filed by mutual

funds with the SEC and from voluntary reports generated by the funds. During most of our



                                                                                                 10
sample period, funds are required by law to disclose their holdings semi-annually. Nevertheless,

about 49 percent of funds in our sample disclose their holdings quarterly.7 Another 4.6 percent of

our observations with valid CRSP data do not have available holdings data during the previous

six months. In these cases, we compute the hypothetical holdings returns using the most recently

available portfolio disclosures, assuming that fund managers follow buy and hold strategies

between disclosure periods. We link each reported stock holding to the CRSP stock database.

        We start our matching process with a sample of all funds in the CRSP database. The

focus of our analysis is on open-end domestic equity mutual funds, for which the holdings data

are most complete and reliable. For that reason, we eliminate balanced, bond, money market,

international, and sector funds, as well as funds not invested primarily in equity securities. Since

different share classes have the same holdings composition, we aggregate all the observations

pertaining to different share classes into one fund level observation.8 We also exclude funds

which hold less than 10 stocks and those which in the previous month manage less than $5

million. Appendix A describes the details of the sample selection process.

        Our database does not include detailed information on the holdings of non-equity asset

classes, such as cash holdings, bonds, and other asset classes. To mitigate this problem, we focus

on domestic stock funds, primarily invested in common stocks, as described before. We also

compute in each time period the proportion of the total fund value invested in five different

classes of assets – equity, bonds, cash, preferred stocks, and other – and adjust the holdings

returns to reflect non-equity holdings in the fund portfolio, as is further described in Appendix B.




7
  Ge and Zheng (2005) investigate both the determinants and potential effects of portfolio disclosure frequency by
comparing funds providing quarterly voluntary disclosure to funds providing only mandatory semiannual disclosure.
8
  For most variables, we use a value-weighted average for the fund level observation. For fund age, we use the
maximum of all share classes.

                                                                                                               11
        Table 1 reports summary statistics of the main fund attributes. Our sample includes 2,543

distinct funds and 211,001 fund-month observations. Due to the substantial growth in the mutual

fund industry over the last 20 years, we have significantly more funds in the more recent years of

our sample period. The number of funds ranges from 244 (January 1984) to 1,816 (April 2002).

        We report summary statistics on fund total net assets (TNA), age, expenses, turnover,

loads, the proportion of money invested in equity securities, and the new money growth. We

define New Money Growth (NMG) as the growth rate of the assets under management (TNA)

after adjusting for the appreciation of the assets of a mutual fund (Rf) assuming that all the cash

flows are invested at the end of the period: 9


          NMGt = f                         (
                      TNAt f − TNAt f−1 1 + Rt f   ).                                                          (7)
                                TNAt f−1




1.3. Quantifying the Return Gap

In this section, we quantify the return gap for funds included in our sample. Table 2 presents the

value and the equally weighted averages of the return gap for our sample of funds between 1984

and 2003. In the first row of Panel A (Panel B) of Table 2, we report the value-weighted (equally

weighted) time-series averages, along with their corresponding standard errors in parentheses.

        The average net investor return, reported in Panel A, is equal to 0.988 percent per month

or about 11.86 percent per year. On the other hand, the average return of a hypothetical portfolio

that invests in the previously disclosed holdings amounts to 1.071 percent per month. The

difference between the investor and the holdings return (i.e., the return gap before expenses)


9
 For most of our sample period, we have TNAs available at a monthly frequency. However, until 1990 the TNA has
only been available at a quarterly frequency. In this case, we compute the quarterly new money growth and divide it
equally across the three months in each quarter. To diminish the impact of extreme outliers, we winsorize this
variable at the one percent level.

                                                                                                                12
comes to –8.3 basis points per month or –1.0 percent per year. The average value-weighted

expense ratio equals 0.07 percent per month or about 0.88 percent per year. The return gap after

adjusting for disclosed expenses equals –1.0 basis points per month and is not significantly

different from zero. Likewise, if we use equally weighted portfolio returns instead, the average

return gap after expenses equals 1.1 basis points per month and is again not significantly

different from zero, as reported in Panel B. In summary, we find that, in the aggregate sample,

the return gap is very small, which is equivalent to saying that hidden costs are similar in

magnitude to the benefits of interim trades.

        To examine whether the return gap is correlated with any risk or style factors, in Table 2

we summarize the abnormal returns and the factor loadings using the one-factor CAPM, the

Fama and French (1993) three-factor, and the Carhart (1997) four-factor model. The Carhart

model has the following specification:


        Ri,t – RF, t = αi + βi,M (RM,t – RF,t) + βi,SMB SMBt + βi,HML HMLt + βi,MOM MOMt + ei,t,          (8)


where the dependent variable is the quarterly return on portfolio i in quarter t minus the risk-free

rate, and the independent variables are given by the returns of the following four zero-investment

factor portfolios. The term RMt – RFt denotes the excess return of the market portfolio over the

risk-free rate;10 SMB is the return difference between small and large capitalization stocks; HML

is the return difference between high and low book-to-market stocks; and MOM is the return

difference between stocks with high and low past returns.11 The intercept of the model, αi, is the

Carhart measure of abnormal performance. The CAPM model uses only the market factor, and


10
   The market return is calculated as the value-weighted return on all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks using the
CRSP database. The monthly return of the one-month Treasury bill rate is obtained from Ibbotson Associates.
11
   The size, the value, and the momentum factor returns were taken from Kenneth French’s Web site
http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/Data_Library.

                                                                                                           13
the Fama and French model uses the first three factors. Based on the results in Table 2, we

conclude that the general conclusions regarding the return gap are not affected if we account for

return components that are due to common risk or style factors in fund returns.



1.4. Persistence of the Return Gap

Many features of the unobserved actions indicate that such actions should be persistent. For

example, if fund governance is weak in one period because of stale price arbitrage or cross-

subsidization, it is likely to remain poor in the next period.

       To test this hypothesis formally, we sort all funds in our sample into deciles according to

their lagged return gap and compute the average return gap during the subsequent month by

weighting all funds in each decile equally. Table 3 reports the raw and the abnormal four-factor

return gap of decile portfolios formed according to the average return gap during the previous

one-, three-, and five-year interval. The first column shows that funds in the worst return gap

decile, based on the previous 12 months, generate an average return gap before expenses of

–11.3 basis points in the subsequent month. On the other hand, funds in the best return gap decile

generate an average return gap of 15.4 basis points. The difference in the return gap between the

two extreme deciles and between the top five and the bottom five deciles is economically and

statistically highly significant. Furthermore, the average return gaps are almost monotonic for the

deciles, as is indicated by the high value of the Spearman rank correlation coefficient.

       The persistence pattern remains similar if we sort funds according to longer-term past

return gaps, as shown in the second and the third columns. The last three columns indicate that

the persistence findings remain unchanged, even if we adjust the fund returns for the four

common factors of Carhart (1997). These results show that funds with positive return gaps tend



                                                                                                14
to have persistently higher interim trading benefits than hidden costs. The opposite is true for

funds with negative return gaps.12

         To provide evidence on long-term stability of the observed patterns, we also track the

persistence of the return gap over the subsequent five years and compute the respective average

monthly return gap. Figure 1 depicts the future return gaps for decile portfolios formed according

to the average return gap during the 12 months prior to the portfolio formation. Panel A reports

the raw return gap, while Panel B additionally adjusts the gap for common factors in stock

returns. The figure demonstrates that the raw return gap is also remarkably persistent over longer

time periods. The ranking of the decile portfolios, based on the raw return gap, in the year after

the formation period remains identical to that in the formation period. Although we find some

evidence for reversion towards the mean for the extreme deciles, the persistence of both top and

bottom performers remains over the longer term.13

         Carhart (1997) shows that performance persistence is not significant for well-performing

funds after one accounts for possible momentum effects.14 Contrary to his finding regarding the

lack of persistence using four-factor alpha, we find that the abnormal return gap remains

persistent in both tails of the return gap distribution even after controlling for momentum and

other common factors in stock returns, as shown in Panel B. Hence, our results cannot be fully

explained by differences in common factors in interim trading benefits. One reason may be that

12
   Persistent return gaps might result just because of persistent differences in the disclosure frequencies of mutual
funds. However, this potential problem does not affect our persistence results. We continue to find significant levels
of persistence if we only consider funds that disclosed their holdings within the last three months and ignore funds
that did not disclose their holdings during the last three months.
13
   The return gaps in the first period after the portfolio formation differ between Figure 1 and Table 3 because they
cover a different estimation window. Figure 1 gives the average return gap over the whole year after the portfolio
formation, while Table 3 reports the monthly return gap in the month after the portfolio formation to avoid
overlapping observations. For example, funds in the top return gap decile based on the previous 12 months have an
average return gap of 15.4 basis points during the first month after the portfolio formation (Table 3) and an average
monthly return gap of 12.1 basis points during the first year after the portfolio formation (Figure 1).



                                                                                                                  15
by measuring the investor returns relative to the holding returns we filter out the impact of

common shocks to both returns and thus are able to focus on a more persistent component of

fund returns.



2. Predictability of Future Fund Performance

Until now, we have provided evidence that the return gap has interesting properties that are

consistent with its potential of being a good predictor of future fund performance. In this section,

we test the main hypothesis of our paper, i.e., whether unobserved actions indeed contain

valuable information that could be used to predict future fund performance. Given that the return

gap is a persistent phenomenon, we should expect that funds with higher return gaps (i.e., those

with more beneficial unobserved actions) outperform funds with lower return gaps in the future.



2.1. Trading Strategy Using the Return Gap

Our first predictability test examines the performance of a trading strategy based on the past

return gap. Specifically, we sort all funds in our sample into deciles, according to their average

lagged return gap during a one-year period. Subsequently, we compute the average returns in the

following month by weighting all the funds in a decile equally.

          In general, the holdings are not disclosed immediately after the effective holdings date.

For example, Frank, Poterba, Shackelford, and Shoven (2004) document that funds publicly

disclose their holdings with a time delay. In light of their findings, we introduce an additional

three-month lag in the return gap before implementing a trading strategy. This implies that the

return of the tenth decile portfolio in January 2003 is based on the 10 percent of funds that had

14
     See Hendricks, Patel, and Zeckhauser (1993); Brown and Goetzmann (1995); Elton, Gruber, and Blake (1996);


                                                                                                           16
the highest return gap between October 2001 and September 2002. Including this additional

implementation lag reduces the profitability of our trading strategy slightly, because there

appears to be a mean-reversion in the return gap, as indicated in Figure 1.

        In Table 4, we report the risk- and style-adjusted net returns for each decile portfolio.

Funds in the first decile have an average return gap of –59.8 basis points per month during the 12

months prior to the portfolio formation. On the other hand, funds in the tenth decile have an

average return gap of 65.7 basis points per month during the formation period.

        The first five performance measures are based on the fund-reported returns, and the last

two measures are based on the fund holdings returns. The first column reports excess returns of

the deciles relative to the market portfolio. The next four columns report the intercepts from a

time-series regression based on the one-factor CAPM model, the three-factor model of Fama and

French (1993), the four-factor model of Carhart (1997), and the conditional four-factor model of

Ferson and Schadt (1996).15 The two holding-based performance measures are the selectivity

measure (CS) of Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (DGTW) (1997) and the benchmark-

free performance measure of Grinblatt and Titman (GT) (1993).16

        We observe that funds with the most favorable past return gaps (decile ten) tend to

significantly outperform funds with the least favorable past return gaps (decile one) in the

subsequent month. Investing in the decile-ten funds would have generated an additional excess


Carhart (1997); Bollen and Busse (2005); and Mamaysky, Spiegel, and Zhang (2005) for studies on the persistence
of mutual funds.
15
   For the Ferson and Schadt (1996) conditional model, we regress the return of a portfolio of mutual funds on the
four Carhart (1997) factors and interaction terms between the four factors and five demeaned lagged macro-
economic variables. Consistent with the previous studies, we consider the following five macro-economic variables:
the one-month Treasury bill yield, the dividend yield of the S&P 500 Index, the Treasury yield spread (long- minus
short-term bonds), the quality spread in the corporate bond market (low- minus high-grade bonds), and an indicator
variable for the month of January.
16
   The benchmark returns for the DGTW performance measures were obtained from Russ Wermer’s Web site at
http://www.smith.umd.edu/faculty/rwermers/ftpsite/Dgtw/coverpage.htm. The benchmark assignments are



                                                                                                               17
return of 28.4 basis points per month or about 3.41 percent per year compared to investing in the

decile-one funds. The relationship between past return gaps and future performance is highly

monotonic, which is confirmed by the high value of the Spearman rank correlation.17 Our results

are not influenced substantially by the variation in the risk or style factors, as reported in the next

three columns. Also, controlling for the conditioning macroeconomic information, as suggested

by Ferson and Schadt (1996), does not adversely affect our findings.18

         The results, though still statistically significant, become a little weaker if we consider the

remaining two, holding-based measures. This is plausible since the holdings returns do not

reflect any of the factors that drive the hidden costs of mutual funds and also ignore the interim

trading benefits. Nevertheless, these results still show a positive relationship between the

holding-based performance measures and the return gap, thus indicating that funds that appear to

have skills based on their disclosed trades also tend to have more favorable return gaps. Panel A

of Figure 2 presents a graphical illustration of the results discussed above.

         All the performance measures for the top decile funds are positive, but many are not

statistically significantly positive. However, the trades of these funds create value that

compensates investors at least for the expenses and the trading costs of the funds. Thus, our

results indicate that the top decile funds perform at least as well as passive benchmarks even

after adjusting for portfolio management costs.

         To analyze the time-series performance of this trading strategy, we compute the average

annual returns of each decile in each year. In the untabulated results, we find that the top five


conducted as described on page 7 of Wermers (2004), which is a slight modification to the original assignments in
Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (1997).
17
   The results are qualitatively unaffected if we compute the average returns over the entire year after the portfolio
formation, as opposed to calculating them in the subsequent month after the portfolio formation. We report the latter
to avoid overlapping return observations.



                                                                                                                  18
return gap decile funds outperform the bottom five return gap decile funds in 18 of 20 years (all

years except 1992 and 2003), indicating that the relationship between the return gap and future

performance is relatively stable over time.

        The spread in the adjusted performance widens further if we form 20 portfolios based on

the lagged return gap. The difference in the excess return relative to the market between the top

and the bottom five percent of funds amounts to 38.5 basis points, as compared to 28.4 basis

points for the difference in the decile portfolios. The difference in the Carhart abnormal returns

between extreme portfolios also increases from 22.4 to 34.4 basis points per month using 20

instead of 10 return gap portfolios.

        Investors cannot short-sell mutual funds, and therefore it is not feasible for them to obtain

the returns given by the difference between the top and the bottom deciles. However, by

conditioning on the return gap investors can avoid potential losses that are proportional to the

return differences between the deciles.



2.2. Trading Strategy with Back-Testing

In a recent study, Mamaysky, Spiegel, and Zhang (2005) provide empirical evidence that

previous performance studies are plagued by estimation problems. Since many sorting criteria

are measured with noise, the top and the bottom deciles of a trading strategy might not just be

populated by the best and the worst funds, but also by funds which have the highest estimation

errors. To alleviate this problem, they suggest using a back-testing technique, in which the

statistical model is required to exhibit some past predictive success for a particular fund before it

is used to make predictions in the current period. They show that a strategy that uses modest ex-

18
  Farnsworth, Ferson, Jackson, and Todd (2002) show that many stochastic discount factor models have a mild
negative bias when performance is neutral. The average bias is about -0.19% per month for the unconditional

                                                                                                        19
ante filters to eliminate funds whose parameters likely derive primarily from estimation errors

produces very significant out of sample risk-adjusted returns.

        Motivated by their study, we apply a back-testing technique with the view of eliminating

the funds with the most severe measurement errors. In the first step, we sort all funds into deciles

according to their average return gap between 15 and four months prior to the portfolio

formation month. This sort yields exactly the same portfolios as those described in Table 4. In

addition, we require that the average reported excess return of a fund relative to the market

during the three months immediately prior to the portfolio formation has the same sign as the

lagged return gap. Thus, funds are only considered in the trading strategy if there is a

concordance between the lagged return gap and the lagged excess return.

        Our results – summarized in Table 5 – show that the performance difference between the

top and the bottom return gap decile portfolios widens dramatically for all performance

measures. For example, the difference in the abnormal four-factor return increases from 22.4

basis points per month to 54.6 basis points per month. We also observe that the differences in the

two holding-based performance measures become larger and statistically more significant.

        After filtering out funds that are more likely to suffer from measurement problems, we

find that the funds in the top return gap decile perform particularly well. The abnormal returns of

the top decile range between 1.12 (Ferson-Schadt) and 4.67 (Fama-French) percent per year. All

abnormal returns are now significantly positive except for the Ferson and Schadt measure.



2.3. Trading Strategies Using Alternative Selection Criteria

To check the robustness of our results, Table 6 reports the abnormal four-factor returns of decile

portfolios of mutual funds based on various portfolio formation criteria. Panel A reports the


models and -0.12% per month for conditional models.
                                                                                                 20
results formed by sorting the mutual funds according to different measures of the return gap, and

Panel B also includes the findings based on the back-testing method suggested by Mamaysky,

Spiegel, and Zhang (2005).

       The first columns of Panels A and B simply repeat as a benchmark the performance

differences of portfolios formed according to the return gap and are therefore identical to the

performance measures in the fourth columns of Tables 4 and 5. The second and the third

columns report the performance results by forming portfolios using the return gaps over the

previous 36 and 60 months as the portfolio formation criterion. The results remain qualitatively

unaffected using the alternative formation windows.

       The fourth columns report results sorting funds according to their return gap before

expenses, which is defined as the raw return gap minus the monthly expenses. This measure

corresponds to the total gap between investor returns and hypothetical holdings returns. Taking

into account expenses improves the performance of decile ten relative to decile one only slightly.

       Finally, in calculating returns on our strategies we do not take into account the loads that

need to be paid to purchase respective funds. Perhaps high return gap funds also have high loads,

which subsequently could reduce overall performance of the proposed strategies. To assess the

robustness of our results to this possibility we exclude load funds and form decile portfolios

based on the return gap. The results remain qualitatively similar to our earlier evidence and are

summarized in the last column.



2.4. Regression Approach

This section uses a pooling regression approach to confirm that the return gap has a predictive

power for future excess and abnormal returns, controlling for other fund-specific characteristics.



                                                                                                21
Table 7 summarizes the estimates of the coefficients with the dependent variables being the

excess return of a mutual fund about the market return, the one-factor abnormal return, the three-

factor Fama and French (1993) abnormal return, and the four-factor Carhart (1997) abnormal

return, respectively. The factor loadings are estimated by regressing the fund returns on the

common factors during a 36-month window prior to the relevant monthly observation. Thus, the

abnormal return regressions have fewer observations than the excess return regression. In

addition, all regressions include time fixed effects and the standard errors are corrected for

clustering by time.19 We take the natural logarithms of the age and size variables to mitigate the

impact of right skewness in the distributions of both variables.

        The results, reported in Table 7, demonstrate that the return gap has an important impact

on future fund performance, even after controlling for other fund characteristics and for time

fixed effects. For example, using a four-factor model, a one standard deviation increase in the

past return gap (0.44 percent per month) increases the future fund return by approximately 9.49

basis points per month or about 1.14 percent per year. Lagged expenses and lagged excess

holdings returns also exhibit a significant impact on the three- and four-factor adjusted returns.

For example, a one standard deviation increase in monthly expenses (0.04 percent per month)

decreases the four-factor abnormal return by 7.63 basis points, and a one standard deviation

increase in excess holdings return (1.21 percent per month) increases the four-factor abnormal

return by 17.61 basis points per month.

        The sign of the remaining coefficients is consistent with the existing evidence. For

example, we find a negative relationship between size and fund performance, confirming Chen,

Hong, Huang, and Kubik’s (2004) diseconomies of scale argument. On the other hand, age,

19
  We also compute the coefficient estimates using the Fama and MacBeth (1973) methodology. Since the results do
not differ significantly across the two methods, for brevity, we only report results using a pooling regression. A

                                                                                                               22
turnover, and the index fund indicator variable play a secondary role.20 We conclude that apart

from other characteristics, such as past returns, expenses, turnover, TNA, and age, fund investors

also should take into account the return gap when selecting funds.



3. Determinants of the Return Gap

This section provides further justification for using the return gap as a measure for unobserved

actions by looking at its association with various indicators related to hidden costs and benefits

applying a multivariate regression framework. We find that the return gap has a significant cross-

sectional variation and is related to many factors that proxy for unobserved actions.

        We analyze the different determinants using a pooling regression of the return gap on the

various fund characteristics. Each regression additionally includes time fixed effects. We

estimate the pooling regressions with clustered standard errors to account for a possible

contemporaneous correlation structure.21

        Table 8 summarizes the regression results for four specifications. The first two columns

use the raw return gaps as the dependent variables, whereas the last two columns use the

abnormal four factor-adjusted return gaps as the dependent variables. Like in the previous

section, we use three years of past monthly return gaps to estimate the coefficients of the four-

factor Carhart (1997) model. Subsequently, we subtract the expected return from the realized

fund return to determine the abnormal return gap of a fund in each month. Given that the risk-

adjusted measure of each individual fund requires at least three years of data we lose the first

three years of fund returns. Furthermore, two specifications include the mutual fund family size



comparison of the two methods can be found in Petersen (2005).
20
   We identify index funds by their names using the CRSP mutual fund data set.
21
   The results using Fama and MacBeth’s (1973) methodology are similar and available upon request.

                                                                                                     23
as an additional variable. This variable is available from the CRSP mutual fund database only

after 1991.

       The first variable we consider is the trading costs of a mutual fund. We follow Wermers

(2000) and compute the execution costs of mutual funds, based on the results of Keim and

Madhavan (1997), who use proprietary data to compute total execution costs (commissions and

market impact) for a sample of institutional investors between 1991 and 1993. Keim and

Madhavan (1997) estimate the cross-sectional dependence of total institutional trading costs on

the market in which a stock is traded, the size of the trade, the market capitalization, the price of

the stock, and whether the trade is a purchase or sell transaction. In Appendix C, we describe the

procedure to estimate the trading costs in more detail. We estimate average execution costs to be

at 5 basis points per month or at about 0.60 percent per year. Our estimates of trading costs are

consistent with the estimates in Wermers (2000) during the periods when both data overlap. The

magnitude of our trading costs also is consistent with the magnitude of trading costs estimated by

Chalmers, Edelen, and Kadlec (1999), who use spread costs and commission costs for a sample

of 132 funds between 1984 and 1991. In particular, between 1984 and 1991 we obtain trading

costs of 0.72 percent as compared to 0.78 percent documented in their study.

       Funds with higher trading costs should perform worse, unless the interim trading benefits

offset their trading costs. We document a negative relationship between trading costs and the

return gap both before and after adjusting for common risk factors. The coefficient estimates on

the trading costs are statistically significantly different from zero, but they are not significantly

different from –1. A coefficient of –1 implies that an increase in the trading costs of 10 basis

points also will reduce the return gap by 10 basis points. Thus, as expected, trading costs have an

important impact on the return gap.



                                                                                                  24
        Another variable we consider is the fund IPO allocations. Due to their incentive to

maximize family level profit, fund families may allocate IPOs strategically to subsidize certain

funds in the family (Nanda, Wang, and Zheng, 2004; Nimalendran, Ritter, and Zhang, 2004;

Gaspar, Massa, and Matos, 2005; Reuter, 2005). As a result, we expect funds that obtain more

IPO allocations to exhibit a more favorable return gap since the IPO allocations tend to be

significantly underpriced. Although we do not know which funds obtain IPO allocations directly,

we observe stocks that go public and are subsequently held by mutual funds. On each disclosure

date, we compute the weight of companies that went public and are held by a fund. The fund

might have obtained these stocks through an IPO allocation or it might have obtained them on

the open market subsequent to the IPO. An average mutual fund holds 1.3 percent of its assets in

companies that went public during the previous disclosure period. The median proportion of IPO

stocks held is close to zero, and a relatively small fraction of funds account for most of the IPO

holdings.

        We find a strong relationship between this variable and the return gap, indicating that

funds that own stocks immediately after they go public have particularly favorable return gaps

during this time interval. This result is consistent with the hypothesis that these funds obtain

favorable IPO allocations, which result in significant first-day trading profits. The coefficient

estimate implies that a one-percent increase in holding of IPO stocks increases the return gap by

23.3 basis points, which is generally consistent with the average underpricing during this time

period.22 The IPO variable remains significant, even after adjusting the return gap for common

factors in fund returns using the Carhart (1997) model.




22
  For example, Ritter and Welch (2002) show that the average first-day return of IPOs between 1980 and 2001
amounts to 18.8 percent.

                                                                                                        25
       The third variable that we consider measures the transparency of the holdings disclosure

and is defined as the correlation coefficient between monthly holdings and investor returns

during the previous year. We argue that funds with a lower correlation between holdings and

investor returns tend to follow investment strategies that are more opaque. Investigating

unobserved actions of these funds is thus of considerable importance. The low correlation can

result from high turnover and from window dressing, which is a fairly common practice in the

mutual fund sector, as described by Meier and Schaumburg (2004). If the low correlation is due

to agency problems, then we should observe low-correlation funds to perform worse. On the

other hand, if the low correlation is driven by managers opting to hide their valuable investment

ideas, then we should find that low-correlation funds perform better. We find a significantly

positive relationship between the correlation and the return gap. This result suggests that the

opaqueness of a fund might be a good proxy for agency problems, which, in turn, adversely

affect the fund performance.

       Next, we examine the relationship between the return gap and other fund characteristics

that the existing literature has shown to affect fund returns, including fund expenses, turnover,

size, age, expenses, new money growth, the standard deviation of the fund returns, holdings

characteristics of the funds, and an indicator variable for index funds. We observe that funds do

not compensate for their higher expenses by either having lower hidden costs or higher interim

trading benefits. In fact, we find a significantly negative relationship between expenses and the

raw return gap.

       An alternative way to assess the impact of trading activities is to look at the relationship

between turnover and the return gap. We do not find a significant relationship between turnover

and the return gap. An insignificant correlation between turnover and the return gap, however,



                                                                                                26
does not necessarily imply that trading costs are not significantly related to turnover. It is

possible that portfolio turnover also has a positive association with the interim trading benefits.

For example, existing studies (e.g., Pástor and Stambaugh, 2002) argue that turnover may proxy

for the unobserved managerial skills. Consequently, these two effects may be offsetting each

other.

         Consistent with Chen, Hong, Huang, and Kubik (2004), we find that smaller funds and

larger fund families tend to exhibit more favorable return gaps.23 We find that the age of a fund

is negatively related to its return gap. However, the effect of age on the return gap is relatively

small. Consistent with the “smart-money” effect in Gruber (1996) and Zheng (1999), we find a

significant and positive relationship between the mean lagged money flow and the return gap. It

has been shown in the literature that liquidity demand of investors can negatively affect fund

performance.24 However, we do not find a significant relationship between the volatility of the

fund returns and the return gap.

         The characteristics of the stocks held by a fund may have a significant impact on the

return gap. To capture potential style differences between mutual funds we follow Kacperczyk,

Sialm, and Zheng (2005) and group the holdings according to their size, value, and momentum

characteristics. Each stock traded on the major U.S. exchanges is grouped into respective

quintiles according to its market value, its book-to-market ratio, and the lagged one-year return.

Subsequently, using the quintile information, we compute the value-weighted size, value, and

momentum score for each mutual fund in each period.25 For example, a mutual fund that invests



23
   In their theoretical models, Nanda, Narayanan, and Warther (2000) and Berk and Green (2004) exploit the notion
of decreasing returns to scale of mutual funds.
24
   See, for example, Edelen (1999); Goetzmann, Ivkovic, and Rouwenhorst (2001); Rakowski (2002); Zitzewitz
(2003); Johnson (2004); and Nanda, Wang, and Zheng (2005).
25
   The book-to-market and the momentum quintiles are formed by dividing the stocks equally into the five groups.
On the other hand, the size quintiles are formed by using cut-offs from the NYSE only.

                                                                                                              27
only in stocks in the smallest size quintile would have a size score of 1, while a mutual fund that

invests only in the largest size quintile would have a size score of 5.

        The regression results indicate that funds focusing on large and momentum stocks tend to

have worse return gaps before and after controlling for the four Carhart (1997) risk factors. This

result might be caused by the fact that profitable interim trading opportunities are less prevalent

or hidden costs are higher in these style classes.

        In unreported tests, we also investigate whether funds that turn over their portfolios

between different industries and styles exhibit superior or inferior return gaps. However, we do

not find a significant relationship between the return gap and the industry or the style turnover.

        Finally, we find that index funds tend to have worse return gaps than actively managed

funds.26 Index funds have only very limited opportunities to create value through interim trades,

and the return gap reflects primarily the hidden costs of fund management.



4. Conclusions

Mutual fund investors must make investment decisions based on publicly available information.

It is well known that market participants cannot entirely observe several fund actions. These

actions may benefit or hurt investors, thus, learning about them may help investors to evaluate

funds more accurately.

        In this paper, we analyze the impact of the unobserved actions on the fund performance

using a large sample of U.S. equity mutual funds between 1984 and 2003. We estimate the

impact of unobserved actions by taking the difference between the net investor returns and the


26
  This result is driven primarily by small index funds. The Vanguard 500 Index Fund, which has been the largest
index fund, has an average positive return gap of 0.66 basis points per month, whereas other index funds have an
average return gap of -1.93 basis points per month. The surprisingly large heterogeneity in index funds has been
described by Elton, Gruber, Busse (2004) and Hortacsu and Syverson (2004).

                                                                                                             28
buy and hold returns of the portfolio disclosed in the most recent past. This difference – termed

the return gap – presents us with several interesting findings. First, the effect of unobserved

actions is persistent in the long run both for bottom and top performing funds. Second, funds

differ substantially with respect to the impact of such actions. Most important, the cross-sectional

difference in unobserved actions has a significant predictive power for future performance,

indicating that funds with value-enhancing unobserved actions outperform funds whose

unobserved actions predominantly reflect hidden costs.

       Our paper offers several implications for the mutual fund industry. First, fund investors

can make more informed fund selection decisions if they take into account the unobserved

actions of mutual funds. Second, the existence of systematic differences in the scope of the

unobserved actions among funds raises concerns for funds with persistently large negative return

gaps. This is especially important in light of the fact that funds with negative actions adversely

affect investors’ return on funds.




                                                                                                 29
APPENDIX

A. Sample Selection

We start our matching process with a sample of all mutual funds in the CRSP mutual fund

database covering the period between 1984 and 2003. The focus of our analysis is on domestic

equity mutual funds, for which the holdings data are the most complete and reliable. As a result,

we eliminate balanced, bond, money market, sector, and international funds, as well as funds not

invested primarily in equity securities. We base our selection criteria on the objective codes and

on the disclosed asset compositions. First, we select funds with the following ICDI objectives:

AG, GI, LG, or IN. If a fund does not have any of the above ICDI objectives, we select funds

with the following Strategic Insight objectives: AGG, GMC, GRI, GRO, ING, or SCG. If a fund

has neither the Strategic Insight nor the ICDI objective, then we go to the Wiesenberger Fund

Type Code and pick funds with the following objectives: G, G-I, AGG, GCI, GRI, GRO, LTG,

MCG, and SCG. If none of these objectives are available and the fund has the CS policy

(Common Stocks are the mainly held securities by the fund), then the fund will be included. We

exclude funds that have the following Investment Objective Codes in the Spectrum Database:

International, Municipal Bonds, Bond and Preferred, and Balanced. Since the reported objectives

do not always indicate whether fund portfolio is balanced or not, we also exclude funds that, on

average, hold less than 80 percent or more than 105 percent in stocks.

       Elton, Gruber, and Blake (2001) and Evans (2004) identify a form of survival bias in the

CRSP mutual fund database, which results from a strategy used by fund families to enhance their

return histories. Fund families might incubate several private funds and they will only make

public the track record of the surviving incubated funds, while the returns for those funds that are

terminated are not made public. To address this incubation bias, we exclude the observations


                                                                                                 30
where the year for the observation is prior to the reported fund starting year and we exclude

observations where the names of the funds are missing in the CRSP database. Data may be

reported prior to the year of fund organization if a fund is incubated before it is made publicly

available; and these funds might not report their names or some other fund attributes, as shown

by Evans (2004). Incubated funds also tend to be smaller, which motivates us to exclude funds

that had in the previous month less than $5 million in assets under management.

       In the next step, we are able to match about 94 percent of the CRSP funds to the

Spectrum database. The unmatched funds tend to be younger and smaller than the funds for

which we find data in Spectrum. As previously mentioned by Wermers (2000), the Spectrum

data set often does not have any holdings data available during the first few quarters listed in the

CRSP database.

       Mutual fund families introduced different share classes in the 1990s, as discussed in

Nanda, Wang, and Zheng (2004). Since different share classes have the same holdings

composition, we aggregate all the observations pertaining to different share classes into one

observation. For the qualitative attributes of funds (e.g., name, objectives, year of origination),

we retain the observation of the oldest fund. For the total net assets under management (TNA),

we sum the TNAs of the different share classes. Finally, for the other quantitative attributes of

funds (e.g., return, expenses, loads), we take the weighted averages of the attributes of the

individual share classes, where the weights are the lagged TNAs of the individual share classes.

The aggregation of multiple share classes reduces our sample size to 3,171 unique funds.

       For most of our sample period, mutual funds were required to disclose their holdings

semi-annually. A large number of funds disclose their holdings quarterly, while a small number

of funds have gaps between holding disclosure dates of more than six months. To fill these gaps,



                                                                                                 31
we impute the holdings of missing quarters using the most recently available holdings, assuming

that mutual funds follow a buy-and-hold strategy. In our sample, 72 percent of the observations

are from the most recent quarter and less than 5 percent of the holdings are more than two

quarters old. We exclude funds who have fewer than 10 identified stock positions and whose

holdings are more than three quarters old. This final selection criterion reduces the number of

mutual funds used in this study to 2,543 funds.



B. Non-Equity Holdings

The holdings database includes only common stock positions and excludes other non-equity

holdings. Mutual funds in our sample invest on average 93.16 percent of their assets in equity

securities and considerably less in cash or cash equivalents (5.51 percent). Finally, the

percentage holdings of bonds (0.75 percent), preferred stocks (0.24 percent), and other assets

(0.33 percent) are relatively minor.

         To adjust fund holdings returns for the returns on the various asset classes, we proxy for

the returns of these assets using published indices. For bonds, we use the total return of the

Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, while for cash holdings we use the Treasury bill rate.27

No reliable index returns are available for preferred stocks and for other asset classes. Thus, we

assume that the return on preferred stocks equals the return of the Lehman Brothers Aggregate

Bond Index, and the return on other assets equals the Treasury bill rate.28



27
   Data on the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index are obtained from Datastream, and the risk-free interest is
obtained from French’s Web site: http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french .
28
   We also have tried two other methods of adjustment. In the first method, we calculate the implied returns on
different asset classes in each month by regressing the return of a fund on the weights invested in the five asset
classes (equity, bonds, preferred stocks, cash, and other). The coefficients are estimates of the imputed returns of the
different asset classes. We find that these imputed returns are highly correlated with the returns of the corresponding
index returns. The second method adjusts the returns by estimating abnormal returns using various factor models,
such as the CAPM model, the three-factor model of Fama and French (1993), or the four-factor model of Carhart

                                                                                                                    32
C. Trading Costs

We follow Wermers (2000) in estimating the execution costs of mutual funds. He bases his

estimate on Keim and Madhavan (1997), who provide fitted regressions for total institutional

execution costs (commissions and market impact) for a sample of investors between 1991 and

1993. The execution costs are estimated separately for the costs of buying and selling stocks. The

costs of buying or selling particular stocks are as follows:

                                                                                                   1
         CiBuy                   Nasdaq
           , t = 1.098 + 0.336 Di, t    + 0.092TradeSize i , t − 0.084 Log ( MktCap ) + 13.807                  (9)
                                                                                                  Pi , t


                                 Nasdaq                                                            1
         CiSell
           , t = 0.979 + 0.058 Di, t    + 0.214TradeSizei, t − 0.059 Log ( MktCap) + 6.537                     (10)
                                                                                                  Pi, t

        The total costs (in percentage of the trade value) of a given purchase and sale transaction

of stock i in quarter t are denoted by CiBuy       Sell
                                         , t and Ci , t . TradeSize denotes the dollar value of a

trade divided by the market capitalization of the stock; MktCap denotes the market capitalization

of the stock (expressed in thousands); Pi, t is the stock price; and DiNasdaq
                                                                       ,t     is an indicator

variable of whether the stock is traded on NASDAQ. Monthly execution costs are obtained by

dividing the quarterly costs equally over the three months.29




(1997). These models are believed to adjust appropriately for cash holdings or other factors captured in the various
models. The results remain qualitatively unchanged if we use an alternative method.
29
   Unlike Wermers (2000), we do not adjust the trading costs by a year factor, since consistent measures of trading
costs are not available for our whole sample period. However, our estimates of the trading results are not affected
significantly if we adjust the trading costs with a year factor. One alternative specification we used to estimate
trading costs adjusts the annual trading costs by the time-series of the aggregate execution costs on the different
markets (NYSE and NASDAQ) from Stoll (1995) between 1984-1992 and the time-series of the execution costs
between 1992-2004 as obtained from Abel/Noser. The means (standard deviations) of the two alternative measures
of trading costs are very similar and equal 4.80 (5.52) basis points per month for the unadjusted measure and 5.02
(5.91) basis points for the adjusted measure using Stoll and Abel/Noser. The correlation between the two measures
is 97.09 percent, indicating that the adjustment has a very minor impact on estimated trading costs.

                                                                                                                 33
REFERENCES

Baks, Klaas P., Andrew Metrick, and Jessica Wachter, 2001, Should investors avoid all actively
       managed mutual funds? A study in Bayesian performance evaluation, Journal of Finance
       56, 45–86.
Baker, Malcom, Lubomir Litov, Jessica Wachter, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2005, Can mutual fund
       managers pick stocks? Evidence from their trades prior to earnings announcements,
       Working paper, Harvard University.
Berk, Jonathan B., and Richard C. Green, 2004, Mutual fund flows and performance in rational
     markets, Journal of Political Economy 112(6), 1269- 1295.
Bollen, Nicholas P., and Jeffrey A. Busse, 2005, Short-term persistence in mutual fund
       performance, Review of Financial Studies 18, 569-597.
Brown, Keith C., W.V. Harlow, and Laura T. Starks, 1996, Of tournaments and temptations: An
       analysis of managerial incentives in the mutual fund industry, Journal of Finance 51, 85-
       110.
Brown, Stephen J., and William N. Goetzmann, 1995, Performance persistence, Journal of
       Finance 50, 679–698.
Carhart, Mark M., 1997, On persistence in mutual fund performance, Journal of Finance 52, 57–
       82.
Carhart, Mark, Ron Kaniel, David Musto, and Adam Reed, 2002, Leaning for the tape: Evidence
       of gaming behavior in equity mutual funds, Journal of Finance 57(2), 661-693.
Chalmers, John M., Roger M. Edelen, and Gregory B. Kadlec, 1999, An analysis of mutual fund
       trading costs, Working paper, University of Oregon.
Chen, Hsiu-Lang, Narasimhan Jegadeesh, and Russ Wermers, 2000, An examination of the
       stockholdings and trades of fund managers, Journal of Financial and Quantitative
       Analysis 35, 343–368.
Chen, Joseph, Harrison Hong, Ming Huang, and Jeffrey Kubik, 2004, Does fund size erode
       performance? Liquidity, organizational diseconomies and active money management,
       American Economic Review 94(5), 1276-1302.
Chevalier, Judith, and Glenn Ellison, 1997, Risk taking by mutual funds as a response to
       incentives, Journal of Political Economy 105, 1167–1200.
Cohen, Randolph, Joshua D. Coval, and Luboš Pástor, 2005, Judging fund managers by the
       company that they keep, Journal of Finance 60, 1057-1096.
Daniel, Kent, Mark Grinblatt, Sheridan Titman, and Russ Wermers, 1997, Measuring mutual
       fund performance with characteristic-based benchmarks, Journal of Finance 52, 1035–
       1058.
Davis, Gerald F., and E. Han Kim, 2005, Would mutual funds bite the hand that feeds them?
       Business ties and proxy voting, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Dickson, Joel M., John B. Shoven, and Clemens Sialm, 2000, Tax externalities of equity mutual
       funds, National Tax Journal 53, 607-628.
Edelen, Roger M, 1999, Investor flows and the assessed performance of open-end mutual funds,
       Journal of Financial Economics 53, 439-466.
Elton, Edwin J., Martin J. Gruber, and Christopher R. Blake, 1996, The persistence of risk-
       adjusted mutual fund performance, Journal of Business 69, 133-157.



                                                                                             34
Elton, Edwin J., Martin J. Gruber, and Christopher R. Blake, 2001, A first look at the accuracy of
        the CRSP mutual fund database and a comparison of the CRSP and Morningstar mutual
        fund databases, Journal of Finance 56, 2415-2430.
Elton, Edwin J., Martin J. Gruber, and Jeffrey A. Busse, 2004, Are investors rational? Choices
        among index funds, Journal of Finance 59, 261-288.
Evans, Richard B., 2004, Does alpha really matter? Evidence from mutual fund incubation,
        termination and manager change, University of Pennsylvania, Working Paper.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the return on bonds and
        stocks, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3-53.
Fama, Eugene F., and James D. MacBeth, 1973, Risk, return, and equilibrium: Empirical tests,
        Journal of Political Economy 81, 607-636.
Farnsworth, Heber, Wayne Ferson, David Jackson, and Steven Todd, 2002, Performance
        Evaluation with Stochastic Discount Factors, Journal of Business 75(3), 473-503.
Ferson, Wayne, and Kenneth Khang, 2002 Conditional Performance Measurement Using
        Portfolio Weights: Evidence from Pension Funds, Journal of Financial Economics 65,
        249-282.
Ferson, Wayne, and Rudi Schadt, 1996, Measuring fund strategy and performance in changing
        economic conditions, Journal of Finance 51, 425–462.
Frank, Mary M., James M. Poterba, Douglas A. Shackelford, and John B. Shoven, 2004, Copycat
        funds: Information disclosure regulation and the returns to active management in the
        mutual fund industry, Journal of Law and Economics 47, 515-541.
Gaspar, Jose-Miguel, Massimo Massa, and Pedro Matos, 2005, Favoritism in mutual fund
        families? Evidence on strategic cross-fund subsidization, Journal of Finance,
        forthcoming.
Ge, Weili, and Lu Zheng, 2004, The Frequency of Mutual Fund Portfolio Disclosure, Working
        paper, University of Michigan.
Goetzmann, William N., and Roger G. Ibbotson, 1994, Do winners repeat? Patterns in mutual
        fund performance, Journal of Portfolio Management 20, 9-17.
Goetzmann, William N., Zoran Ivkovic, and Geert K. Rouwenhorst, Day trading international
        mutual funds: Evidence and policy solutions, Journal of Financial and Quantitative
        Analysis 36(3), 287-309.
Greene, Jason T., and Charles W. Hodges, 2002, The dilution impact of daily fund flows on
     open-end mutual funds, Journal of Financial Economics 65(1), 131-158.
Grinblatt, Mark, and Sheridan Titman, 1989, Mutual fund performance: An analysis of quarterly
        portfolio holdings, Journal of Business 62, 393–416.
Grinblatt, Mark, and Sheridan Titman, 1993, Performance measurement without benchmarks: An
        examination of mutual fund returns, Journal of Business 66, 47–68.
Grinblatt, Mark, Sheridan Titman, and Russ Wermers, 1995, Momentum investment strategies,
        portfolio performance, and herding: A study of mutual fund behavior, American
        Economic Review 85, 1088–1105.
Gruber, Martin J., 1996, Another puzzle: The growth in actively managed mutual funds, Journal
        of Finance 51, 783–810.
Hendricks, Darryll, Jayendu Patel, and Richard Zeckhauser, 1993, Hot hands in mutual funds:
        The persistence of performance 1974-1988, Journal of Finance 48, 93–130.




                                                                                               35
Hortacsu, Ali, and Chad Syverson, 2004, Product differentiation, search costs and competition in
        the mutual fund industry: A case study of S&P 500 index funds, Quarterly Journal of
        Economics 119, 303-356.
Jensen, Michael C., 1968, The performance of mutual funds in the period 1945–1964, Journal of
        Finance 23, 389–416.
Johnson, Woodrow T., 2004, Predictable investment horizons and wealth transfers among
        mutual fund shareholders, Journal of Finance 59, 1979-2012.
Kacperczyk, Marcin, Clemens Sialm, and Lu Zheng, 2005, On the industry concentration of
        actively managed equity mutual funds, Journal of Finance 60, 1983-2012.
Karceski, Jason, Miles Livingston, and Edward S. O’Neal, 2005, Portfolio transactions costs at
        U.S. equity mutual funds, Working paper, University of Florida.
Keim, Donald B., and Ananth Madhavan, 1997, Transactions costs and investment style: An
        inter-exchange analysis of institutional equity trades, Journal of Financial Economics 46,
        265-292.
Kosowski, Robert, Allan Timmermann, Hal White, and Russ Wermers, 2001, Can mutual fund
        “stars” really pick stocks? New evidence from a bootstrap analysis, Working paper,
        INSEAD.
Livingston, Miles, and Edward S. O’Neal, 1996, Mutual fund brokerage commissions, Journal of
        Financial Research 19(2), 273-292.
Mahoney, Paul G., 2004, Manager-investor conflicts in mutual funds, Journal of Economic
        Perspectives 18(2), 161-182.
Malkiel, Burton G., 1995, Returns from investing in equity mutual funds 1971-1991, Journal of
        Finance 50, 549–572.
Mamaysky, Harry, Matthew Spiegel, and Hong Zhang, 2004, Estimating the Dynamics of
        Mutual Fund Alphas and Betas, Working paper, Yale University.
Mamaysky, Harry, Matthew Spiegel, and Hong Zhang, 2005, Improved Forecasting of Mutual
        Fund Alphas and Betas, Working paper, Yale University.
Meier, Iwan, and Ernst Schaumburg, 2004, Do funds window dress? Evidence for U.S. domestic
        equity mutual funds, Working paper, Northwestern University.
Nanda, Vikram, M. P. Narayanan, and Vincent A. Warther, 2000, Liquidity, investment ability,
      and mutual fund structure, Journal of Financial Economics 57(3), 417-443.
Nanda, Vikram, Z. Jay Wang, and Lu Zheng, 2004, Family Values and the Star Phenomenon:
        Strategies of Mutual Fund Families, The Review of Financial Studies 17(3), 667-698.
Nanda, Vikram, Z. Jay Wang, and Lu Zheng, 2005, The ABCs of mutual funds: The introduction
        of multiple share classes, Working paper, University of Michigan.
Nimalendran, M., Jay R. Ritter, and Donghang Zhang, 2004, Are trading commissions a factor in
        IPO allocation?, Working paper, University of Florida.
Pástor Luboš, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 2002, Investing in equity mutual funds, Journal of
        Financial Economics 63, 351-380.
Petersen, Mitchell A., 2005, Estimating standard errors in finance panel data sets: Comparing
        approaches, Working paper, Northwestern University.
Rakowski, David, 2002, Fund flow volatility and performance, Working paper, Georgia State
        University.
Reuter, Jonathan, 2005, Are IPO allocations for sale? Evidence from mutual funds, Journal of
        Finance, forthcoming.



                                                                                               36
Ritter, Jay R., and Ivo Welch, 2002, A review of IPO activity, pricing, and allocations, Journal
        of Finance 57, 1795-1828.
Stoll, Hans R., 1995, The importance of equity trading costs: Evidence from securities firms’
        revenues. In Robert A. Schwartz, ed., Global Equity Markets: Technological,
        Competitive, and Regulatory Challenges (Irwin Professional Publishing, New York).
Wermers, Russell, 2000, Mutual fund performance: An empirical decomposition into stock-
        picking talent, style, transaction costs, and expenses, Journal of Finance 55, 1655–1703.
Wermers, Russell, 2004, Is money really ‘smart’? New evidence on the relation between mutual
        fund flows, manager behavior, and performance persistence, Working paper, University
        of Maryland.
Zheng, Lu, 1999, Is money smart? A study of mutual fund investors’ fund selection ability,
        Journal of Finance, 54, 901-933.
Zitzewitz, Eric, 2003, Who cares about shareholders? Arbitrage-proofing mutual funds, Journal
        of Law, Economics, and Organization 19(2), 245-280.




                                                                                              37
                                                                             Figure 1
                                                                  Persistence of the Return Gap
This figure depicts the average return gap of portfolios tracked over a five-year period for the period 1984 and 2003.
The return gap is defined as the difference between the net investor return and the holding return of the portfolio
disclosed in the previous period and is expressed in percent per month. The portfolios are formed by sorting all the
funds into deciles according to their initial return gap during the previous year. Subsequently, each portfolio is
tracked over the next five-year period. In Panel A, we report the raw return gap, and in Panel B we report the return
adjusted for the four factor Carhart (1997) model.

Panel A: Persistence in the Return Gap

                                      0.15

                                                       10

                                            0.1
                     Raw Return Gap




                                                       9
                                      0.05

                                                       8
                                                       7
                                                      6
                                             0          5
                                                      43
                                                             1            2             3             4     5
                                                       2
                                      -0.05


                                                       1
                                       -0.1
                                                                         Years After Portfolio Formation



Panel B: Persistence in the Four-Factor Abnormal Return Gap

                                             0.05           10


                                                              9
                                                              8
                                                  0
                                                            6 7
                                                            5 4 1             2             3          4    5
                     Four-Factor Abnormal




                                                              3
                          Return Gap




                                            -0.05
                                                              2



                                              -0.1



                                                             1
                                            -0.15
                                                                          Years After Portfolio Formation



                                                                                                                  38
                                                                                             Figure 2
                                                                                   Returns of Trading Strategies
This figure shows the average abnormal returns during the month following the formation period over the period
1984 and 2003, expressed in percent per month. The decile portfolios are formed based on the previous one-year
return gap (Panel A) and on the previous one-year return gap using the back-testing technique of Mamaysky,
Spiegel, and Zhang (2005) (Panel B), where decile one has the lowest return gap and decile ten has the highest
return gap. We use four measures of abnormal returns – the return in excess of the market return; the market-
adjusted abnormal return (CAPM); the three-factor adjusted return as in Fama and French (1993); and the four-
factor adjusted return as in Carhart (1997).

Panel A: Sorting Based on the Return Gap

                                                                  0.2

                                                                 0.15                                                                 Fama-French
                          Abnormal Return of Trading Strategy




                                                                  0.1                                                                     Excess Return

                                                                 0.05
                                                                                                                                      Carhart
                                                                                                                                      CAPM
                                                                       0
                                                                               1       2   3        4    5     6    7        8   9   10
                                                                -0.05

                                                                 -0.1

                                                                -0.15

                                                                 -0.2

                                                                -0.25

                                                                 -0.3
                                                                                               Return Gap Decile Portfolio




Panel B: Sorting Based on the Return Gap with Back-Testing

                                                                0.5

                                                                0.4                                                                       Fama-French
                                                                                                                                          Excess Return
                     Abnormal Return of Trading Strategy




                                                                0.3
                                                                                                                                      CAPM
                                                                0.2                                                                   Carhart

                                                                0.1

                                                                  0
                                                                           1       2       3       4    5     6     7        8   9   10
                                                                -0.1

                                                                -0.2

                                                                -0.3

                                                                -0.4

                                                                -0.5
                                                                                               Return Gap Decile Portfolio




                                                                                                                                                          39
                                                 Table 1
                                             Summary Statistics
This table presents the summary statistics for the sample of equity mutual funds over the period 1984 to 2003.
                                                         Mean                 Median            Standard Deviation
Number of distinct mutual funds                            2,543

Number of fund-month observations                          211,001

Number of funds per month                                      879                     720

TNA (Total Net Assets) (in Millions)                           952                     166                   3,771

Age                                                           13.49                      8                       13.98

Expense Ratio (in Percent)                                     1.24                    1.20                       0.44

Turnover Ratio (in Percent)                                   88.06                   65.00                  103.51

Maximum Total Load (in Percent)                                2.10                    0.28                       2.52

Proportion Invested in Equity                                 93.16                   95.22                       7.72
(in Percent)
Mean of Prior-Year New Money Growth                            2.50                    0.35                       9.45
(in Percent per month; 1% winsorized)




                                                                                                                    40
                                              Table 2
                            Performance of Investor and Holdings Returns
This table summarizes the investor returns, the holdings returns before and after subtracting expenses, and the return
gaps before and after subtracting expenses for the value- and equally weighted portfolio of all funds in our sample
over the period 1984 to 2003. The return gap has been defined as the difference between the investor return and the
holdings return of the portfolio disclosed in the previous period. We report the raw returns, the one-factor alpha of
Jensen (1968), the three-factor alpha of Fama and French (1993), and the four-factor alpha of Carhart (1997) to
measure fund performance. The returns are expressed in percent per month and the standard errors are summarized
in parentheses.
                     Investor Return              Holdings Return                           Return Gap
                                        Before Expenses     After Expenses      Before Expenses    After Expenses

Panel A: Value-Weighted Returns
Raw Return           0.988***                1.071***            0.998***           -0.083***          -0.010
                    (0.294)                 (0.295)             (0.295)             (0.012)            (0.012)

CAPM Alpha             -0.075**              0.006              -0.067**            -0.082***          -0.009
                       (0.032)              (0.033)             (0.033)             (0.012)            (0.012)

Fama-French            -0.064**              0.028              -0.045              -0.092***          -0.019*
Alpha                  (0.031)              (0.032)             (0.032)             (0.011)            (0.011)

Carhart Alpha          -0.072**              0.022              -0.051              -0.094***          -0.021*
                       (0.032)              (0.033)             (0.033)             (0.012)            (0.012)


Panel B: Equally Weighted Returns
Raw Return            1.014***               1.100***            1.003***           -0.086***           0.011
                     (0.305)                (0.305)             (0.305)             (0.009)            (0.009)

CAPM Alpha             -0.064                0.021              -0.077              -0.085***           0.012
                       (0.056)              (0.056)             (0.056)             (0.010)            (0.010)

Fama-French            -0.057                0.034              -0.062              -0.092***           0.005
Alpha                  (0.044)              (0.045)             (0.045)             (0.009)            (0.009)

Carhart Alpha          -0.068                0.026              -0.071              -0.095***           0.002
                       (0.045)              (0.046)             (0.046)             (0.009)            (0.009)

*** 1% significance; ** 5% significance; * 10% significance




                                                                                                                  41
                                                  Table 3
                                       Persistence of the Return Gap
This table reports the means and the standard errors (in parentheses) of the current return gaps for decile portfolios
of the mutual funds sorted by their average lagged return gaps during the previous one, three, and five years over the
period 1984 to 2003. The return gap is defined as the difference between the reported return and the holding return
of the portfolio disclosed in the previous period. The first three columns summarize the raw return gaps, and the last
three columns show the four-factor abnormal return gaps as in Carhart (1997). The returns are expressed in percent
per month. The table also calculates the differences in the return gaps between the top and the bottom deciles and the
top and the bottom halves, along with the Spearman rank correlations and the corresponding p-values in parentheses.
                                  Raw Return Gap                                 Abnormal Return Gap
                                                                                Using Four-Factor Model
Estimation            1 Year           3 Years          5 Years          1 Year         3 Years         5 Years
Window
1. Decile          -0.113***        -0.122***         -0.113***        -0.088***        -0.113***        -0.100***
(Lowest RG)        (0.026)          (0.024)           (0.027)          (0.025)          (0.022)          (0.026)

2. Decile          -0.026           -0.040***         -0.055***        -0.015           -0.041***        -0.063***
                   (0.020)          (0.014)           (0.020)          (0.020)          (0.015)          (0.021)

3. Decile          -0.019           -0.024            -0.028**         -0.017           -0.024           -0.028**
                   (0.011)          (0.022)           (0.013)          (0.011)          (0.023)          (0.013)

4. Decile          -0.015           -0.016            -0.022*          -0.024***        -0.018           -0.018
                   (0.010)          (0.012)           (0.012)          (0.009)          (0.012)          (0.012)

5. Decile          -0.008           -0.002            -0.010           -0.015           -0.012           -0.013
                   (0.009)          (0.011)           (0.012)          (0.010)          (0.012)          (0.012)

6. Decile           0.001           -0.001            -0.006           -0.013           -0.009           -0.013
                   (0.011)          (0.010)           (0.012)          (0.011)          (0.010)          (0.012)

7. Decile          -0.003           -0.013            -0.005           -0.016           -0.024**         -0.019
                   (0.012)          (0.012)           (0.014)          (0.012)          (0.012)          (0.014)

8. Decile           0.018            0.029**           0.020            0.002            0.013           -0.004
                   (0.014)          (0.012)           (0.017)          (0.014)          (0.012)          (0.016)

9. Decile           0.049***         0.053***          0.050*           0.025*           0.023            0.040
                   (0.016)          (0.019)           (0.028)          (0.015)          (0.018)          (0.030)

10. Decile          0.154***         0.111***          0.122***         0.116***         0.078***         0.088***
(Highest RG)       (0.033)          (0.025)           (0.023)          (0.031)          (0.023)          (0.022)

Tenth Decile –      0.268***         0.234***          0.235***         0.204***         0.191***         0.188***
First Decile       (0.043)          (0.031)           (0.033)          (0.040)          (0.028)          (0.031)

Second Half –       0.080***         0.077***          0.082***         0.055***         0.058***         0.063***
First Half         (0.016)          (0.012)           (0.012)          (0.015)          (0.011)          (0.012)

Spearman           0.988***         0.964***        1.000***            0.839***         0.906***         0.924***
Rank              (0.000)          (0.000)         (0.000)             (0.002)          (0.000)          (0.000)
Correlation
*** 1% significance; ** 5% significance; * 10% significance




                                                                                                                    42
                                                 Table 4
                               Portfolio Returns Based on the Return Gap
This table reports the means and the standard errors (in parentheses) for deciles of mutual funds sorted according to
the lagged one-year return gap over the period 1984 to 2003. The return gap is lagged for one additional quarter to
account for the possible delay in reporting the holdings. The return gap is defined as the difference between the
investor fund return and the return based on the previous holdings. We use the excess return over the market, the
one-factor alpha of Jensen (1968), the three-factor alpha of Fama and French (1993), the four-factor alpha of Carhart
(1997), and the Ferson-Schadt (1996) conditional measure based on the four-factor model to measure fund
performance. Moreover, we report the Characteristic Selectivity (CS) measure of Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and
Wermers (1997), and the Grinblatt and Titman (1993) performance measure. The returns are expressed in percent
per month. The table also reports the differences in the return gaps between the top and the bottom deciles and the
top and the bottom halves, along with the Spearman rank correlations and the corresponding p-values in parentheses.
                    Excess         CAPM           Fama          Carhart    Ferson-Schadt DGTW              GT
                    Market         Alpha      French Alpha      Alpha          Alpha      Selectivity Performance
                    Return                                                                 Measure       Measure
1. Decile:         -0.183*        -0.246**     -0.164***     -0.199***      -0.191***    0.065         0.195*
Mean: -0.598       (0.098)        (0.095)      (0.061)       (0.062)        (0.061)     (0.061)       (0.107)

2. Decile          -0.090         -0.118*      -0.110**      -0.123**       -0.093*        0.050         0.124
Mean: -0.245       (0.062)        (0.061)      (0.053)       (0.054)        (0.050)       (0.043)       (0.087)

3. Decile          -0.064         -0.051       -0.082*       -0.061         -0.063*        0.054         0.126*
Mean: -0.137       (0.051)        (0.052)      (0.048)       (0.049)        (0.037)       (0.037)       (0.072)

4. Decile          -0.062         -0.044       -0.084*       -0.066         -0.073**       0.045         0.090
Mean: -0.070       (0.049)        (0.049)      (0.047)       (0.048)        (0.035)       (0.033)       (0.063)

5. Decile          -0.066         -0.032       -0.090*       -0.059         -0.067*        0.033         0.066
Mean: -0.019       (0.053)        (0.052)      (0.049)       (0.050)        (0.035)       (0.033)       (0.058)

6. Decile          -0.018          0.013       -0.032        -0.011         -0.027         0.053*        0.075
Mean: 0.026        (0.051)        (0.049)      (0.048)       (0.049)        (0.033)       (0.031)       (0.060)

7. Decile          -0.053         -0.037       -0.080        -0.069         -0.077*        0.042         0.127*
Mean: 0.078        (0.058)        (0.058)      (0.056)       (0.057)        (0.041)       (0.039)       (0.068)

8. Decile          -0.064         -0.063       -0.086*       -0.083         -0.087**       0.025         0.110
Mean: 0.149        (0.058)        (0.059)      (0.051)       (0.052)        (0.040)       (0.039)       (0.077)

9. Decile           0.029         -0.003        0.022        -0.019          0.026         0.091*        0.200**
Mean: 0.266        (0.082)        (0.082)      (0.056)       (0.056)        (0.052)       (0.048)       (0.098)

10. Decile:         0.101          0.012        0.156**       0.025          0.068         0.125*        0.322**
Mean: 0.657        (0.151)        (0.148)      (0.078)       (0.071)        (0.072)       (0.075)       (0.140)

Tenth Decile –      0.284***       0.259***     0.321***      0.224***       0.258***      0.060*        0.127**
First Decile       (0.078)        (0.078)      (0.059)       (0.054)        (0.053)       (0.038)       (0.055)

Second Half –       0.088***       0.097***     0.091***      0.076***       0.078***      0.008         0.016
First Half         (0.024)        (0.023)      (0.024)       (0.024)        (0.023)       (0.014)       (0.018)

Spearman Rank      0.839***       0.697**     0.794***       0.649**         0.661**       0.103         0.297
Correlation       (0.002)        (0.025)     (0.006)        (0.042)         (0.038)       (0.770)       (0.405)
*** 1% significance; ** 5% significance; * 10% significance




                                                                                                                   43
                                             Table 5
                  Portfolio Returns Based on the Return Gap with Back-Testing
This table reports the means and the standard errors (in parentheses) for deciles of mutual funds over the period
1984 to 2003 sorted according to the lagged one-year return gap with back-testing as suggested by Mamaysky,
Spiegel, and Zhang (2005). Mutual funds are sorted into deciles according to the average return gaps between fifteen
and four months prior to the portfolio formation. In addition, funds are only considered if the sign of the average
return gap equals the sign of the excess reported fund return during the three months prior to the portfolio formation.
We use the performance measures described in Table 4. The returns are expressed in percent per month.
                    Excess          CAPM           Fama          Carhart    Ferson-Schadt DGTW              GT
                    Market          Alpha      French Alpha      Alpha          Alpha      Selectivity Performance
                    Return                                                                  Measure       Measure
1. Decile:         -0.378***      -0.443***    -0.406***       -0.336***     -0.198**    -0.035         0.065
Mean: -0.600       (0.106)        (0.103)      (0.098)         (0.099)       (0.096)     (0.069)       (0.106)

2. Decile          -0.242***      -0.276***    -0.278***       -0.207**      -0.047        -0.013          0.066
Mean: -0.245       (0.088)        (0.088)      (0.088)         (0.089)       (0.085)       (0.052)        (0.090)

3. Decile          -0.176**       -0.185**     -0.187**        -0.105         0.002         0.036          0.090
Mean: -0.137       (0.085)        (0.086)      (0.088)         (0.087)       (0.080)       (0.053)        (0.092)

4. Decile          -0.184**       -0.185**     -0.200***       -0.126*        0.001         0.017          0.039
Mean: -0.070       (0.074)        (0.075)      (0.076)         (0.076)       (0.070)       (0.044)        (0.081)

5. Decile          -0.050         -0.043       -0.057           0.009         0.101         0.054          0.025
Mean: -0.019       (0.070)        (0.070)      (0.072)         (0.072)       (0.068)       (0.039)        (0.077)

6. Decile           0.111          0.144*       0.163**         0.106        -0.002         0.106**        0.141*
Mean: 0.026        (0.084)        (0.083)      (0.076)         (0.077)       (0.072)       (0.045)        (0.084)

7. Decile           0.100          0.116        0.110           0.056        -0.090         0.097*         0.202**
Mean: 0.078        (0.093)        (0.094)      (0.085)         (0.082)       (0.075)       (0.051)        (0.087)

8. Decile           0.081          0.100        0.102           0.013        -0.102         0.088*         0.204**
Mean: 0.149        (0.095)        (0.096)      (0.082)         (0.081)       (0.073)       (0.051)        (0.090)

9. Decile           0.162          0.157        0.187**         0.068        -0.008         0.118**        0.256**
Mean: 0.266        (0.113)        (0.115)      (0.091)         (0.087)       (0.084)       (0.057)        (0.103)

10. Decile:         0.310*         0.275*       0.389***        0.210**       0.093         0.211***       0.382***
Mean: 0.640        (0.166)        (0.166)      (0.115)         (0.106)       (0.105)       (0.081)        (0.138)

Tenth Decile –      0.687***       0.717***     0.795***        0.546***      0.291*        0.246***       0.317***
First Decile       (0.182)        (0.184)      (0.167)         (0.156)       (0.150)       (0.094)        (0.098)

Second Half –       0.364***       0.397***     0.417***        0.262**       0.059         0.111**        0.137**
First Half         (0.120)        (0.120)      (0.117)         (0.111)       (0.104)       (0.056)        (0.064)

Spearman Rank       0.939***       0.875***     0.939***        0.903***      0.200         0.939***       0.806***
Correlation        (0.000)        (0.001)      (0.000)         (0.000)       (0.580)       (0.000)        (0.005)

*** 1% significance; ** 5% significance; * 10% significance




                                                                                                                     44
                                                Table 6
                              Portfolio Returns Based on the Return Gap:
                                        Various Sorting Criteria
This table reports the abnormal returns according to the four-factor model of Carhart (1997), along with their
standard errors (in parentheses), for deciles of mutual funds formed according to different sorting criteria over the
period 1984 to 2003. Panel A sorts the funds according to the lagged return gap between fifteen and four months
prior to the portfolio formation. Panel B uses in addition the back-testing technique suggested by Mamaysky,
Spiegel, and Zhang (2005), by considering only funds if the sign of the average return gap equals the sign of the
excess reported fund return during the three months prior to the portfolio formation. The returns are expressed in
percent per month.

Panel A: Sorting According to Lagged Return Gap Measures
                       Return Gap          Return Gap          Return Gap         Return Gap         Return Gap for
                                                                                Before Expenses      No-Load Funds
                          1 Year             3 Years             5 Years            1 Year               1 Year
1. Decile               -0.199***          -0.234***           -0.146**          -0.221***             -0.183***
(Lowest RG)             (0.062)            (0.060)             (0.068)           (0.062)               (0.068)

2. Decile               -0.123**           -0.100*             -0.115*            -0.134**              -0.131**
                        (0.054)            (0.055)             (0.063)            (0.053)               (0.059)

3. Decile               -0.061             -0.060              -0.097*            -0.057                -0.072
                        (0.049)            (0.049)             (0.054)            (0.051)               (0.058)

4. Decile               -0.066             -0.029              -0.112**           -0.074                -0.004
                        (0.048)            (0.043)             (0.049)            (0.052)               (0.059)

5. Decile               -0.059             -0.090**            -0.053             -0.057                -0.027
                        (0.050)            (0.046)             (0.050)            (0.050)               (0.063)

6. Decile               -0.011             -0.055              -0.087*            -0.013                -0.000
                        (0.049)            (0.050)             (0.049)            (0.050)               (0.052)

7. Decile               -0.069             -0.075              -0.100             -0.085                -0.008
                        (0.057)            (0.057)             (0.061)            (0.054)               (0.062)

8. Decile               -0.083             -0.067              -0.013             -0.067                -0.109*
                        (0.052)            (0.057)             (0.066)            (0.051)               (0.058)

9. Decile               -0.019              0.019               0.038              0.012                -0.078
                        (0.056)            (0.060)             (0.069)            (0.053)               (0.057)

10. Decile               0.025             -0.017               0.012              0.028                 0.029
(Highest RG)            (0.071)            (0.067)             (0.070)            (0.071)               (0.079)

Tenth Decile –           0.224***           0.217***            0.158***           0.249***              0.212***
First Decile            (0.054)            (0.056)             (0.054)            (0.057)               (0.081)

Second Half –            0.076***           0.058**             0.084***           0.091***              0.065**
First Half              (0.024)            (0.025)             (0.024)            (0.023)               (0.030)

Spearman Rank            0.649**            0.697**             0.879***           0.736**               0.515
Correlation             (0.042)            (0.025)             (0.001)            (0.015)               (0.123)

*** 1% significance; ** 5% significance; * 10% significance




                                                                                                                   45
Panel B: Sorting According to Lagged Return Gap Measures with Back-Testing
                      Return Gap         Return Gap           Return Gap     Return Gap      Return Gap for
                                                                           Before Expenses   No-Load Funds
                         1 Year            3 Years              5 Years        1 Year            1 Year
1. Decile              -0.336***         -0.370***            -0.271***     -0.371***          -0.295***
(Lowest RG)            (0.099)           (0.096)              (0.099)       (0.099)            (0.113)

2. Decile              -0.207**          -0.188**             -0.227**      -0.207**           -0.178**
                       (0.089)           (0.093)              (0.094)       (0.087)            (0.089)

3. Decile              -0.105            -0.078               -0.165*       -0.127             -0.123
                       (0.087)           (0.078)              (0.090)       (0.082)            (0.102)

4. Decile              -0.126*           -0.098               -0.176**      -0.116             -0.085
                       (0.076)           (0.078)              (0.087)       (0.081)            (0.092)

5. Decile               0.009            -0.101               -0.100        -0.108              0.023
                       (0.072)           (0.076)              (0.084)       (0.083)            (0.087)

6. Decile               0.106             0.041               -0.020        -0.021              0.084
                       (0.077)           (0.069)              (0.058)       (0.074)            (0.079)

7. Decile               0.056            -0.013               -0.014        -0.043              0.080
                       (0.082)           (0.084)              (0.083)       (0.072)            (0.096)

8. Decile               0.013             0.048                0.042         0.035             -0.037
                       (0.081)           (0.085)              (0.096)       (0.079)            (0.087)

9. Decile               0.068             0.156*               0.151         0.095              0.075
                       (0.087)           (0.093)              (0.104)       (0.084)            (0.097)

10. Decile              0.210**           0.112                0.137         0.206*             0.275**
(Highest RG)           (0.106)           (0.098)              (0.105)       (0.106)            (0.123)

Tenth Decile –          0.546***          0.482***             0.408***      0.577***           0.572***
First Decile           (0.156)           (0.146)              (0.152)       (0.157)            (0.187)

Second Half –           0.262**           0.224**              0.242**       0.232***           0.252**
First Half             (0.111)           (0.108)              (0.110)       (0.085)            (0.118)

Spearman Rank           0.903***          0.927***             0.964***      0.988***           0.855***
Correlation            (0.000)           (0.000)              (0.000)       (0.000)            (0.002)

*** 1% significance; ** 5% significance; * 10% significance




                                                                                                          46
                                                Table 7
               Predictability of Future Returns Using Return Gap and Holdings Return
This table reports the coefficients of pooling regressions of excess and abnormal returns on various fund attributes.
The sample includes all equity mutual funds in our sample and spans the period of 1984-2003 (including the data used
for calculating the abnormal returns). The dependent variables are the market excess return, the one-factor abnormal
return, the three-factor abnormal return of Fama and French (1993), and the four-factor abnormal return of Carhart
(1997), respectively. All regressions include time dummies. Cluster-corrected standard errors have been provided in
parentheses. The returns are expressed in percent per month.

  Dependent Variable                           Excess Market       One-Factor       Three-Factor       Four-Factor
                                                  Return           Abnormal          Abnormal           Abnormal
                                                                     Return            Return             Return
  Prior-Year Adjusted Return Gap                  0.3619**         0.2771             0.2184***        0.2152***
                                                 (0.1841)         (0.1772)           (0.0468)         (0.0446)

  Prior-Year Expenses                            -1.4478          -1.7218**          -1.0450***       -1.7348***
                                                 (0.9769)         (0.8461)           (0.4037)         (0.4389)

  Prior-Year Excess Holdings Return               0.2349           0.1579             0.2211***        0.1450**
                                                 (0.2313)         (0.2110)           (0.0687)         (0.0673)

  Log of Lagged TNA                              -0.0533***       -0.0396***         -0.0026          -0.0222**
                                                 (0.0185)         (0.0121)           (0.0115)         (0.0125)

  Log of Age                                      0.0061          -0.0182            -0.0257*         -0.0222**
                                                 (0.0216)         (0.0175)           (0.0144)         (0.0125)

  Prior-Year Turnover                             0.0317           0.0233             0.0212          -0.0469
                                                 (0.0685)         (0.0711)           (0.0446)         (0.0343)

  Index Fund                                      0.0472          -0.0077             0.0164          -0.0153
                                                 (0.0489)         (0.0465)           (0.0323)         (0.0315)

  Time Fixed Effects                                YES               YES               YES               YES

  Number of Observations                          160,895           150,210            150,210           150,210

  *** 1% significance; ** 5% significance; * 10% significance




                                                                                                                   47
                                                  Table 8
                                       Determinants of the Return Gap
This table reports the coefficients of the panel regressions of the return gaps on various fund and fund family
characteristics. The sample includes equity mutual funds and spans the period of 1984-2003. The return gap is defined
as the difference between the investor fund return and the return based on the previous holdings. All regressions
include time-fixed effect dummies. The standard errors take into account clustering by time and are provided in
parentheses. The returns are expressed in percent per month.
                                                         Dependent Variables (in Percent per Month)
                                                         Raw                          Abnormal Four-Factor
                                                      Return Gap                            Return Gap
  Trading Costs per Month                    -0.7633***        -0.8331***         -0.7996***        -0.8683***
                                             (0.2394)          (0.2653)           (0.3056)          (0.3517)
  Weight of Recent IPOs                       0.2332***          0.2441***          0.2052***          0.2285***
                                             (0.0265)           (0.0300)           (0.0314)           (0.0366)
  Correlation Between Holdings and            0.6964**           0.6802**           1.0620***          1.0832***
  Investor Returns                           (0.3085)           (0.3269)           (0.3527)           (0.3804)
  Expenses per Month                         -0.3534**          -0.3618**          -0.2003            -0.2039
                                             (0.1640)           (0.1666)           (0.2116)           (0.1928)
  Turnover                                    0.0092             0.0069            -0.0193            -0.0255
                                             (0.0112)           (0.0120)           (0.0172)           (0.0192)
  Log of TNA                                 -0.0112***         -0.0229***         -0.0130***         -0.0234***
                                             (0.0029)           (0.0042)           (0.0035)           (0.0047)
  Log of Family TNA                                              0.0121***                             0.0097**
                                                                (0.0032)                              (0.0039)
  Log of Age                                 -0.0179***         -0.0132**           0.0069             0.0126
                                             (0.0050)           (0.0059)           (0.0076)           (0.0090)
  Mean New Money Growth                       0.2198***          0.2087***          0.4132***          0.3948***
                                             (0.0576)           (0.0614)           (0.1337)           (0.1410)
  Standard Deviation of Investor              0.0113             0.0131             0.0016             0.0047
  Returns                                    (0.0101)           (0.0105)           (0.0092)           (0.0099)
  Index Fund                                 -0.0393**          -0.0467***         -0.0559***         -0.0623***
                                             (0.0158)           (0.0158)           (0.0194)           (0.0201)
  Size-Score                                 -0.0330***         -0.0387***         -0.0395***         -0.0420***
                                             (0.0112)           (0.0128)           (0.0133)           (0.0156)
  Value-Score                                -0.0133            -0.0116             0.0006             0.0152
                                             (0.0195)           (0.0223)           (0.0179)           (0.0206)
  Momentum-Score                             -0.0657**          -0.0746**          -0.1132***         -0.1234***
                                             (0.0299)           (0.0352)           (0.0342)           (0.0413)
  Time Fixed Effects                           YES                 YES                YES                 YES

  Number of Observations                      167,983            145,328             117,130             97,788

  *** 1% significance; ** 5% significance; * 10% significance




                                                                                                                   48
