NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TO LEAVE OR NOT TO LEAVE:
THE DISTRIBUTION OF BEQUEST MOTIVES
Wojciech Kopczuk
Joseph P. Lupton
Working Paper 11767
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11767
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2005

We thank Robert Barsky, Jason Cummins, Karen Dynan, Bernard Salanié, Matthew Shapiro, and two
anonymous referees for helpful comments. The opinions expressed are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or its staff members.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Wojciech Kopczuk and Joseph P. Lupton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

To Leave or Not To Leave: The Distribution of Bequest Motives
Wojciech Kopczuk and Joseph P. Lupton
NBER Working Paper No. 11767
November 2005
JEL No. D11, D12, D91, E21
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we examine the effect of observed and unobserved heterogeneity in the desire to die
with positive net worth. Using a structural life-cycle model nested in a switching regression with
unknown sample separation, we find that roughly three-fourths of the elderly single population has
a bequest motive that may or may not have an appreciable effect on spending depending on the level
of resources. Both the presence and the magnitude of the bequest motive are statistically and
economically significant. On average, households with a bequest motive spend about 25 percent less
on consumption expenditures. We conclude that, among the elderly single households in our sample,
about four-fifths of their net wealth will be bequeathed and approximately half of this is due to a
bequest motive.
Wojciech Kopczuk
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street, Rm. 1022 IAB
MC 3323
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
wk2110@columbia.edu
Joseph P. Lupton
Federal Reserve Board
joseph.p.lupton@frb.gov

I.

Introduction

As of 2003, the cohort of those aged 50 or more had amassed a level of wealth never held
before by a single generation. The disposition of this wealth over the next 50 years will have
large consequences for the generations to follow. Will there be a massive surge in consumption
in the decades to come? Or, will the next generation be the recipients of this golden egg? In this
paper, we explore the possibility that, after accounting for lifetime resources, heterogeneity in the
desire to leave bequests can explain much of the substantial variation in saving behavior observed
among the elderly. In doing so, we estimate both the magnitude of the desire to leave a bequest
and the proportion of the elderly population that has this desire.
In two papers, Michael Hurd examines the importance of bequests by noting that the
difference between the change in wealth for households with and without a bequest motive
provides a measure of the strength of the bequest motive (Hurd, 1987 and 1989). Hurd assumes
that only people with children save for bequests. Contrary to the predictions of a strong bequest
motive, Hurd (1987) finds that people with children decummulate their wealth faster than people
without children. This finding holds even after controlling for initial income and wealth
differences. Hurd (1989) estimates the parameters of a life-cycle model augmented with an
egoistic bequest motive and finds the bequest motive to be statistically significant but
economically trivial.
The approach in Hurd (1989) is compelling because it controls for the complex
relationship between mortality risk, annuity income and liquidity constraints—a crucial
requirement for examining bequest motives because U.S. law prohibits the use of social security
benefits as collateral. We adopt this approach as well. However, it is not clear that simply
having children implies a desire to die with bequeathable wealth. Nor is it clear that households
without children lack such a desire. Large-scale heterogeneity in saving behavior owes to a
combination of differences in preferences and outcomes (Venti and Wise, 1998; Dynan, Skinner,
and Zeldes, 2002). In a sample of TIAA-CREF pension holders, Juster and Laitner (1996) find
heterogeneity in preferences for bequests despite homogeneity in earnings, occupation, and
education. This heterogeneity exists across households with and without children and thus
suggests a potential problem with the identification strategy used in Hurd (1987, 1989).
Little is known regarding why individuals desire to leave a bequest, if they do at all.
Empirical tests of the importance of bequest motives in the literature rely on the assumption of an
operative bequest motive, either by selecting a group that definitely has the motive as in Hurd
(1987, 1989) or by positing that either everyone has the motive or that nobody does, as in Altonji,
Hayashi and Kotlikoff (1997). An alternative approach is based on noting that, if a bequest

1

motive is strong for a certain segment of the population, it will be evident in the relative
consumption of this group after conditioning on the structural relationship between mortality risk,
wealth, annuity income and the possibility of future liquidity constraints. In this paper we
examine consumption expenditures of the elderly in which both the presence of a bequest motive
as well as its impact on spending is not assumed but is instead estimated. The estimation of our
model is done in the framework of a switching regression where sample separation is unknown.
In this context, whereas Hurd (1989) assumes perfect sample separation information regarding
who has a bequest motive (households with children), we allow all households to have a bequest
motive and let observed spending behavior determine the extent to which bequests are of
economic importance.
Using panel data that provide detailed information on the financial resources of a sample
of elderly households, we estimate a bequest motive that is substantially larger than found in
Hurd (1989). Although we find the existence of children to be a significant indicator of having a
bequest motive, the hypothesis that it is a deterministic predictor is soundly rejected. We view
this result as being consistent with Hurd’s finding that households with children do not behave
according to a bequest motive anymore than do households without children. However, rather
than interpreting this as evidence against a bequest motive, we show that a significant portion of
elderly households—with and without children—behave according to a statistically significant
and economically meaningful bequest motive.
The more flexible estimation strategy utilized in this paper comes at the cost of not being
able to distinguish between a bequest motive and the desire to hold wealth for other reasons
unrelated to utility from consumption, such as status (Carroll, 2000) or uncertain health expenses
(Palumbo, 1999; Dynan, Skinner and Zeldes, 2002 and 2004). However, it is unlikely for several
reasons that the precautionary saving motive related to uncertain medical costs is having a large
influence on the estimated presence and magnitude of the bequest motive. First, the empirical
strategy compares the consumption profiles of households, conditioning on wealth and income.
Consequently, if households with similar resources face the same risk of medical costs, the
precautionary saving motive should affect these households similarly and not affect the relative
consumption profiles. Second, we show that households with private health insurance are no less
likely to consume in a manner consistent with a bequest motive. Third, we show that households
with higher self-reported expected future out-of-pocket medical costs are no more likely to
consume in a manner consistent with a bequest motive than households with lower expected
costs. Finally, we compare the results from the model to self-reported probabilities of leaving a
bequest after conditioning on self-reported expected future out-of-pocket medical costs. We find

2

that among households with similar permanent income, wealth, and expected medical expenses,
those who consume in a way that is more consistent with a bequest motive also reported having a
higher likelihood of leaving a bequest. We conclude that, although the precautionary motive may
be an important component of saving behavior among the elderly, it does little to influence the
bequest motive results in this paper.
Our results suggest that roughly 75 percent of the elderly population has a bequest
motive. Households with a bequest motive spend about 25 percent less on personal outlays on
average. Of the 78 percent of net wealth that is estimated to be bequeathed by single households
aged 70 and older, 53 percent is accounted for by a bequest motive. Although we also report
results that are consistent with both an altruistic and strategic bequest motive, none of the
evidence is significant. This is in line with the literature which suggests the desire to die with
positive net worth is largely for egoistic reasons.1

II.

Related Literature

The importance of bequests and other intergenerational transfers in the macroeconomy
has been debated extensively for the past two decades. Kotlikoff and Summers (1981) argue that
as much as 46% of household wealth is accounted for by bequests while Modigliani (1988)
argues that a much smaller 17% is more accurate.2 The methodology used to obtain these
numbers is affected by assumptions regarding how flows of bequests are converted into stocks of
inherited wealth. Alternative estimates of the importance of bequests have used micro data which
ascertain either the amount of wealth that has been inherited or the amount of savings planned for
bequests. Most of these studies have found inherited wealth to be in the range of 15% to 31% of
total household wealth (Menchick and David, 1983; Modigliani, 1988; Hurd and Mundaca, 1989;
Gale and Scholz, 1994; Juster and Laitner, 1996). However, it is not clear that individuals
accurately answer how much of their wealth was given to them opposed to being from the fruit of
their own labor. Nor is it clear if returns to past inheritances are included in self-reported
bequests. More importantly, measuring the amount of inheritances received does not distinguish
between intended versus accidental bequests. On the other hand, simply asking individuals about
1

For example, see Kuehlwein (1993), Wilhelm (1996), Laitner and Juster (1996), and Altonji, Hayashi and
Kotlikoff (1997).
2
These numbers are based on converting flows of bequests to a stock of inherited wealth. An alternative
method is also used which is based on estimating life-cycle saving and then comparing the result to total
wealth. With this method, Kotlikoff and Summers (1981) find total intergenerational transfers to be on the
order of 81% while Modigliani (1988) finds 20%. The differences between the two estimates come from
differences of opinion regarding 1) the timing of bequest transfers 2) educational expenses and 3) capital
gains on received inheritances. Davies and Shorrocks (2001) surveyed the literature that was spawned by
this debate and proposed a rough estimate of 34-45 percent for the contribution of inheritance to aggregate
wealth.

3

expected future bequests is biased by past unexpected wealth changes and could say very little
about saving behavior.
Studies of bequests using micro data have focused on wealth at different stages during the
life-cycle. This approach yielded an early critique of the life-cycle hypothesis of Modigliani and
Brumberg (1954). The standard life cycle model predicts that wealth should begin to decline at
some age and continue to do so until death. Although initial estimates using cross section data
suggest that household wealth increases with age (Menchik and David, 1983), later studies have
shown a decline (Hurd, 1990).3 Moreover, studies examining panel data report a declining
trajectory (e.g. Diamond and Hausman, 1984; Hurd, 1987). Nevertheless, Hurd (1987) proves
that a declining wealth trajectory need not preclude the possibility of a binding bequest motive.
The addition of a bequest motive to the standard life cycle model simply flattens the wealth
trajectory. Whether or not the trajectory switches from declining to increasing depends on the
parameters of the model.
Indirect evidence concerning the existence of a bequest motive is mixed but largely
supportive. Individuals act to decrease their tax liability through intergenerational transfers
(Bernheim et al. 2001; Page, 2003; Bernheim et al. 2004; Joulfaian 2004) and offset public
transfers by purchasing life insurance and selling annuities (Bernheim, 1991). Furthermore, the
presence of a bequest motive aids in explaining the amount of total wealth in the U.S. as well as
its distribution (Kotlikoff and Summers, 1981; Gale and Scholz, 1994; Bernheim et al., 2001).
Despite the potential presence of a bequest motive, there is little evidence that individuals
leave bequests for altruistic reasons. Linking parents’ and childrens’ income tax returns to
parents’ estate tax records, Wilhelm (1996) finds evidence inconsistent with the compensatory
bequest implications of an altruistic bequest model. Although Laitner and Juster (1996) note that
roughly one-half of TIAA-CREF annuitants conform to the altruistic model, they show little
evidence of altruism toward one’s children in the full sample. Estimating the first-order
conditions of a model of altruism that is robust to uncertainty and liquidity constraints, Altonji,
Hayashi and Kotlikoff (1997) find that parents do not offset inter-vivos transfers given an
increase in their children’s permanent income. They conclude that this is a strong rejection of
intergenerational altruism. Laitner and Ohlsson (2001) find only weak evidence for parental
altruism in the U.S. and Sweden. The very rich who are subject to estate taxation, and who are

3

Possible reasons for the increasing age-wealth relationship in the cross section are 1) wealthy people live
longer, 2) cohort differences require one to account for differences in tastes (as well as permanent income
which would imply a more positively sloped wealth trajectory), and 3) Hurd (1990) suggests that earlier
studies had too much aggregation of age groups and that, the cross section wealth-age profile showed a
decline when examining more disaggregated age groups.

4

virtually certain to leave a bequest do not appear to pursue tax avoidance strategies such as
intervivos giving (McGarry, 1999; Poterba, 2001). All this evidence suggests motives other than
the maximization of a dynastic utility function.

III. The Data
We use panel data from the Asset and Health Dynamics Among the Oldest Old
(AHEAD) survey, a survey of households born in 1923 or earlier. At the time of the initial wave
in 1993, these households had at least one age eligible respondent of age 69 or older. Households
that maintained at least one living member were interviewed again in 1995, 1998 and 2000.
Since the purpose of the AHEAD is to examine the relationship between age-related health
changes in the elderly and the economic resources available to these households, it is ideally
suited for the examining the effects of a bequest motive on behavior.
The initial 1993 wave of the AHEAD consists of 6,046 households of which 4,362 had at
least one living member that was interviewed in the subsequent three waves. In order to make the
data consistent with the theoretical model described below, the sample is restricted to single
households that claim to be retired and not working. With these restrictions, there are 1,575
households present in all four waves. All analyses use compensatory household weights which
control for unequal selection probabilities as well as geographic and race group differences in
response rates.
Respondents were asked detailed questions about their economic resources.4 This
includes detailed self-reported information regarding all sources of regularly occurring income:
social security income, supplemental security income, veteran’s benefits, defined benefit
retirement pension income, annuities, welfare, and food stamps.5 In each wave of the survey,
respondents noted the amount of each type of income received, how long the income is expected
to last, and whether the income source is adjusted for increases in the cost of living. We use this
information to construct a profile of total income for each survey and then combine them to create
a single profile that utilizes the most current information: Income from 1995 to 1998 is based on
the 1995 survey, income from 1998 to 2000 is based on the 1998 survey, and income from 2000
forward is based on the 2000 survey.6 Non-regularly occurring income, such as financial
4

A more comprehensive description of the wealth, income and saving data in the AHEAD survey is
provided in the appendix.
5
Respondents were lastly asked about any “other” sources of regularly occurring income. This could
include such sources as annuity payments from reverse mortgages.
6
Each income source is assumed to last for as long as the respondent claims it will last. If the income
source is adjusted for cost-of-living increases, the level of income is held constant in real terms. Otherwise,
future income values are discounted by the CPI-U as forecasted by Social Security Administration in the
1998 OASDI Trustees Report.

5

assistance from friends and family are added to earnings in the relevant survey period but
assumed to not continue into the future.7
Household respondents also provided detailed balance sheet information. The specific
components of net worth include equity in a main home, other real estate (including a second
home), vehicles, owned business, investment retirement accounts, corporate equities and mutual
funds, transaction bank accounts, CD’s and saving bonds, corporate and government bonds,
assets in a trust, other assets (such as art, jewelry and collectibles), and other non-collateralized
debt (such as credit card debt or debts owing to medical treatment). The sum of these
components (less debt) is defined as measured net wealth. Measured wealth can also be thought
of as bequeathable wealth.8
Measured net wealth is missing two components. First, defined contribution pensions are
excluded because these data were not available to us. However, our focus on individuals born
prior to 1923—a cohort with very little exposure to defined contribution pension plans—largely
mitigates any potential bias in measured wealth. Moreover, because we focus on individuals
older than 70 years, it is likely that most of the few defined contribution pensions that did exist
were either liquidated and placed into one of the financial accounts noted above, or converted to
an annuity, which is included in measured income. Second, measured wealth excludes the value
of life insurance policies. Because roughly 40 percent of the sample has a life insurance policy,
the effect of life insurance on our results is considered in more detail below.
Table 1 shows the sample means of total net wealth and its components from each survey
year. In general, the level of wealth is consistent with alternative surveys of household wealth.9
However, the $40,323 increase in total net wealth between 1993 and 1995 is puzzling. As
indicated in the table, most of the change owes to a large increase in the value of stocks and
mutual funds. Although an increase of this magnitude would be consistent with large and varying
capital gains, the rate of return to equities from 1993 to 1995 was substantially smaller than in the
subsequent periods. In particular, the Standard & Poor’s index of common stock rose at an
7

Roughly one-fourth of the sample either received (or gave) transfers from (or to) friends and family. The
average annual net transfer out of the household is about $600. The assumption that these transfers do not
continue in the future has little impact on our results.
8
Although it is not obvious that housing wealth should be included in measured bequeathable wealth, we
argue below that this is more appropriate than excluding it. However, we also report results that exclude
housing wealth. Equity in the main home and other real estate excludes the value of reverse mortgages.
Any income generated from reverse mortgages is included in measured income.
9
For comparison, data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics indicate that, among unmarried
individuals older than age 70 that are alive in 1994 and 1999, mean wealth was $161,037 in 1994 and
$196,714 in 1999. An alternative source of data is the Federal Reserve’s Survey of Consumer Finance
(SCF). Restricting the SCF to unmarried households aged 72 and older in 1995, mean wealth was
$182,536 in 1995, $179,869 in 1998 and $244,874 in 2001.

6

annual rate of 7 percent in real terms between 1993 and 1995 but rose 23 percent (annual rate)
from 1995 to 1998 and then another 11 percent (annual rate) from 1998 to 2000. Table 1 also
reports the share of total net worth for each subcomponent. The doubling of the share of wealth
in stocks and mutual funds from 1993 to 1995 is again suspicious, particularly given its relative
stability in subsequent waves of the survey. Because such a large increase in wealth has the
potential to bias the results toward finding evidence of a strong bequest motive, the 1993 wave is
not used in the estimation of the model.10
Table 1 shows that mean net wealth fell only slightly between 1995 and 1998, and fell
again between 1998 and 2000. However, this cannot be interpreted as evidence against the
standard life-cycle model since it neglects the influence of asset returns. Indeed, unexpected
differential rates of return to wealth could bias any cross-household comparison of wealth
changes. In the presence of unexpected returns to wealth, the standard life-cycle model is
hypothesis about saving and spending behavior and not necessarily about ex-post movements in
wealth. To address this issue, the AHEAD provides information allowing capital gains to be
netted out of the change in wealth. Along with balance sheet information, respondents were
asked about the net transactions in each component of wealth. The sum of these transactions
provides a measure of household saving.11 In turn, the level of saving can be used to define
capital gains (the difference between the change in measured wealth and measured saving) and
consumption (the difference between measured total income and measured saving)—see the
appendix for a more detailed derivation of saving and consumption in the AHEAD. We estimate
the theoretical model using this measure of consumption.
Table 2 reports the mean and median of total income, saving, capital gains and
consumption from 1995 to 1998 and 1998 to 2000. Before computing the sample statistics, the
values are annualized by using the individual specific number of months between survey dates. 12
As implied by the standard life-cycle hypothesis, average saving is negative in both periods.
However, although capital losses contribute to the decline in wealth in the first period, capital
gains offset about one-half of the decline in saving in the latter period. Consumption
10

Rohwedder, Haider, and Hurd (2004) conclude that a combination of question sequence and wording in
the 1993 wave of the AHEAD survey led to a severe under-reporting of ownership rates of stocks, CDs,
bonds, and checking and saving accounts. In a personal conversation, Bob Willis, director and co-principal
investigator of the HRS/AHEAD survey, agreed with the Rohwedder et al conclusion and noted that the
flawed methodology was revised considerably in later waves of the survey. Consequently, Willis suggests
the wealth data from the 1993 AHEAD not be used to make cross-year comparisons.
11
Juster et al (2004) show that the same survey instrument used to measure active saving in the Panel Study
of Income Dynamics from 1984 to 1994 aligns well with movements in the personal saving rate from the
National Income Accounts.
12
The average number of years between the 1995 and 1998 wave is 2.86 and the average number of years
between the 1998 and 2000 wave is 2.11.

7

expenditures are relatively smooth across the two periods, both in terms of the mean—about
$21,000—and the median—about $12,500.
Given the uniqueness of the net transaction data that allow total consumption to be
measured, we assess the data’s reliability by comparing it to a more established survey measure
of household consumption. The 1997 Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) suggests that, on
average, non-married, non-working individuals older than age 70 spent about $16,300 on
consumption. The median of expenditures in the CEX is $13,456. These estimates are roughly in
line with the estimates from the AHEAD survey.
The results in Table 2 are insufficient to adequately assess the strength of the bequest
motive. Household saving in the AHEAD is negative as indicated by the life-cycle model
without a bequest motive, but household wealth does not appear to decline much over the five
year span of the AHEAD. In order to properly condition upon varying mortality risk, income
profiles, and liquidity constraints, more structure is needed. The next section provides this
structure.
Estimates of mortality hazard rates are based on the life-tables from the National Institute
of Health. Although these tables are arrayed by birth-cohort, age and gender, a substantial
literature has noted that mortality is also related to wealth and race (Smith, 1999; Deaton, 2003).
We incorporate these indicators of mortality risk by combining the life-tables with a model of
mortality that conditions on age, birth-cohort, permanent income and race. Permanent income is
used in place of wealth for two reasons. First, it more adequately reflects the part of lifetime
resources that have the potential to influence long-term health outcomes.13 Second, since lifetime
income is likely to be more exogenous than wealth, it raises fewer concerns when used as a
regressor in a model that estimates the bequest motive. Social security income is used as a proxy
for permanent income. The appendix provides a detailed description of the mortality model and
how it is used to modify the life-tables.

IV. Theoretical Model
Taking income { yt }Tt = s as given, single elderly households that are permanently out of the

labor force optimally allocate their bequeathable wealth ( ws ) over their remaining life cycle.

13

An individual’s current health condition is largely a function of a lifetime of health related choices, e.g.
what to eat and drink, whether to smoke cigarettes, and how much to exercise. Many of the decisions are
related to education, which is in turn related to permanent income. Moreover permanent income is related
to access to preventative health care earlier in life. For these reasons, a proxy for permanent income is a
better indicator of health status than wealth, which is confounded by saving behavior and idiosyncratic risk.
Indeed, households that are less risk averse may have more wealth but worse health, all else being equal.

8

Following the life cycle model of Yaari (1965), a household at age s is assumed to solve the
following intertemporal allocation problem:
V ( ws ) = Max

cs , cs +1 ,..., cT

T −s

∑ β ( a u ( c ) + m b ( w ))
t −s

t

t=s

t

t

t

subject to wt +1 = (1 + r ) wt + yt − ct
ws given,
where wt and ct are the household’s wealth and consumption at age t.14 The probability of being
alive at age t is given by at and the probability of dying at age t is given mt with the convention
that death occurs at the beginning of the period. Households die with certainty by age T. Future
utility is discounted by the factor of time preference β . Households place value on consuming
while alive and leaving some wealth upon death. The period utility function is isoelastic,
u (c) = (1 − γ ) −1 c1−γ .
Utility from leaving a bequest is assumed to be linear in wealth, b (wt ) = α wt , where α is
a constant. This specification is preferred for two reasons. First, much of the empirical evidence
cited above favors this simple egoistic motive over a more complex motive of altruism. Second,
the specification introduces an intuitive notion of bequests as a luxury good: as wealth increases,
the marginal utility from bequests increases relative to the marginal utility of consumption. As
noted by Cooper (1979), “Persons in the wealth category we are now discussing have more
current income that they can expend. Beyond a certain point, the real value of greater wealth is
power, control, and security.” At the same time, less wealthy individuals still enjoy the
possibility of leaving a bequest in the case of a premature death.
Constraints on the ability to borrow against future income are an important aspect of the
allocation problem facing the elderly. In particular, U.S. law forbids using social security income
as collateral. We explicitly model this constraint in the dynamic budget equation. At any age N,
s+ N

ws + N = (1 + r ) ws + ∑ (1 + r )t − s ( yt − ct ) ≥ 0
N

N = 1,..., T − s.

(1)

t =s

Given isoelastic utility, it is straightforward to show that the optimal consumption profile satisfies
the following Euler equation

( ct +1

ct )

−γ

≥ ( β ( at +1 at ) )

−1

(1 + r ) − ( mt +1

at +1 ) α ct−γ .

(2)

Without mortality risk, the standard relationship between the rate of return on wealth and the
degree of impatience defines the slope of the consumption profile until the penultimate period of
14

We do not model the taxation of estates. Over the time period examined in this paper, estate taxes
applied to estates larger than $600,000. Only a few individuals in our sample have wealth in this range.

9

life, at which point the bequest motive would be influential.15 In contrast, mortality risk not only
affects the rate of time preference but, when combined with a linear bequest motive, generates an
inverse relationship between the growth rate of consumption and the level of consumption. In
general, any examination of the bequest motive based on the growth rate of consumption must
also account for mortality risk.
There are three possible qualitative solutions to the life-cycle model depending on
whether or not the liquidity constraint binds at the end of life (Hurd, 1989). The Euler equation
determines the shape of the consumption profile, and its location is pinned down by the restriction
that the optimal wealth trajectory yields positive or zero wealth at age T. In the first case, the
wealth constraint is not binding at age T. If a household reaches age T with positive net worth,
the optimal consumption path is given by
ct−γ = α

∑ (m
T

j = t +1

j

a j −1 ) ( β (1 + r ) )

j −t

.

(3)

This path does not depend on income or wealth. It is the “satiation” path of consumption that
gives an upper bound for consumption at any given age. A household follows this path if it is
able to finance it; that is, if following this path keeps wealth positive at all ages. If wealth reaches
zero at age T, then consumption is low enough so that the marginal utility from consumption
exceeds the guaranteed marginal utility from bequests. In the second case, wealth reaches zero at
age T. The slope of consumption is determined by the Euler equation and the level is determined
so that wealth is exhausted by age T. In the third case, wealth reaches zero at some age N < T .
Until age N, the slope of consumption is determined by the Euler equation and the level is
determined by condition (1), which implies that the present discount sum of dissaving between
age t and N is equal to initial wealth. For age t > N , consumption follows the path of income if
they satisfy the following condition:

at yt−γ ≥ β (1 + r ) ( at +1 yt−+γ1 + mt +1α ) .

(4)

When income is constant (for example, if all income comes from a real annuity), this exhausts all
possible solutions. However, if income varies with age, the constraint may be binding a number
of times and the solution consists of multiple segments in which consumption follows the Euler
equation, but separated by periods when the wealth constraint is active and consumption follows
the path of income. Throughout the rest of the paper, we assume that households follow the
solutions outlined here. In the next section we outline the empirical model.

15

Without mortality risk, the probability of death is zero until the last period of life.

10

V.

Empirical Model

In this section, an empirical model is developed that is used to obtain an estimate of both
the presence and strength of a bequest motive. We assume that the theoretical model describes
the behavior of a household in one of two regimes: households with a bequest motive ( α > 0 ),
and households without a bequest motive ( α = 0 ). The regime in which a household resides is
correlated with various observable characteristics and depends on an idiosyncratic component
that is unobserved by the econometrician. These characteristics, including the unobservable
component, are fixed in time and so households do not switch regimes—the regime is a timeinvariant characteristic of individual preferences. Put differently, a researcher who analyzes a
sample drawn from the population is not able to ascertain with full confidence the regime an
individual is in but is able to arrive at a probability that the individual is in a particular regime.
To the extent that the sample is representative of the whole population, the probabilities
correspond to the actual distribution of the presence of a bequest motive in the population.
A. The likelihood function

Define the function g ( xi ;θ ,α ,τ ) as the solution to the life-cycle model where
xi = [ wsi ,{ yt , at , mt }Tt = si ] . The function g (.) takes the characteristics of a given household along
with a given set of parameters, solves for the optimal consumption profile between 1995 and the
year the household turns 119 years old, and returns the optimal value of consumption from 1995
to 1998 for τ = 1 and from 1998 to 2000 for τ = 2 . The function g (.) depends on initial wealth
in 1995, the lifetime path of income, survival and mortality probabilities , and the parameters of
the model, θ = [ β , γ , r ] , where β is the factor of time discounting, γ is the inverse of the
elasticity of intertemporal substitution and r is the rate of return which is set to 2.6 percent.16
The function g (.) also depends on the marginal utility of leaving a bequest, α . The econometric
model is as follows:
⎧ciτ = g ( xi ;θ ,α ,τ ) + ε1iτ
⎪
⎨ciτ = g ( xi ;θ ,0,τ ) + ε 2iτ
⎪ I = λ ′z + η
i
i
⎩ i

if I i > 0 (bequest motive, regime 1),
if I i ≤ 0 ( no bequest motive, regime 2),

(5)

( switching equation),

where, zi is a vector of bequest motive indicators, assumed to be pre-determined and constant
after 1995, and λ is a vector of the corresponding coefficients. The switching equation
determines the presence of the bequest motive while the magnitude of α determines its strength.

16

The real interest rate is set to the 1995 to 2000 average rate of return on a three month treasury bill less
the percent change in the CPI.

11

We assume that the unobserved idiosyncratic component in the switching equation, ηi , is
normally distributed and reflects the econometrician’s uncertainty regarding the presence of a
bequest motive. 17 The error term in regime k is assumed to be “transitory measured
consumption” and reflects the mis-measurement of true consumption. We model this error as

ε kiτ = uτ + ekiτ , where uτ is assumed constant across all households but allowed to vary over time,
and ekiτ is mean zero and normally distributed but serially correlated, corr (ekiτ +1 , ekiτ ) = ρ . We
assume that the uncertainty regarding the presence of a bequest motive is unrelated to transitory
measured consumption, E[ηi ε kiτ ] = 0 . So as to minimize the potential dependence of xi on ε kiτ
and ηi , the optimal consumption profile generated by g ( ⋅) is based on wealth as of 1995. That
is, the value of wealth in 1998 is not used as an initial condition for computing optimal
consumption between 1998 and 2000 because it may be correlated with ε ki1 .
Given the distributional assumptions, (5) can be estimated by maximum likelihood.
Transitory measured consumption in regime k is given as ekiτ = ciτ − g ( xi ;θ ,α k ,τ ) − uτ , where

α k = α in for k = 1 and α k = 0 for k = 2 . Since sample separation is unknown, each observation
contributes a weighted average of two probabilities to the likelihood function:
l ( xi , zi ;θ ,α , λ , σ ) = Φ ( λ ′zi )φ ( e1i1 , e1i 2 ;σ ) + (1 − Φ ( λ ′zi ) )φ ( e2i1 , e2i 2 ;σ ) ,

(6)

where φ (.) is the pdf of a two-dimensional normal distribution with the second moments given
by σ , a vector of the standard deviations in periods 1 and 2 (σ 1 ,σ 2 ) and the intertemporal
correlation ( ρ ), and Φ (.) is the cdf of a standard normal distribution. We assume the standard
deviation of transitory measured consumption is constant across regimes. Given the complex
survey design of the AHEAD, we maximize the likelihood function using household level
population weights.18
B. Identification
The structural specification used to estimate the empirical model has several advantages
over a reduced form specification. Foremost, the structural specification does not require
assumptions regarding which households have a bequest motive. Second, the structural
specification conditions on the whole path of annuities and mortality rates. A parsimonious
reduced form specification could not adequately capture the effects of liquidity constraints and
17

The assumption of normality in the switching equation is not very restrictive because most of the bequest
motive indicators are dummy variables.
18
The quasi-maximum likelihood estimator using household survey weights yields consistent and
asymptotically normal estimates (Sakata, 2002).

12

mortality risk, and so would be misspecified. Third, by using a fully specified structural model
we are able to estimate behavioral parameters instead of reduced form coefficients that are
difficult to interpret.19
The life-cycle model provides the structure to generate the conditional means of the
respective regimes, and to estimate the behavioral parameters of the model. More specifically,
consider the Euler equation (2) for a household of age s whose wealth constraint eventually binds
at some age K where K ≤ T . This excludes only those very high-wealth households consuming
at their satiation level, as indicated by (3). Consequently, for most households, iterating the Euler
equation forward from any age t ≥ s to age K yields:
K

at ct−γ = α ∑ β i −t (1 + r ) mi + aK cK−γ β K −t (1 + r )
i −t

K −t

(7)

i = t +1

where cK is consumption in the last period when wealth constraint is not binding. Thus,
consumption at any age can be expressed in terms of the single unknown cK . Substituting (7)
into the intertemporal budget constraint and combining the result with the terminal conditional
WK = 0 yields the solution for cK = h ( ws ,{ yt , at , mt }tK= s , s ) , which can then be used to derive ct
from equation (7). This solution is then matched to the data.
There are three sources of independent variation across households that determine the
optimal consumption path: Mortality rate profiles, income profiles, and the level of initial wealth.
Mortality rates vary exogenously with age, birth cohort, gender, permanent income (reflecting
inherent ability), and race. Income and initial wealth vary exogenously with inherent ability, expost returns to lifetime saving, and the presence of a bequest motive. Together, income and
initial wealth determine the level of consumption but, because of borrowing constraints, variation
in their relative magnitudes has implications for both the level and the slope of the consumption
profile. When combined with measured consumption, this variation is used to identify the
behavioral parameters β , γ , and α .
First, note that cK interacts with β but not α . Consequently, because the level of
resources available to the households affects the level of current spending through its effect on

cK , the effect of variation in wealth and income on the contemporaneous marginal utility of
consumption is scaled by β and not α . Second, even in the limiting case with no variation in
cK (very high-wealth households consuming at their satiation level), variation in mortality risk
19

An alternative interpretation of our approach is as a simulation exercise that relies on data-driven rather
than arbitrarily selected parameter values. We show that allowing for heterogeneity in the presence of a
bequest motive yields results that fit the empirical patterns in consumption remarkably well.

13

alone can separately identify β and α , as indicated by the first term (7). Specifically, an
increase in α increases the impact of mortality risk at any age, while an increase in β
strengthens the impact of mortality rates in the near or far future depending on whether β (1 + r )
is greater than or less than one. Therefore, variation in the shape of the entire mortality rate
profile—rather than the immediate mortality risk—aids in separately identifying these two
parameters. This variation would be hard to incorporate in a reduced form specification but is
naturally used by the structural approach. Finally, the inverse of the elasticity of intertemporal
substitution γ is identified from the functional form, as indicated in (7) , as well as from the
slope of the measured consumption profile—variation that is provided by having two periods of
measured consumption. Although β , γ , and α all affect the slope of the consumption profile,
as noted above, the identification of β and α does not rest on variation in the slope of the
consumption profile across households. As a result, variation in the intertemporal pattern of
measured consumption can be used to separately identify γ .20
The separate identification of the strength and the presence of the bequest motive is based
on the assumption that measured consumption is a mixture of two normal distributions after
conditioning on the structural form of the life-cycle model. As far as the population average of
consumption is concerned, holding other parameters constant, there is no clear distinction
between the two: Higher consumption could reflect either a weaker bequest motive or a smaller
probability of having a bequest motive. However, the two parameters can be identified by the
cross-sectional variation in measured consumption. Consumption increases with wealth but the
rate of this increase varies depending on the presence of the bequest motive. Intuitively, if
consumption relative to wealth and income differs depending on the presence of a bequest
motive, all else being equal, then the unconditional distribution of the error term would be
bimodal. Maximization of the likelihood function pins down the strength of the bequest motive
and its probability by fitting the mixture of the two conditional normal distributions to the regime
residuals. Although the particular distributional assumption is relevant, it is less important so

20

The model has one more feature that is helpful for identification. From (7), the marginal utility of
contemporaneous consumption depends on the number of years K − t . If the wealth constraint were never
binding, this would simply reflect age and therefore age variation would further help in separately
identifying β and α . When the wealth constraint binds, the age at which wealth is exhausted, K, becomes
an endogenous variable that responds among other things to wealth and the relative importance of future
income in the present value of resources. Therefore, the interaction of these two dimensions of the data
with the parameters β and α provide an extra source of identification.

14

long as the underlying consumption distribution is bimodal.21 The distance between the means of
the two distributions—centered on the respective conditional consumption functions for the two
regimes—provides an estimate of the magnitude of the bequest motive, while the relative density
at the two means provides an estimate of the presence of the bequest motive.
B. Measurement error
Although measurement error is incorporated into the empirical model as discussed above,
there remains a potential for extreme outliers to bias the results. In general, we consider two
sources of measurement error: regular inaccuracies in the reporting of the value of assets
conditional on owning the asset, and the misreporting of the ownership of an asset that leads to
the omission of the assets value completely. Although active saving is directly measured
independently from the reported asset values for categories of assets that are heavily influenced
by capital gains (such as corporate equities, real estate, and personal businesses), active saving is
simply measured as the change in the value of the asset between survey years for the remaining
categories (checking accounts, for example). Consequently, the misreporting of the ownership of
a particular asset in one survey year but not another may give rise to extreme outliers.
The data include two periods of consumption for each household. Large swings in
consumption resulting from extreme measurement error could bias the parameter estimates. So as
to reduce the impact of these influential outliers, the sample distribution of changes in
consumption over the two periods is trimmed. We assume the measurement error remaining in
the sample is adequately captured by the error structure in (5). However, trimming the data could
also eliminate valid observations. This implies a truncated error distribution, which is
endogenous to the model parameters. A modified likelihood function that accounts for the
potential of sample selection bias is used to estimate the model.22
The truncated sample restricts the change in annual consumption to be between -$70,000
and less than $70,000. Our final sample includes 1,126 observations. 23 The model is estimated
using the numerical algorithm described in the appendix. Variances of the parameter estimates

21

Indeed, within the data, for households with high levels of wealth, there are a significant number of
households with high levels of consumption and a significant number with low levels of consumption. This
is consistent with a bequest motive that is 1) present for only a segment of the population and 2) a luxury
good.
22
A formal presentation of the modified likelihood function is provided in the appendix.
23
Our estimates are robust to more restrictive trims (-$50,000 to $50,000) as well as to less restrictive trims
(-$120,000 to $120,000). These results are available upon request. In addition to the trim, the sample also
excludes 40 households with negative net wealth. Setting the wealth of these households to zero and
including them in the sample has no effect on the results.

15

are computed as the outer product of the contributions to the first derivatives of the log likelihood
function with respect to the parameters. 24

VI. Results
Various specifications of the switching equation are used in estimating the empirical
model. The results are reported in Tables 3, 4 and 5. The estimates correspond to consumption at
a two year frequency. For expositional purposes, the estimated bequest motive parameter is
reported as α −1/ γ . This transformation provides an intuitive dollar-value interpretation: For
households that do not exhaust their wealth by the end of life, (3) implies that consumption at age
T is α −1/ γ . That is, α −1/ γ is the level of consumption that makes one indifferent between
consuming and leaving a bequest in the last period of life. When consumption is less than this
amount at age T, the marginal utility of consumption exceeds the marginal utility of leaving a
bequest, and consumption is more attractive. In general, a large value of α −1/ γ implies a weak
bequest motive.25
A. Model estimates
The first column of Table 3 reports the results from assuming with certainty that only
households with children have a bequest motive. This is the assumption made in Hurd (1989),
and it implies that 82 percent of the sample has a bequest motive. We estimate the model by
imposing that households with children have a bequest motive and that the switching equation
error is zero with a zero variance.26 Although the estimate of the time discount factor is
implausible, the implication of the magnitude of the bequest motive is the same as in Hurd
(1989).27 The level of consumption over two years that makes households indifferent between
consuming and leaving a bequest in the last period of life is $246,318. This level of consumption
is well above what most households could afford suggesting that bequests are largely due to
uncertain mortality.
Comparing the predicted consumption profiles with and without a bequest motive reveals
the implied strength of the desire to leave a bequest. As indicated in the penultimate row of Table
3, predicted consumption over the sample period for households with children (bequest motive) is
24

If the model is properly specified, this is equivalent to the information matrix in terms of expected
values.
25
Standard errors are computed directly for this transformed parameter.
26
In terms of (6), Φ (λ ′zi ) equals one for households with children, and it equals zero for households
without children.
27
These results were obtained by restricting the discount factor to be no larger than 2 and the standard
errors of the remaining parameters were obtained as if the discount factor was set to be equal to 2. There
was no interior solution for the discount rate even if we relaxed this restriction to allow for discount factors
as large as 8, although the impact of this relaxation on the likelihood was relatively minor.

16

only 0.2 percent less than the predicted consumption for households without children (no bequest
motive). The difference is trivial implying that, conditional on the identifying assumption that
only those households with children have a bequest motive, the bequest motive is essentially
inactive. This is the same conclusion found in Hurd (1989).
The second column in Table 3 reports the estimated parameters of the model under
imperfect sample separation information. Only a constant is considered in the switching
equation. The behavioral parameters are within the range of values typically reported in the
literature and are fairly tightly estimated. Abstracting from mortality risk, future utility is
discounted at a rate of 0.91 over two years, and the estimated elasticity of intertemporal
substitution is 0.29. Transitory measured consumption has a standard deviation of roughly
$23,000 and is somewhat persistent with an intertemporal correlation of 0.25. Overall, allowing
the presence of a bequest motive to vary across all households greatly improves the fit of the
model. The specification in the first column of Table 3 is a special case of the switching
regression and can be formally compared to the specification in the second column using the
likelihood ratio test. The difference in the log-likelihood between the two specifications is
overwhelmingly significant.
Although the presence of children is clearly not a definitive predictor of the presence of a
bequest motive, it is still a useful indicator. The results in the third column of Table 3 control for
the presence of children in the switching equation. Neither the behavioral parameters nor the
properties of transitory consumption are significantly altered from the specification in which no
bequest motive indicators are included in the switching equation. The level of consumption over
two years that makes households indifferent between consuming and leaving a bequest in the last
period of life is significant and equal to $47,687, considerably lower than the level implied by the
assumption that only households with children have a bequest motive.
The estimated effect of having at least one child on the presence of a bequest motive is
significant at a 10 percent level, and it implies that households with children have a 79 percent
probability of having a bequest motive, while those without children have a 63 percent
probability. These do not correspond to the probabilities of leaving a bequest because households
can die with positive net worth due to uncertain mortality. Indeed, the parameters of the model
indicate that only 14 percent of the sample are consuming at the satiation level of consumption as
given by (3). Households below the satiation level of consumption may or may not leave a
bequest depending on their length of life. As indicated in Figure 1, roughly 10 percent of the
sample is predicted to have zero net wealth by age 80. Naturally, the fraction of households
affected by the wealth constraint grows with age but it also varies with the presence of the

17

bequest motive. Individuals who have a bequest motive are significantly less likely to face a
binding constraint at any age, although the incidence of a binding wealth constraint is also
growing with age reflecting that the bequest motive is infra-marginal for most of the population:
while it provides utility on the margin, the consumers are planning to run out of wealth if they
live long enough. Conditional on no bequest motive, the fraction of the sample with a binding
wealth constraint rises to almost 30 percent by age 90. The presence of a bequest motive reduces
the fraction of households with a binding wealth constraint by almost 10 percentage points.
Whether the wealth constraint binds depends largely on the level of initial wealth.
Consequently, the effect of the bequest motive on spending is largest for wealthy households.
The effect of the bequest motive on spending can be seen in Figure 2, which shows the sample
mean of the average propensity to consume out of cash-on-hand by age, defined as the sum of
wealth and current income. The age profiles are conditional on either having (the dashed line) or
not having (the solid line) a bequest motive, and are stratified by initial net wealth: less than
$25,000, $25,000 to $100,000, and greater than $100,000.28
The average propensity to consume is lowest for households in the high-wealth group
regardless of whether a bequest motive is present. For a 75 year-old household with no bequest
motive, the average propensity to consume out of cash-on-hand is 0.32 in the high-wealth group,
and 0.86 in the low-wealth group. The presence of a bequest motive increases the average
propensity to consume considerably for households in the high-wealth group and has essentially
no effect on households in the low-wealth group. This differential impact based on wealth clearly
characterizes bequests as a luxury good. Despite the presence of a bequest motive, the marginal
utility of consumption for households in the low-wealth group significantly exceeds that of
leaving a bequest. This is in contrast to households in the high-wealth group where the presence
of a bequest motive damps considerably spending relative to cash-on-hand. On average, if all
households had a bequest motive, predicted consumption would be 74 percent of what it would be
if no households had a bequest motive, as indicated in the penultimate row of third column of
Table 3.
Restricting the sample to households with children has little effect on the results, as
reported in the fourth column of Table 3. The time discount factor is a touch stronger but this is
offset by a slightly larger elasticity of intertemporal substitution. The constant in the switching
equation indicates that households with children have a 79 percent probability of having a bequest
motive, identical to the probability when using the entire sample and including an indicator for
having children.
28

These three wealth groups split the sample roughly into thirds.

18

A more detailed examination of the effect of children on the presence of a bequest motive
is provided in Table 4, which reports the results from several alternative specifications of the
switching equation. The estimates of the behavioral parameters are very similar to those reported
in Table 3 and so are not shown. As indicated in the first column, households with two children
have the largest and most significant probability of having a bequest motive. However, the effect
of children on the presence of a bequest motive is insignificant when grandchildren are included
in the specification. The point estimates in the second column of Table 4 suggest that, among
households without grandchildren, the probability of having a bequest motive is roughly
50 percent for those with either one child or more than two children, and is 70 percent for those
with two children. The presence of grandchildren increases the probability of having a bequest
motive by roughly 25 percentage points. At 91 percent, households with two children and at least
one grandchild have the highest probability of having a bequest motive. However, this result is
insignificant at conventional levels of significance.
Households with a bequest motive are assumed to receive utility from having wealth at
death primarily for egoistic reasons. However, the financial characteristics of a household’s
children could influence the presence of a bequest motive insofar as households desire to leave
bequests for altruistic reasons. To examine the possibility of an altruistic bequest motive, the
model is estimated over households with children, and various financial and demographic
characteristics of the children are included in the switching equation.29 The switching equation
also controls for the number of children and the presence of grandchildren. Although this may
not conclusively reveal the type of bequest motive because the model is still restricted to a
constant bequest motive parameter, it does indicate how the presence of a bequest motive varies
across households with children.30 These results are reported in the final column of Table 4.
In general, the point estimates are consistent with an altruistic motive for desiring to
leave a bequest. However, none of the characteristics are significant suggesting that the
assumption of an egoistic bequest motive is plausible. Among households with the same number
of children, those with children who are financially the same or better off have a lower
probability of having a bequest motive relative to those with children that are worse off. Having
children that are college educated also lowers the probability of having a bequest motive. Insofar
as a college education implies more human capital, this could be interpreted as intergenerational
29

The interpretation of these results must be tempered by the fact that the indicators are not necessarily
time-independent. However, because we only use predetermined values as of 1995, the potential for
endogeneity is somewhat mitigated.
30
We considered a Tobit specification that allowed the bequest motive parameter α to vary by certain
household characteristics. Because the results were largely insignificant and did not change the main
results, we do not report them here. They are available upon request.

19

altruism. However, it could also indicate a substitution of intervivos transfers in the form of
college expenses for bequests. Regardless, the effects are insignificant. In contrast, households
with children that own their own home are more likely to have a bequest motive.
An alternative to the egoistic and altruistic bequest motive is the strategic motive, which
suggests that bequests are used as compensation for services rendered by the beneficiaries
(Bernheim, Shleifer, and Summers, 1985). All else being equal, it is likely that children who live
near their parents spend more time attending to the needs of their parents, and that this, in turn,
could lead to larger intended bequests. To examine this hypothesis, the number of children that
live within ten miles of the parent is included in the switching equation. Of course, this variable
is likely endogenous: children of parents willing to pursue such a bequest motive strategy should
locate close to their parents. Nevertheless, we would still expect a positive association between
location and the presence of a bequest motive if this type of motive is present, even though
interpreting the magnitude of the estimate is difficult. The sign of the point estimate, reported in
the final column of Table 4, is consistent with the strategic bequest motive hypothesis but small.
Relative to the typical household, those with an additional child that lives within ten miles have
only roughly a five percentage point higher probability of having a bequest motive. Moreover,
the effect is insignificant.
Returning to Table 3, the last two columns examine the influence of housing equity and
life insurance, respectively, on the estimated presence and magnitude of the bequest motive.
Hurd (1989) excludes housing equity from his baseline estimates, arguing that high transaction
costs make it difficult to change the level of housing consumption services, and importantly, that
non-housing consumption is completely financed only out of non-housing wealth. While it is
likely that housing equity was fairly illiquid for the households in Hurd’s sample, which covered
1969 to 1977, financial deregulation and new technologies over the past two decades have
reduced transaction costs to allow the creation of new instruments that permit previously illiquid
obligations to be securitized and traded. Consequently, the difficulties in extracting housing
equity have been reduced considerably. Moreover, it is not clear that non-housing consumption is
unaffected by housing equity, regardless of how it is financed. Many households could think of
their home as a future bequest and consume a larger share of their non-housing wealth than they
would otherwise. Excluding housing equity from total wealth could thus bias the result toward
finding no bequest motive. Indeed, Hurd (1989) finds some support for a sizable bequest motive
when housing equity is added to total wealth.
Despite this argument, we estimate the model excluding housing equity from total wealth
for completeness. The results are reported in the fifth column of Table 3. As in Hurd (1989), the

20

exclusion of housing equity reduces the time discount factor suggesting that households are
somewhat less willing to consume their housing equity regardless of whether or not they have a
bequest motive. Although less patient, households appear more sensitive to interest rate changes,
as the elasticity of intertemporal substitution is larger than in the second column of Table 3.
More importantly, the bequest motive parameter is just as significant and is somewhat larger than
when housing equity is included in total wealth. The effect of the bequest motive on predicted
consumption is unchanged: The bequest motive reduces consumption by roughly 25 percent.31
As noted above, measured wealth does not include the value of life insurance. If
households consume more out of measured wealth knowing that their heirs will receive a life
insurance payout, then the exclusion of the value of a life insurance settlement could in principle
bias the results against finding a significant bequest motive. About 16 percent of the sample
owns a whole-life insurance policy, and 27 percent own a term-life insurance policy. Given the
relative liquidity of whole-life policies, we estimated the model including these policies in
measured wealth.32 The effects are negligible and are not reported. However, as shown in the
final column of Table 3, there is some evidence that owning a life insurance policy is associated
with the presence of a bequest motive. Owning either a whole- or term-life insurance policy is
associated with a 12-percentage point higher probability of having a bequest motive, and is
significant at a 10 percent level.
Finally, we considered various alterative model and data specifications to examine the
robustness of the results. First, we added the log of initial wealth in the regime equations as a
proxy for the error term in the initial wealth. While this variable was itself significant, it had little
effect on the estimates of the parameters of interest. Second, we added to initial wealth those
resources that were transferred out of the household in the form of financial assistance or gifts.
Given that these transfers were relatively minor, adding them back to wealth had little effect on
the results. Third, we considered a more robust model of the error-term that allows the standard
deviation of transitory measured consumption to vary with the log of net wealth. Although this
form of heteroskedasticty was significant, it had little effect on the estimated magnitude of the
31

The fact that the exclusion of housing equity does not affect the results in this paper but does in Hurd
(1989) may reflect the higher quality of wealth data in the AHEAD compared to the Retirement History
Survey. The ability to collect wealth data has improved appreciably in the two decades following the
collection of the RHS data (Juster and Smith, 1997). In particular, the quality of financial wealth data is far
superior. As indicated in Table 1, housing equity is only slightly more than one-third of total wealth.
Although mean housing equity was not reported in Hurd (1989), it was likely a larger source of potential
bequeathable wealth than in this paper. If this is true, it is not surprising that the inclusion of housing
equity in Hurd (1989) had a large and significant effect on the estimated magnitude of the bequest motive.
32
The value of the policy was added to initial wealth and treated as completely fungible with all other
forms of wealth. Wealth in later periods is not used in the empirical model and so no adjustment is
required.

21

bequest motive. Fourth, we considered alternative trims of the data. Allowing for a more
restrictive trim—change in spending between -50,000 to 50,000, dropping 100 additional
observations—and less restrictive trims—change in spending between -120,000 to 120,000,
adding 200 observations—both yielded fairly similar results to those reported in Table 3.33
B. Bequest versus precautionary motive
The empirical results above imply that roughly 75 percent of the elderly population
consume in a manner consistent with a life-cycle model modified to include the desire to leave a
bequest, and that this desire reduces spending by about 25 percent on average. However, because
no assumptions were made regarding which households have a bequest motive, the observed
patterns of spending relative to wealth may indicate a desire to save for uncertain medical
expenses rather than for a bequest. Distinguishing between the bequest and precautionary motive
is made difficult by the fact that precautionary savings can also serve the bequest motive (Dynan,
Skinner and Zeldes, 2002 and 2004). Estimating a model that accounts for both the bequest
motive and the risks associated with future medical expenses is beyond the scope of this paper.
Nevertheless, we consider several potential alternative hypotheses suggesting a weaker bequest
motive in favor of a stronger precautionary motive and provide evidence against each.
The precautionary motive is a response to uninsurable risk, and thus the saving response
to uncertain medical costs is largely mitigated by access to both social and private insurance.
Indeed, the effect of asset-based means tested social insurance programs, such as Medicaid,
reduces the saving of households (Hubbard, Skinner, Zeldes, 1995). All else being equal, this
would bias the results toward finding no bequest motive. However, the fact that Medicaid affects
the saving behavior of some households more so than others could be influencing the empirical
results. A potential alternative hypothesis to the bequest motive is that Medicaid creates two
groups of people: Those who do not save in order to maintain eligibility for Medicaid and, in so
doing, consume in a manner inconsistent with a bequest motive, and those who are wealthy
enough to make self-insuring utility maximizing and, in so doing, consume in a manner consistent
with a bequest motive.
We argue the effect of Medicaid on the estimated presence and magnitude of the bequest
motive is small for two reasons. First, although some self-insuring occurs, most wealthy
households purchase insurance and so have less of a need to save. In the AHEAD sample,
roughly 85 percent of households in the top third of the wealth distribution have health insurance
beyond Medicare and Medicaid, and 14 percent have long-term health care. Second, and more

33

Any of these additional results are available upon request.

22

importantly, the empirical model conditions on initial wealth and so is implicitly comparing the
consumption profiles among households with similar wealth. This is clear from Figure 2, which
indicates that the identification of the bequest motive is largely based on households with wealth
greater than $25,000. The estimates presented in the first column of Table 5 imply that the
bequest motive damps spending by roughly the same magnitude (25 percent) when estimating the
model on households with wealth greater than $50,000 (roughly the median) as when estimating
over the full sample. The estimates of behavioral parameters are also quite close to those based on
the full sample.
Still, not all high-wealth households purchase private health insurance beyond Medicare,
and even fewer purchase long-term care insurance. Thus, a second alternative hypothesis could
be that there are some high-wealth households that self-insure and, in so doing, consume in a
manner consistent with a bequest motive, and there are other high-wealth households that prefer
to purchase private health insurance and, in so doing, consume in a manner inconsistent with a
bequest motive. To test this hypothesis, we include in the switching equation whether or not a
household has access to private health insurance and long-term care insurance.34 As indicated in
the second column of Table 5, access to long-term care insurance is insignificant and so is not
associated with either having or not having a bequest motive. Although access to private health
insurance is significant, it is associated with having a bequest motive, contrary to the alternative
hypothesis.35
Despite access to social or private health insurance, most households face some risk of
out-of-pocket medical costs. Consequently, to the extent that this risk differs across households,
a third alternative hypothesis is that all households self-insure by saving, but those with a higher
risk save more and, in so doing, consume in a manner more consistent with a bequest motive,
while those with a lower risk save less and, in so doing, consume in a manner less consistent with
a bequest motive. To test this alternative, we include in the switching equation a unique survey
instrument in the AHEAD that asks households their expected probability that future medical
costs will exhaust their wealth within the next five years. If the precautionary motive is heavily
influencing the estimated bequest motive, households with a high probability of large medical
costs should save more and consume in a manner that we mistakenly attribute to a bequest

34

As with including the characteristics of children in the switching equation, only predetermined values as
of 1995 are used.
35
To determine if private health insurance were simply acting as a proxy for initial wealth, we considered a
specification that also includes the log of initial wealth in the switching equation. The result was
unchanged.

23

motive. As indicated in the last column of Table 5, a higher probability of large medical costs is
indeed associated with having a bequest motive but the effect is not significant.
We conclude that, although the precautionary motive is likely present, the saving patterns
observed in the data are largely consistent with a significant bequest motive.36 In general,
precautionary saving models with uncertain medical expenses alone cannot explain these patterns
precisely because most of aggregate personal saving is done by high wealth households (Dynan,
Skinner and Zeldes, 2004). Palumbo (1999) concludes that the precautionary saving motive for
uncertain medical expenses damps spending by roughly 7 percent. Even if one were to argue that
the effect of the bequest motive estimated in this paper was mis-identified one-for-one with the
precautionary motive, this would still imply the bequest motive damps spending by about
18 percent, more than twice as large as the effect of the precautionary motive.
C. Model predictions
As an alternative check on the validity of the results, we examine self-reported
probabilities of leaving a bequest. Survey respondents were asked what they believed was the
probability that they would leave a bequest larger than $0, $10,000, and $100,000. The selfreported probabilities are compared to the predicted probability of leaving a bequest. For each
household, the predicted probability of leaving a bequest conditional on having or not having a
bequest motive is created by first creating an indicator variable that reflects whether wealth is
larger than the intended bequest ($0, $10,000, or $100,000) at each age. The probability of
leaving a bequest of a given size conditional on the bequest motive regime is the weighted
average of the indicator variable over the lifetime of the household where the weights reflect the
probability of dying at a given age. The unconditional probability of leaving a bequest is then
obtained by weighing the two conditional probabilities by the probability of having the bequest
motive.
In addition to the predicted probability of leaving a bequest, we create an indictor
variable that provides a binary estimate of whether a household has a bequest motive. The
variable is based on the individual households likelihood function and equals one if

φ ( eˆ1i1 , eˆ1i 2 ;σˆ ) > φ ( eˆ2i1 , eˆ2i 2 ;σˆ ) , and equals zero otherwise. About half of the households in the
sample have a likelihood that is greater when imposing the estimated bequest motive with
certainty. For a given level of wealth and income and a known path of survival probabilities,

36

Although we do not show the results, including the indictors for long-term health care, private health
insurance and the probability of large medical costs directly in the regime equations (additively) did not
affect the estimates of the parameters of interest.

24

these are households that consume in a way that is more consistent with a bequest motive than
without one.
We verify the strength of the association between the predictions from our model and the
self-reported probability of leaving a bequest by estimating a probit probability model with the
self-reported probability as the dependent variable, expressed as a number between zero and one.
In addition, we also control for the self-reported probability that a household’s future medical
expenses will exhaust all its wealth. The results are reported in Table 6. The probability of
leaving a bequest is clearly correlated with the level of wealth and income. Moreover, consistent
with the precautionary saving motive, households that expect large future medical expenses
report having a small probability of leaving a bequest. Although the effect is significant, the
magnitude is somewhat small. Evaluating the probability at the mean, a ten percentage point
increase in the self-reported probability of large future medical expenses reduces the self-reported
probability of leaving a bequest by about two percentage points, regardless of the self-reported
size of the bequest.
As indicated in Table 6, the self-reported and predicted probabilities of leaving a bequest
are significantly related. Among households with the same level of wealth and income, as well as
the same probability of large future medical expenses, a ten percentage point increase in the
predicted probability of leaving a bequest suggests a five percentage point increase in the selfreported probability of leaving a bequest.37 This relationship is similar for bequests larger than
$0, $10,000 and $100,000. The predicted probability is a function of individual wealth, annuities,
age and mortality but not consumption. Therefore, these specifications only highlight that the
nonlinear structural predictions perform much better in explaining self-reported probabilities than
the reduced form linear specification in wealth and income.
The generated bequest motive indicator has a similar significant relationship. This is
more compelling than the previous results because the bequest motive indicator reflects the fit of
the two regimes for a particular individual, and is a function of the individual specific
consumption-to-wealth relationship. Households whose individual likelihood is greater when
imposing the estimated bequest motive with certainty have a 13, 11 and 5 percentage point larger
self-reported probability of leaving a bequest larger than zero, $10,000, and $100,000,
respectively. The significant relationship between the model predictions and the self-reported
probabilities, all else being equal, is suggestive of a bequest motive and serves as an external
validation of the results.

37

The marginal effect is evaluated at the mean.

25

The distributions of self-reported and predicted probabilities of leaving a bequest larger
than $10,000 are reported in Table 7. Overall, the distribution of the predicted probabilities is
well aligned with the distribution of the self-reported probabilities. A fifth of the sample reported
a probability greater than 80 percent. This is similar to the percent predicted by the model.
However, whereas about one-half of the sample reported a probability less than 20 percent, the
model predicts that only about a quarter of the sample has a probability in that range.38 The last
two columns of Table 7 report the distribution of the self-reported probability of leaving a
bequest greater than $10,000, separating the sample by the generated bequest motive indicator
described above. Among households that reported a probability of leaving a bequest as less than
20 percent, 44 percent consume in a way that is more consistent with a bequest motive while
65 percent consume in a way that is more consistent with not having a bequest motive. Among
households that reported a probability of leaving a bequest as more than 80 percent, 29 percent
consume in a way that is more consistent with a bequest motive while only 14 percent consume in
a way that is more consistent with not having a bequest motive.39
We next compare the predicted consumption profile from the estimated model to
independent data on expenditures in the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX). Restricting the
CEX to single, nonworking households that are age 70 and higher, total expenditures are
regressed on a full set of single-year age indicators. The sample is restricted to the 1993 to 1997
waves of survey to match the same cohorts in the AHEAD. The fitted expenditure profile is
shown in Figure 3 along with two-standard-error bands. This is compared to predicted
consumption from the estimated life-cycle model that includes a constant and an indicator of
children in the switching equation (specification iii in Table 3). Consumption is predicted for
each household assuming a bequest motive, {cˆ1it }Tt = si , and also generated assuming no bequest
motive, {cˆ2it }Tt = si . A weighted average yields each household’s unconditional consumption profile
where the weights are given by the probability of having a bequest motive,

{cˆitu ≡ pˆ i cˆ1it + (1 − pˆ i )cˆ2it }Tt = si
with pˆ i = Φ (λˆ ′zi ) . Averaging cˆitu by age is not comparable to the fitted CEX profile since the
CEX is subject to mortality bias. Correcting for survival rates that are conditioned by age,
gender, cohort, race and permanent income, the predicted unconditional consumption profile is
38

Note that 26 percent of the sample has positive initial net wealth and yet claims to have a zero probability
of dying with positive net worth. This cannot be matched by our model because there is a non-zero
probability of immediate death which implies that the probability of leaving a bequest is greater than zero.
39
The differences in expected medical expenses between households with and without a predicted bequest
motive are minor and have little effect on the distribution of self-reported bequest probabilities.

26

given by {ctu = N −1 ∑ i =1 aˆit cˆitu }90
t = 72 and shown in Figure 3. The predicted level of consumption is
N

roughly in line with expenditures in the CEX, and the two profiles share the same downward
trajectory. However, the predicted consumption profile masks a sizable degree of heterogeneity
that depends on the presence of a bequest motive. As indicated in Figure 4, households without a
bequest motive consume a fair bit more on average than the unconditional average.40
The difference in consumption between households with and without a bequest motive
provides the necessary information needed to determine the fraction of wealth attributable to the
bequest motive. Using the predicted conditional consumption profiles, along with the budget
constraint, a wealth profile is generated for each household assuming a bequest motive is present,
{wˆ1it }Tt = si , and another wealth profile is generated assuming no motive is present, {wˆ 2it }Tt = si . The
share of bequeathed wealth attributed to the desire to leave a bequest is then computed as

∑ ∑
119

N

t = 70

i =1

mˆ it pˆ i ( wˆ1it − wˆ 2it )

∑ ∑
119

N

t = 70

i =1

mit ( pˆ i wˆ 1it − (1 − pˆ i ) wˆ 2it ) .

Although uncertain mortality still plays a large role, much of bequeathed wealth is due to the
desire to leave a bequest. Of the 78 percent of net wealth that is estimated to be bequeathed by
single households aged 70 and older, 53 percent is accounted for by a bequest motive.

VII. Conclusions
Assumptions regarding the desire to leave bequests are a crucial element to policy
prescriptions related to the distribution of wealth, taxation, government debt and charitable
contributions, to name a few. Our perception of wealth inequality relies heavily on whether a
significant portion of household wealth is attributable to bequests as opposed to life-cycle saving.
If bequests are merely a result of an uncertain length of life, estate taxes may have no direct
distortionary effect on saving. The neutrality of government spending rests on a belief that all
later generations are equally cared for by the current generation in terms of discounted utility.
Moreover, social security reform requires knowledge of the saving response to changes in
payments. Under an operative bequest motive, an increase in payments may simply be saved. In
general, the nature of why households save relates to the effects of many policy instruments.
Without taking seriously the full range of saving behavior, government actions can have diluted
or even the opposite desired effects.
In this paper, we estimate that about 75 percent of a representative sample of elderly
single households has a desire to leave an estate with positive net worth. The magnitude of this
desire is both statistically and economically significant. All else being equal, households with an
40

The conditional profiles in Figure 2 are weighted by the survival probabilities in the cross-section.

27

operative bequest motive spend about 25 percent less on personal outlays. This implies that of the
almost four-fifths of household wealth we estimate will be bequeathed, about one-half will be due
to a bequest motive.
As in Hurd (1989), we show that elderly households with children do not consume in a
way that is any more consistent with a bequest motive than do households without children.
However, we argue that this is not evidence against the importance of the bequest motive. The
assumption of children as a definitive indicator of a bequest motive is rejected. Although the
probability that a household with children has a bequest motive is 79 percent, the probability for
households without children is 63 percent. In general, the life-cycle model with an egoistic
bequest motive fits the data much better when the presence of a bequest motive is allowed to vary
across all households, as opposed to restricting it to households with children. Assuming a
deterministic bequest motive results in estimates of the time discount factor and elasticity of
intertemporal substitution that are highly implausible, while relaxing this assumption yields
estimates that are consistent with estimates typically reported in the literature.
We find little evidence that is consistent with both the altruistic and strategic bequest
motives. Among households with children, those with children who are better off financially and
are college educated have a lower probability of having a bequest motive. Consistent with the
strategic bequest motive, we show that households with children that live within ten miles are a
touch more likely to have a bequest motive. However, none of the evidence is statistically
significant and we conclude that the egoistic bequest motive is the most plausible.
In terms of out-of-sample fit, the predicted probability of leaving a bequest aligns well
with self-reported probabilities. Moreover, we show that the estimated bequest motive is not
simply reflecting the desire to accumulate wealth for future medical expenses. Slightly more than
one-fourth of households that consume in a way that is consistent with a bequest motive reported
a probability of leaving a bequest that was greater than 80 percent. In contrast, only about oneseventh of households that consume in way consistent with no bequest motive reported a
probability of leaving a bequest greater than 80 percent.
These results are relevant for the assessment of the efficiency cost and desirability of
estate taxation. We find that most of the population has a bequest motive but for a majority, at
least some of bequests are of an accidental nature. Only at high wealth levels does the difference
between having and not having a bequest become clearly visible. A tax on small bequests is
therefore unlikely to be largely distortionary.41 A tax on large bequests may be distortionary
41

This is not to say that such a tax is necessarily desirable as a first-best policy would be to address the lack
of insurance that gives rise to accidental bequests (Kopczuk, 2003).

28

because some of the large bequests appear motivated by bequest considerations. At the same
time, the existence of some accidental bequests among the wealthy suggests a peculiar policy
prescription that resembles the current U.S. estate tax: Imposing taxation while simultaneously
allowing for wide-spread and relatively cheap avoidance. Under this kind of policy, the tax could
apply to bequests left by people without a bequest motive while cheap avoidance could allow
others to escape taxation without a real reduction in wealth and thereby reduce the efficiency cost.
Of course, our results say nothing about the potential influence of bequests on the saving behavior
of the recipient.
Future research is needed to better understand the effect of heterogeneous preferences
toward leaving bequests. Most previous studies rest on the assumption that all households have a
bequest motive and proceed to measure empirically the economic significance of the motive and
its impact on various dimensions of household behavior. Some studies assume that only
households with children have a bequest motive and use the relative behavior between
households with and without children as an indicator of the strength of the bequest motive. In
this paper, we have shown that both of these prevailing assumptions are suspect. Better
indicators of the desire to die with positive net worth would greatly improve our understanding of
household wealth determination.

29

VIII. Appendix
A. Measuring Wealth, Income and Consumption in the AHEAD
Total household net wealth in the AHEAD is comprised of twelve components: main
home equity ( w1 ), real estate equity other than main home equity ( w2 ), a farm or private
business, net of any loans ( w3 ), automobiles, motor homes, or boats, net of any loans ( w4 ),
investment retirement accounts or Keoghs ( w5 ), checking and saving accounts, money market
funds ( w6 ), certificates of deposit, government saving bonds, treasury bills ( w7 ), equities in
publicly traded corporations or mutual funds ( w8 ), municipal, government or foreign bonds, or
bond funds ( w9 ), trust funds ( w10 ), other savings or assets, such as jewelry, money owed by
others, a collection for investment purposes, beneficiary rights in a trust or estate ( w11 ), total noncollateralized debt, such as credit card balances, medical debts, and loans from relatives ( − w12 ).
With t = 1995, 1998, and 2000, total net wealth for each household is given as wt = ∑ k =1 wkt , with
12

tangible wealth defined as wtTangible = ∑ k =1 wkt and financial wealth given as wtFinancial = ∑ k =5 wkt .
4

12

In 1998 and 2000, respondents were asked about their “active” saving since the previous
survey, defined as the net acquisition of assets. These questions were specific to the components
of wealth where capital gains are most relevant. Measured active saving in the main home ( s1 ),
other real estate ( s2 ), and farm or private business ( s3 ), depend on ownership status. If there was
no change in ownership status between the survey years, active saving is defined as the change in
the mortgage or loan principal plus investments and improvements. If there was a change in
ownership status, the active saving is simply the change in net equity. Active saving in
transportation assets ( s4 ) is defined as the change in the self-reported value of the assets between
survey years after depreciating the asset at a rate of 20 percent per year. Active saving in
investment retirement accounts or Keoghs ( s5 ) and in equities for publicly traded corporations or
mutual funds ( s8 ) are defined as the self-reported acquisition of assets less withdrawals in these
accounts. Active saving in all other assets are defined as the change in the self-reported value of
the assets between waves, based on the assumption that capital gains in these assets are relatively
12
small. Total saving is given as st = ∑ k =1 skt . The dynamic budget constraint implies the change
in wealth is the sum of capital gains and active saving, Δwt = Gt + st . Thus, given both the
change in wealth and active saving, capital gains in each asset is derived as Gkt = Δwkt − skt .
Respondents provided detailed information regarding all sources of income over the
previous calendar year, or previous month. These include self-reported social security income,
supplemental security income, veteran’s benefits, defined benefit retirement pensions, annuities,
welfare, food stamps, and financial assistance from friends and family. Also, dividend and
interest income were provided. Combining these sources of income yields a measure of all
resources that flowed into the household in previous calendar year. This is scaled by the number
of years between survey waves for each household to generate a measure of total inter-surveyyear income that is at the same frequency as measured active saving. The difference between
total income and active saving yields measured consumption between survey years. In Table 2,
income, consumption, and capital gains values are annualized by the individual specific number
of years between survey dates. For the purposes of estimating the empirical model, consumption
and income are converted to a two-year frequency.

30

B. Mortality Rates
Vital statistics from the National Institute of Health (NIH) are used which provide the
number of individuals alive out of 100,000 for each age from 0 to 119 separately by birth-year
cohort and gender. Note that for future values, these are NIH projections. These values are
assumed to reflect the true age-mortality profile but neglect the effect of income, marital status,
and race differences. It is further assumed that the true hazard function of mortality is given as
Prob ( Die at age t ) = exp (ω ′ X it + f ( t ) )
where f ( t ) reflects the true age-mortality profile from the Vital Statistics. The first term is the
effect of a quadratic in log permanent income relative to the median and race on the hazard
function. Social security earnings are used for permanent income and truncated at the 10th and
90th percentile. These effects are estimated using those individuals who died in the AHEAD
between waves I and III, approximating the age effect by age dummy variables. Since the exact
time of death is unknown (it is only known if an individual is dead by wave II or dead by wave
III), estimating the hazard model cannot be done using standard procedures. Instead the
likelihood function needs to be modified. To see this, consider the following,

Prob ( Alive in wave k and dead by wave k + 1) = ∫

2( k −1)

k −1

2( k −1)

μ ( u ) du = D ( u ) k −1

2( k −1)

= − S ( u ) k −1

= S ( k − 1) − S ( 2( k − 1) )

μ ( u ) is the instantaneous probability of dying u years after wave I (the hazard function), D ( u )
is the probability of dying u years after wave I, and S ( u ) is the probability of living u years after
wave I. Assuming an exponential hazard function, μ ( u ) = exp(ω ′ X + δ A) , where δ A ≈ f ( t ) and
A is the age in wave I, the survival function is given as

(

)

S ( t ) = exp − ∫ μ ( u ) du = exp ( −t exp (ω ′ X + δ A ) ) .
t

0

The exact number of years following wave I in which an individual dies, t, is censored both at a
maximum of 6 (the last wave in 1998) as well as censored to be equal to 2, 4, or 6. The likelihood
function is given by
N

L (ω , δ ) = ∏ d i ⎡⎣ Si ( 2( k − 1) ) − Si ( k − 1) ⎤⎦ + (1 − di ) Si ( 6 )
i =1

where di is one if the individual is dead by wave 4 (1998) and zero otherwise, and ki is the

earliest wave in which an individual is known to be dead. Maximizing L (ω , δ ) separately by

gender yields the estimate ω̂ .
The vital statistics from the NIH are converted to hazard rates, ν = exp ( f ( t ) ) . These are
then adjusted as follows to yield individual specific hazard rates,
Prob ( Die at age t ) = exp (ω ′ X it + f ( t ) )

= exp (ω ′ X it ) exp ( f ( t ) )
≈ exp (ωˆ ′ X it )ν .
C. Truncated Switching Regression
We modify the likelihood function implied by (6) in order to account for the potential
sample selection bias due to trimming the data. Denote the lower and the upper bound of the
trimmed sample of changes in consumption as L and H , respectively. Conditional on being in
regime k = 1 or 2 ( α k = α in for k = 1 and α k = 0 for k = 2 ), an observation is included in the
sample if

31

L < ( g ( xi ;θ ,α k ,1) + u2 + eki 2 ) − ( g ( xi ;θ ,α k ,1) + u1 + eki1 ) < H .
The distribution of ekit is a truncated normal with the truncation points given by
L ( x ,θ ,α ) = L − ( g ( x ;θ ,α ,1) + u − g ( x ;θ ,α , 2 ) − u )
i

k

i

k

1

i

k

2

H ( xi ,θ ,α k ) = H − ( g ( xi ;θ ,α k ,1) + u1 − g ( xi ;θ ,α k , 2 ) − u2 ) ,
with variance equal to σ 12 + σ 22 − 2σ 1σ 2 ρ . Predicted consumption depends on the value of the
bequest motive parameter and so is dependent upon the regime for which it is being predicted.
These values modify the p.d.f.’s for regimes 1 and 2 in (6) as follows:
φ ( eki1 , eki 2 ;σ )
,
1/ 2
1/ 2
Φ L ( xi ;θ ,α k ) (σ 12 + σ 22 − 2σ 1σ 2 ρ )
− Φ H ( xi ;θ ,α k ) (σ 12 + σ 22 − 2σ 1σ 2 ρ )

(

) (

)

for k = 1 and 2 , respectively. These two p.d.f.’s, weighted by the probability of being in the
respective regime, are used to define the log-likelihood function for the truncated switching
regression model.
D. Estimation procedure
Solving for the optimal path of consumption
Given the parameters, the path of mortality rates and income, and initial wealth, the
algorithm proceeds as follows. The satiation path of consumption given by (3) determines the
minimum initial level of wealth needed to financing such a policy, ws* . If the initial wealth
equals or exceeds ws* , consumption follows the satiation path provided that optimal consumption
in the last period exceeds income yT (otherwise some constraints are binding). If the initial
wealth is less than ws* and yT exceeds the satiation level of consumption at time T (the maximum
consumption in that period), some constraints must be binding. Otherwise, the level of wealth
corresponding to the path of consumption satisfying the Euler equation and ending with yT is
computed. This level is compared to ws , if it exceeds ws , some constraints are binding. If not,
binary search algorithm over consumption cT in period T belonging to the interval [ yT , cTh ] is
used to find the consumption profile that is exactly financed by ws . If the corresponding path
does not violate non-negativity constraints, this is the optimal solution. Otherwise, some
constraints are binding.
Whenever it is determined that the wealth constraints are binding, the first age where the
solution to the unconstrained problem yields negative wealth is noted as age k * . This is done as
a by-product of the steps described above. Age k * is the earliest age where the constraint may be
binding: if it were binding earlier, consumption over some initial period would have exceeded the
unconstrained one, which may not be optimal. When the constraint binds at k, ck +1 ≤ yk +1 , and it
follows from the Euler equation that ak ck−γ ≥ β (1 + r ) ( ak +1 yk−+γ1 + mk +1α ) . The terminal condition

also guarantees that ck ≤ ckh . These conditions yield an upper bound on ck , the lower bound is
given by ck ≥ yk . The level of wealth corresponding to these two bounds can be found, and when
the initial wealth is within the region, binary search algorithm is used to search for the path that is
financed by it. If it satisfies the non-negativity constraint before k, the constraint may be binding
at k . The algorithm then proceeds to test later points in the same manner. If another place where
the constraint may bind is found, the levels of utility corresponding to the two solutions are
compared and the better one is selected. If not, this is the solution and evaluation of the utility is
not performed. Evaluating the utility level requires calculating the whole path of consumption;

32

this is done by calling recursively the same procedure starting at a period after the constraint
binds and with initial wealth of zero.
Numerical optimization
Maximization of the log-likelihood function is accomplished by using a two-step
maximization procedure: max max ∑ i log(A i ) , where li is given by (6) modified according to
{β ,γ ,α } {λ ,u ,σ }

Appendix A.3, u = [u1 , u2 ] , and σ = [σ 1 ,σ 2 , ρ ] . In other words, given behavioral parameters, full
maximization is performed over distributional parameters λ , u , and σ . This helps to reduce the
number of costly evaluations of the function g (.) , which depends only the behavioral parameters
and need not be evaluated when maximizing over λ , u , and σ . The estimation was performed
using Matlab. The Nelder-Mead (Matlab’s fminsearch) algorithm is used starting from an initial
guess obtained by means of a grid search. The derivatives of the likelihood function are
computed by finite differentiation. In addition to the usual convergence criterion, the estimates
were tested for convergence using an artificial regression of Davidson and MacKinnon (1993, p.
472).

33

Reference List

Altonji, Joseph G., Hayashi, Fumio and Kotlikoff, Laurence J. “Parental Altruism and Inter
Vivos Transfers: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Political Economy, 1997, 105(6), 11211166.
Bernheim, B. Douglas. “How Strong Are Bequest Motives? Evidence Based on the Estimates of
the Demand for Life Insurance and Annuities,” Journal of Political Economy, 1991, 99(5),
899-927.
Bernheim, Douglas B., Jonathan Skinner, and Steven Weinberg. “What Accounts for the
Variation in Retirement Wealth among Households,” American Economic Review, 2001,
91(4), 832-57.
Bernheim, Douglas B., Robert J. Lemke and John Karl Scholz, “Do Estate and Gift Taxes Affect
the Timing of Private Transfers,” Journal of Public Economics, 2004, forthcoming.
Bernheim, Douglas B., Shleifer, Andre, and Summers, Lawrence H. “The Strategic Bequest
Motive,” Journal of Political Economy, 1985, 93(6), 1045-1076.
Carroll, Christopher D. “Why Do the Rich Save So Much,” in Does Atlas Shrug? The Economic
Consequences of Taxing the Rich, Joel B. Slemrod (editor). Harvard University Press, 2000.
Cooper, George. Voluntary Tax? New Perspectives on Sophisticated Tax Avoidance.
Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution, 1979.
Deaton, Angus. “Health Inequality and Economic Development,” Journal of Economic
Literature, March 2003, 41(1), 113-158.
Davidson, Russell and MacKinnon, James G. Estimation and Inference in Econometrics.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993.
Davies, James B., Shorrocks, Anthony F. "The Distribution of Wealth," in Handbook of Income
Distribution, Atkinson, Anthony B. and Bourguignon, Francois (editors). Amsterdam; New
York: Elsevier/North Holland, 2001.
Diamond, Peter A., Hausman, Jerry A. "The Retirement and Unemployment Behavior of Older
Men," in Retirement and Economic Behavior, Aaron, Henry A., Burtless, Gary
(editors).Washington D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1984.
Dynan, Karen E., Skinner, Jonathan, and Zeldes, Stephen P. “The Importance of Bequests and
Life-Cycle Saving in Capital Accumulation: A New Answer,” American Economic Review,
2002, 92(2), 274-278.
Dynan, Karen E., Skinner, Jonathan, and Zeldes, Stephen P. “Do the Rich Save More?,” Journal
of Political Economy, 2004, 112(2), 397-444.
Gale, William G., Scholz, John Karl. "Intergenerational Transfers and the Accumulation of
Wealth,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 1994, 8(4), 145-160.
Hubbard, Glenn R., Skinner, Jonathan, Zeldes, Stephen P. “Precautionary Saving and Social
Insurance,” Journal of Political Economy, 1995, 103(2), 360-399.
Hurd, Michael D. "Savings of the Elderly and Desired Bequests,” American Economic Review,
1987, 77 (3), 298-312.
Hurd, Michael D. "Mortality Risk and Bequests,” Econometrica, 1989, 57(4), 779-813.
Hurd, Michael D. "Research on the Elderly: Economic Status, Retirement, and Consumption,”
Journal of Economic Literature, 1990, 28(2), 565-637.

34

Hurd, Michael D., Mundaca, B. Gabriela. "The Importance of Gifts and Inheritances Among the
Affluent," in The Measurement of Saving, Investment and Wealth, Lipsey, Robert E., Tice,
Helen Stone (editors). Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1989.
Joulfaian, David. “Gift Taxes and Lifetime Transfers: Time Series Evidence,” Journal of Public
Economics, 2004, 88(9-10), 1917-1929.
Juster, Thomas F. and Smith, James P. “Improving the Quality of Economic Data: Lessons from
HRS and AHEAD,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 1997, 92(440), 12681278.
Juster, Thomas F., Lupton, Joseph P., Smith, James P. and Stafford, Frank. “The Decline in
Household Saving and the Wealth Effect,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System, Finance and Economics Discussion Series, 2004, 32.
Kopczuk, Wojciech. "The Trick is to Live: Is the Estate Tax Social Security for the Rich?,"
Journal of Political Economy, December 2003, 111(6), 1318-1341.
Kotlikoff, Laurence J., Summers, Lawrence H. "The Role of Intergenerational Transfers in
Aggregate Capital Accumulation,” Journal of Political Economy, 1981, 89(4), 706-732.
Kuehlwein, Michael. “Life-Cycle And Altruistic Theories of Saving with Lifetime Uncertainty,”
The Review of Economics and Statistics, 1993, 75(1), 3-47.
Laitner, John, Juster, Thomas F. "New Evidence on Altruism: A Study of TIAA-CREF
Retirees,” American Economic Review, 1996, 86(4), 893-908.
Laitner, John and Ohlsson, Henry. “Bequest Motives: A Comparison of Sweden and the United
States,” Journal of Public Economics, 2001, 79, 205-236.
McGarry, Kathleen. “Inter Vivos Transfers and Intended Bequests,” Journal of Public
Economics, 1999, 73(3), 321-51.
Menchik, Paul L., Martin, David. "Income Distribution, Lifetime Savings, and Bequests,"
American Economic Review, 1983, 73(4), 672-90.
Modigliani, Franco. "The Role of Intergenerational Transfers and Life-Cycle Saving in the
Accumulation of Wealth,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 1988, 2(2), 15-40.
Modigliani, Franco, Brumberg, Richard. "Utility Analysis and the Consumption Function: An
Attempt at Integration of Cross-Section Data," in Post-Keynesian Economics, Kurihara,
Kenneth K. (editor). New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1954, 388-436.
Page, Benjamin R. “Bequest Taxes, Inter Vivos Gifts, and the Bequest Motive,” Journal of
Public Economics, 2003, 87, 1219-1229.
Palumbo, Michael G. “Uncertain Medical Expenses and Precautionary Saving Near the End of
the Life Cycle,” The Review of Economic Studies, 1999, 66(2), 395-421.
Poterba, James M. “Estate and Gift Taxes and Incentives for Inter Vivos Giving,” Journal of
Public Economics, 2001, 79(1), 237-64.
Rohwedder, Susann, Haider, Steven J., and Hurd, Michael. “Increases in Wealth among the
Elderly in the Early 1990s: How Much is Due to Survey Design?” NBER working paper,
(10862), 2004.
Sakata, Shinichi. “Quasi-Maximum Likelihood Estimation with Complex Survey Data,”
University of Michigan Working Paper, 2002.
Smith, James P. “Health Bodies and Thick Wallets: The Dual Relation Between Health and

35

Economic Status,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 1999, 13(2), 145-166.
Venti, Steven F. and Wise, David A. “The Cause of Wealth Dispersion at Retirement: Choice or
Chance?” American Economic Review, 1998, 88(2), 185-191.
Wilhelm, Mark O. “Bequest Behavior and the Effect of Heirs’ Earnings: Testing Altruistic
Model of Bequests,” American Economic Review, 1996, 86(4), 874-892.
Yaari, Menahem E. "Uncertain Lifetime, Life Insurance, and the Theory of the Consumer,"
Review of Economic Studies, 1965, 32(2), 137-150.

36

Total Net Wealth
Tangible Wealth
Net Equity in Home
Financial Wealth
Stocks/Mutual Funds
Share of Total Net Wealth
Real Assets
Net Equity in Home
Financial Wealth
Stocks/Mutual Funds

Table 1.-Mean Wealth of the Elderly
1993
1995
141,275
181,598
87,090
96,358
63,807
66,419
54,186
85,240
15,450
38,740
0.62
0.45
0.38
0.11

0.53
0.37
0.47
0.21

1998
170,731
91,230
61,401
79,501
37,885

2000
167,783
85,681
61,560
82,102
42,586

0.53
0.36
0.47
0.22

0.51
0.37
0.49
0.25

Sample includes all non-married, non-working heads of household present in the 1993, 1995, 1998 and 2000
AHEAD survey (1,576 observations). Dollar values are in 1996 dollars.

Table 2.-Saving and Consumption of the Elderly: Annual Average
Mean
Median
1995 to 1998 1998 to 2000
1995 to 1998 1998 to 2000
Change in Wealth
-4,870
-1,362
-1,105
-251
Saving
-4,118
-2,678
-111
-101
Capital Gains
-752
1,315
0
0
Income
18,327
17,647
12,658
11,921
Consumption
22,449
20,325
13,071
12,139
Sample includes all non-married, non-working heads of household present in the 1993, 1995, 1998
and 2000 AHEAD survey (1,576 observations). Values are annualized by individual specific number of
years between survey interviews. Dollar values are in 1996 dollars.

Table 3.-Model Estimates
i
ii
iii
Time Discount Factor ( β )
Elasticity of Substitution (1/ γ )
Bequest Motive (α −1/ γ )

Constant, period 1 (u1 )

2.00
(n.a.)
0.059
(0.005)
246,318
(5,159)

2,373
(1,217)
(
u
)
Constant, period 2 2
-684
(1,134)
Standard Deviation, period 1 (σ 1 ) 26,880
(354)
Standard Deviation, period 2 (σ 2 ) 27,111
(550)
(
σ
)
Intertemporal Correlation 1,2
0.43
(0.02)

iv

v

vi

0.85
(0.03)
0.379
(0.036)
43,826
(2,058)

0.90
(0.03)
0.283
(0.027)
48,132
(2,026)

Transitory Measured Consumption
-6,503
-6,578
-6,973
-1,560
(1,189) (1,188) (1,326)
(952)
-7,328
-7,362
-6,824
-2,141
(1,137) (1,138) (1,205)
(929)
22,903
22,866
22,586
22,803
(342)
(341)
(380)
(322)
24,327
24,336
23,210
24,286
(550)
(548)
(569)
(544)
0.25
0.25
0.24
0.22
(0.03)
(0.03)
(0.03)
(0.03)

-6,618
(1196)
-7,408
(1143)
22,910
(342)
24,349
(554)
0.25
(0.03)

Behavioral Parameters
0.91
0.90
0.93
(0.03)
(0.03)
(0.03)
0.287
0.284
0.380
(0.026) (0.027) (0.051)
48,090
47,687
47,842
(1,973) (1,968) (2,983)

Switching Equation
0.45
(0.26)

One or more children
Life insurance policy
Constant

Prob (Having a bequest motive)
Bequest effect on consumption
Log-Likelihood

0.67
(0.12)

0.34
(0.22)

0.82
(0.14)

0.63
(0.13)

0.39
(0.25)
0.54
(0.15)

Predicted Sample Averages
0.820
0.748
0.757
0.794
0.735
0.752
0.998
0.741
0.741
0.732
0.756
0.743
-10,425.8 -10,279.4 -10,277.8 -8,378.4 -10,258.8 -10,278.0

The results in column i assume perfect sample separation information: households with children have a bequest
motive. The average probability of having a bequest motive in column i is simply the fraction of the sample with
children. The results in column iv restrict the sample to households with children and assume no sample separation
information . The results in column v exclude housing equity from the measure of total net wealth. See text for
estimation procedure. Standard errors are in parentheses. Dollar values are in 1996 dollars and the model is estimated
at a two-year frequency. The bequest effect on consumption is the ratio of predicted consumption over the sample
period assuming all households have a bequest motive to predicted consumpiton assuming no households have a
bequest motive. Column iv is based on 923 observations; all others are based on 1,126 observations.

Table 4.-Alternative Specifications for the Switching Equation
i
ii

iii

Switching Equation
Number of children
One child
Two children
Three or more children

-0.06
(0.15)
0.16
(0.35)
0.85
(0.36)
0.38
(0.30)

One or more grandchildren

-0.42
(0.51)
0.25
(0.52)
-0.35
(0.54)
0.74
(0.46)

0.76
(0.80)

0.34
(0.22)

-0.77
(0.65)
-0.84
(0.72)
1.72
(1.23)
-0.34
(0.77)
-0.18
(0.65)
1.39
(0.71)
0.10
(0.82)
-0.48
(1.11)

Children Characteristics
Financially better off than parents
Financially same as parents
High school degree
Some college
College degree
Own a home
Live within ten miles of parents
Constant

Prob (Having a bequest motive)
Bequest effect on consumption
Log-Likelihood

0.34
(0.22)

Predicted Sample Averages
0.756
0.758
0.798
0.743
0.745
0.726
-10,276.1
-10,274.9
-6,555.4

Only the estimated parameters of the switching equation are shown. The results in column i and ii are
based on the full sample (1,126 observations), and the results in column iii restrict the sample to
households with children (721 observations). See text for estimation procedure. Standard errors are in
parentheses. Dollar values are in 1996 dollars and the model is estimated at a two-year frequency. The
bequest effect on consumption is the ratio of predicted consumption over the sample period assuming all
households have a bequest motive to predicted consumpiton assuming no households have a bequest
motive.

Table 5.-Model Estimates
i
Time Discount Factor ( β )
Elasticity of Substitution (1/ γ )
Bequest Motive (α −1/ γ )

Constant, period 1 (u1 )
Constant, period 2 (u2 )
Standard Deviation, period 1 (σ 1 )
Standard Deviation, period 2 (σ 2 )
Intertemporal Correlation (σ 1,2 )

ii

Behavioral Parameters
0.85
0.90
0.90
(0.05)
(0.03)
(0.04)
0.297
0.284
0.286
(0.046)
(0.027)
(0.032)
57,394
47,787
51,610
(3,394)
(1,966)
(2,448)
Transitory Measured Consumption
-14,243
-6,615
-7,600
(2,343)
(1,186)
(1,532)
-16,017
-7,392
-7,959
(2,185)
(1,139)
(1,455)
28,819
22,866
24,015
(812)
(342)
(434)
30,483
24,366
25,741
(1,220)
(554)
(707)
0.22
0.25
0.26
(0.05)
(0.03)
(0.03)
Switching Equation
0.23
(0.64)
0.56
(0.24)

Long-term health care policy
Private health insurance policy
Prob (Medical costs exhaust wealth)
Constant

Prob (Having a bequest motive)
Bequest effect on consumption
Log-Likelihood

iii

0.68
(0.15)

0.28
(0.20)

0.60
(0.48)
0.52
(0.20)

Predicted Sample Averages
0.751
0.746
0.776
0.732
-5,391.0

0.741
-10,276.3

0.731
-7,502.1

The results in column i are based on households with wealth greater than $50,000 (569 observations).
The results in the second column are based on the full sample (1,126 observations), and the results in the
last column are based on households that self-reported the probability there future medical expenses
would exhaust all their wealth within five years (814 observations). See text for estimation procedure.
Standard errors are in parentheses. Dollar values are in 1996 dollars and the model is estimated at a twoyear frequency. The bequest effect on consumption is the ratio of predicted consumption over the sample
period assuming all households have a bequest motive to predicted consumpiton assuming no households
have a bequest motive.

Table 6.-Self-Reported Probability of Leaving Bequest and Model Predictions
Self-Reported Probability of Leaving a Bequest Larger than…
…$0
…$10,000
…$100,000
Constant
-1.55
-0.95
-1.62
-1.18
-1.96
-1.96
(0.20)
(0.15)
(0.18)
(0.16)
(0.20)
(0.21)
Wealth
0.0142
0.0259
0.0108
0.0294
0.0108
0.0302
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.003)
Social security income
0.42
0.46
0.49
0.56
0.35
0.49
(0.15)
(0.14)
(0.15)
(0.15)
(0.19)
(0.19)
Prob (Medical costs exhaust wealth)
-0.52
-0.51
-0.61
-0.64
-0.63
-0.60
(0.14)
(0.14)
(0.15)
(0.15)
(0.22)
(0.21)
Prob (Leave bequest)
1.29
1.44
1.54
(0.21)
(0.20)
(0.25)
Bequest motive indicator
0.34
0.31
0.18
(0.10)
(0.10)
(0.13)
Log-Likelihood
-455.8
-469.8
-411.3
-434.0
-220.6
-239.3
The sample is restricted to households that self-reported the probability there future medical expenses would exhaust all their
wealth within five years (800 observations). Models are estimated by maximum likelihood using a probit specification for a
continuous dependent variable between zero and one. Wealth and social security income are in tens of thousands of 1996
dollars, and the probability of large medical expenses is the self-reported probability that medical expenses will deplete all
wealth within in the next five years. The predicted probability of leaving a bequest is the predicted probability of dying with
wealth larger than $0, $10,000, or $100,000. The bequest indicator is equal to one if the individual observation's contribution to
the likelihood function would be greater if a bequest motive were present with certainty, and zero otherwise.

Table 7.-Distribution of Probability of Leaving a Bequest Larger than $10,000
Self-Reported
Probability
Self-Reported
Predicted
Bequest motive No bequest motive
0 to 0.2
53.6
27.2
44.2
65.0
0.2 to 0.4
5.7
8.4
7.1
4.0
0.4 to 0.6
15.3
12.0
17.4
12.9
0.6 to 0.8
4.6
15.6
5.1
3.9
0.8 to 1.0
20.8
36.8
26.2
14.1
The table reports the percent of households whose probability of leaving a bequest larger than $10,000 is
within a given quintile. Sample weights are used in all calculations. The predicted unconditional
probabilities reflect the weighted average of the probability of leave a bequest with and without a bequest
motive, where the weights reflect the probability of have a bequest motive. The last two columns show the
self-reported probabilities of leaving a bequest larger than $10,000 separated by the predicted presence of a
bequest motive. The sample is separated into those households whose individual contribution to the
likelihood would be greater if a bequest motive were present with certainty and those households whose
individual contribution would be greater if a bequest motive were absent with certainty. Sample includes
all households used in the estimation and that reported a probability of leaving a bequest (1,027
observations).

Figure 1.-Percent of Households with Binding Wealth Constraint
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
Unconditional
No bequest motive
Bequest motive

0.05
0.00
72

73

74

75

76

77

78

79

80

81

82

83

84

85

86

87

88

89

90

Figure 2.-Average Propensity to Consume out of Cash-On-Hand by Age
1.0
0.9

Low-Wealth

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

Middle-Wealth
High-Wealth
No bequest motive
Bequest motive

0.0
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
Figure shows the average ratio of predicted annual consumption to cash-on-hand, defined as the sum of net wealth and
income. Averages are weighted by the probability of survival to a given age. Households in the low wealth group have
initial total net wealth less than or equal to $25,000, households in the middle wealth group have initial total net wealth
between $25,000 and $100,000, and households in the high wealth group have initial net wealth greater than $100,000. The
solid line is conditional on all households having no bequest motive, and the dashed line is conditional on all households
having a bequest motive.

Figure 3.-Total Expenditures of Non-Married, Non-Working Households by Age
(Thousands of 1996 dollars)
25

20

15

10
CEX Consumption (----- plus/minus two standard errors)
Predicted Consumption (Unconditional)
5
72

73

74

75

76

77

78

79

80

81

82

83

84

85

86

87

88

89

90

85

86

87

88

89

90

Figure 4.-Predicted Consumption by Age
(Thousands of 1996 dollars)

30

25

20

Unconditional
No bequest motive
Bequest motive

15

10
72

73

74

75

76

77

78

79

80

81

82

83

84

