                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     OPTIMAL STOCK TRADING WITH PERSONAL TAXES:
     IMPLICATIONS FOR PRICES AND THE ABNORMAL JANUARY RETURNS




                  George M. Constantinides



                   Working Paper No. 1176




            NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                     Cambridge MA 02138

                         August 1983




This paper is a substantially revised version of iy 1980 paper
titled "Short Term versus Long Term Capital Gains and Losses." I
wish to thank ny colleagues at the University of Chicago and
workshop participants at the 1982 Sunuir Institute in Boston, the
University of Pennsylvania, Cornell University, Northwestern
University, Columbia University, and the University of Texas at
Dallas. In particular, I wish to thank Eugene FanR, Philippe
Jorion, Allan Kleidon, Merton Miller, Richard Roll and an anony—
mous referee. Aid from the Center for Research in Security Prices
of the University of Chicago is gratefully acknowledged. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
Financial Markets and Monetary Economics and program in
Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                               NBER Working Paper #1176
                                                               August 1983




                Optimal Stock Trading with Personal Taxes: Implications
                       For Prices and the Abnormal January Returns



                                         ABSTRACT




        The tax law confers upon the investor a timing option--to realize capital

losses and defer capital gains. With the tax rate on long term capital gains

and losses being about half the short term rate, the tax law provides a second

timing option--to realize capital losses short term and realize capital gains

long term, if at all. Our theory and simulation with actual stock prices over

the 1962—1977 period establish that the second timing option is extremely

valuable: Taxable investors should realize their long term capital gains in

high variance stocks and repurchase the same or similar stock, in order to

reestablish    the short—term status and realize potential future losses short
term.
        Tax trading does not explain the positive abnormal returns of small
firms. In     the   presence of transactions costs, tax trading predicts that the
volume of tax—loss selling increases from January to December and ceases in

the first few days of January. The trading volume seasonal maps into a stock

price seasonal only if tax—loss sellers are assumed irrational or ignorant of

the price seasonality.




                                                    Proc. George M. Constantinides
                                                    Graduate School of Business
                                                    University of Chicago
                                                    1101   East 58th Street
                                                    Chicago, IL 60637
                               1 •   INTRODUCTION


     Capital gains and losses are taxed when the investor sells the stock——not

when gains and losses actually occur. Suppressing the distinction between the

short term tax rate on capital gains and losses and the long term rate, the

optimal trading policy is to realize capital losses immediately and defer

capital gains, thereby reducing the present value of the stream of tax

payments on capital gains net of tax credits on capital losses.

Constantinides (1983) formally derives the optimal trading policy, estimates

the value of this timing option as a fraction of the stock price, and finds

the effective tax rate on capital gains and on dividends. He also explains

how the capital gains tax influences the investor's optima], consumption and

investment program and derives the equilibrium pricing implications--how the

capital gains tax modifies the asset pricing models of Breeden (1979), Brennan

(1973) and Merton (1973).

     With the tax rate on long term capital gains and losses being about half

the rate on short term capital gains and losses, the tax law confers upon the

investor a second timing option——to realize losses short term and realize

gains long term, if at all. For those investors who can draw the distinction

between the two tax rates, the second option is substantially more valuable

than the first one. Suppose that the investor bought the stock exactly one

year ago. If the stock price has declined, he optimally sells the stock and

repurchases it, realizing a short term capital loss immediately. If the stock

price has increased instead, the investor optimally defers the realization of

a short term capital gain and one day later faces two alternatives. First, he

may defer the realization of the long term gain. Second, he may sell the

stock and repurchase it, realizing a long term gain and reestablishing the
                                             2


favorable    short term status, in order to realize future capital losses at the

short term rate.

        Our theory, based on the option pricing argument   of   Black and Scholes

(1973), confirms that under broad conditions the investor ought to realize a

long term gain in order to reestablish the short term status. These

conditions apply to high variance stocks and even to medium variance stocks,

if transactions costs are low and the interest rate is low (see, Tables 1 and

2). The results are intuitively appealing. The timing option to realize

losses short term and gains long term is more valuable the higher the stock

variance, for essentially the same reason that a call option is more valuable

the higher the stock variance. Thus the higher the stock variance the

stronger   the incentive to reestablish the short term status even at the
expense of the tax on long term gains. Also, the lower the interest rate the
higher the present value of the future tax benefit of this option.
Transactions costs inhibit trading but the order of magnitude of the potential
tax benefit is large relative to even substantial transactions costs.
      We simulate three active tax trading policies and the buy—and-hold policy
for a   large sample of NYSE— and AMEX—listed stocks over the period 1962—

1977. The performance      under optimal trading far exceeds the performance under
the   buy—and—hold   policy (see, Table 3   and Figures 1, 2, and 3). The     tax
trading benefit is large even when we allow for long term gains to offset
short term losses dollar for dollar. The results readily translate into an
annual tax subsidy which the government provides to taxable investors under
various provisions of the tax law.
      We relate our findings to the   empirical   evidence on   positive   abnormal
returns by small firms, and positive abnormal returns in the month of
January. We argue that tax trading not only fails to explain, but exacerbates
                                            3


 the   small firm anomaly, and cast doubts on a proposed explanation based on

 transactions costs. Regarding the January      anomaly, we find that tax-loss
selling predicts a seasonal pattern in trading volume, provided transactions

costs are present. Tax—loss selling predicts a seasonal pattern in stock

prices, only if we further assume irrationality or ignorance of the stock

price seasonality on behalf of investors.

         paper is organized as follows: The tax environment is discussed in
       The

Section 2. In Section 3 we derive those properties of the optimal trading
policy which do not depend on detailed assumptions on the stock price
distribution     (see, Propositions 1   and 2). In Section 4   we assume that the

stock price follows a binomial process and provide coyiditions under which it

is   optimal to incur the cost of realizing a long term gain in order to
reestablish the tax—advantageous short term status (see, Proposition 3). The
conclusions are summarized in Tables 1 and 2 for a range of parameter
values.      Section 5 reports the simulation of the trading policies. In Section

6 we relate our findings to the empirical evidence on the small firm anomaly

and the January anomaly. Concluding remarks are offered in Section 7.


                               2. THE TAX ENVIRONMENT

       Unrealized capital gains and losses are not taxed. Realized capital

gains and losses are short term if the asset has been held for one year or

less, and long term otherwise. Net short term capital gains (or losses),

       are defined as the total short term capital gains net of total short term

capital losses, including unused short term carryovers. Net long term capital

gains (or losses), XL, are defined as the total long term capital gains net

of total long term capital losses, including unused long term carryovers. If


       From 1942 to 1976 the holding period was six months. In 1977 it was
increased to nine months, and in 1978 it was increased to one year.
                                                4



both X and XL are nonnegative, short term capital gains are taxed at the

individual's marginal        tax   rate on ordinary income; and long term capital gains

are taxed at 40% (until October 1979, 50%) of the individual's marginal tax
                               2,3/
rate on ordinary income.              If both   X   and XL are nonpositive, then net

short term capital losses and 50% of net long term capital losses are

deductible     from ordinary income. These deductions may      jointly decrease the
                                                                     4/
taxable    ordinary income by a maximum of $3,000 per tax year.            Unused capital

losses     are carried forward indefinitely.
      A complication of the tax code is that net short term losses offset net
long term gains one to one. Thus, if            X < 0 < XL   and Xg +     XL <   0,   the
loss X      + XL    is   taxed as short term; if    X < 0 < XL and   X+      XL > 0,        the

gain X +       XL   is taxed as long term. Likewise, if XL < 0 < X and

X +   XL   < 0, the loss X + XL is taxed as long term; if XL < 0 < X and

X +   XL > 0, the  gain X ÷ XL is taxed as short term.
      If an asset is sold at a loss and repurchased within        thirty days, the IRS

terms the transaction a "wash sale" and disallows the loss deduction. The

investor has a high probability to circumvent this rule by waiting thirty days

before repurchasing the same asset. A safer way to circumvent the rule is to

repurchase a different asset with the same risk and return characteristics.

In any case, the wash sale provision does not apply to dealers or individuals

who are in the business of trading stocks.




      —2/Prior
             to 1969 the maximum rate on long term capital gains was 25% even
to investors in tax brackets above 50%. In 1969—1976 (1976—1979) the marginal
tax rate on capital gains above the first $50,000 was as high as 421/2% (49%).
      3/
       Upon the investor's death the assets' basis is adjusted to market.
Effectively realized and unrealized capital gains and losses remain untaxed.
      4/
       Until 1976 the deduction limit was $1,000. It was increased to $2,000
in 1977 and to $3,000 thereafter.
                                          5


                   3, PROPERTIES OF THE OPTIMAL TRADING POLICY

     An investor may   sell   stock to invest the proceeds in relatively

underpriced assets, consume, or rebalance his portfolio. We consider those

times at which the investor is not motivated by any of the above reasons to

sell stock and investigate the conditions under which he would optimally sell
                                              5/
stock and repurchase it for tax reasons.           We defer the discussion of

transactions costs until Section 4.3.

     There   are at least three representative tax scenarios. In the first one
the investor is a tax-exempt institution or an individual who continually
carries forward large capital losses and expects the deduction limit to remain
binding   for many years. The   marginal tax rate on     cap,ital gains and losses is

zero and the investor pays no attention to the realization of capital gains

and losses in pursuing his optimal investment policy.

     In the second scenario the deduction limit is not binding and short term

and long term capital gains and losses are taxed at the same rate. This

scenario is plausible if (1) the individual investor is periodically forced to

sell some of his assets by factors beyond his control and, on average,

realizes large long term gains; and (2) he can defer the realization of short

term capital gains until the holding period exceeds one year and then realize

the capital gains long term. Then short term and long term capital losses

simply offset some of the long term capital gains. The optimal trading policy

is derived in Constantinides (1983) and is restated here for completeness.


PROPOSITION 0: Assume that transactions costs are zero and the tax rate on

long term capital gains and losses equals the tax rate on short term capital



     5/
       Holt and Shelton (1962) discuss the investor's trade—off between the
benefit of switching to relatively underpriced assets and the cost of the
capital gains tax.
                                              6


gains and losses. Then at any time that the investor is not forced to sell

the stock, he optimally realizes losses and repurchases the stock; and defers

the realization of gains.


     In the third scenario we focus on the distinction between the short term

and the long term tax status. We assume that short term capital gains and

losses are taxed at the rate t,        and   long term capital gains and losses are
                                6,2/
taxed at the lower rate TL.            We examine the optimal trading policy under

the simplifying assumption that trading occurs in discrete, one-year

intervals. The length of the trading period conveniently coincides with the

length of the holding period beyond which short term capital gains and losses

become long term. If an asset is sold one year after purchase, the capital

gain or loss is short term or long term at the investor's discretion.

Obviously the investor delays the sale by at least one day if he has a short

term capital gain, but not if he has a short term capital loss. Propositions

1 and 2 state some properties of the optimal trading policy which are free

from distributional assumptions on the stock price.


PROPOSITION 1: Assume that trading occurs in one—year intervals only,

transactions     costs are zero, and the tax rate on long term capital gains and

     6/
       If the investor does not have short term gains, he offsets short term
losses against long term gains one to one and, effectively, cannot use to his
advantage the distinction between the short term and the long term tax
status. This complication is suppressed here and discussed later in
Section   5.4.
     7/
         We suppress the distinction between the tax rate on net long term
gains,  TL(net gains) = .4t, and the tax rate on net long term losses,
TL(net losses) = .5t. This is justified because long term losses offset some
of the long term gains and the marginal tax rate on long term losses equals
the marginal tax rate on long term gains.
     In any case, Propositions 1, 2, and 3 remain valid if the condition
T(margina1 gain) = T(marginal loss) < T           is
                                              replaced by the pair of weaker
conditions, T(margir1al gain) < 'r and T(marginal loss) < t.
                                               7



losses is less than the tax rate on short term capital gains and losses, i.e.,

TL < T.       Then, at any time that the investor is not forced to sell the stock,
he optimally:

      a.    Defers the realization of a short term gain.

      b. Sells the stock and repurchases it to realize a loss, short term if

            possible.

      c. Sells the stock and repurchases it to change the long term status to

            short   term, whenever the   stock price is equal to the basis      and   the

            status is long term.


Proof:

a. Realizing the gain long term one year and one day after purchase dominates

the policy of realizing the gain short term one year after purchase. This

proves (a).

b. Suppose that the stock was purchased longer than one year ago with cost

basis p0 and the stock price now is                    <          If the investor does

nothing now and sells the stock at time T, T > t,                the   after-tax proceeds
are    (1 — T )P + T P
               L T       LO
       show that the active policy of realizing the loss at time t and
       We

repurchasing the stock dominates the above policy. In selling the stock at
time t the investor receive a tax rebate t           LO t
                                                      (P —   P    )    which he invests in a
riskless bond with after-tax annual return R, R > 1. The basis of the stock
is      and the status is short term. At time T he sells the stock and the
bond. The after—tax proceeds are at least (1 -          TL)PT
                                                                 +
                                                                      TLt   + RTtT(P —
and exceed the after-tax proceeds of the passive policy by at least
                                                  8


(R
     T-t   —             —     > 0.     If the investor dies at time T and the
               l)TL(PQ
effective tax rate becomes zero, the proceeds of the optimal policy exceed the
proceeds of the passive policy by at least R t(P -                                       >   0.
       Next suppose that the stock was purchased just one year ago. By the

above argument, realizing a long term loss (by waiting one day before selling

the stock) dominates the passive policy. Also realizing the loss short term

dominates the policy of realizing it long term. This proves (b).

       c.      The short term status dominates the long term status. With the short
term status, if          capital gains are realized in the             future, they are realized
long   term irrespective of the        current   status;        if   capital losses are realized

one period hence, they are realized short term. Therefore the investor

switches to the short term status whenever he can do so costlessly. This

proves (c).


       An investor holds a share of stock with price P, purchased t periods

ago at cost basis p. We introduce the concept of the value of a stock

position, v(P, P, t). At the time that the investor purchases the stock, the
                                  A               AA                   A
value of the position is P,            i.e., V(P, P, 0) = P.                    If the stock         price   falls

one year later, the investor optimally realizes a short term loss (see, Proposition

1) and the value of the position is v(P, P1 1) = (1                            —
                                                                                   T)P   +    TP, p        p If
the stock price rises t years after purchase, the optimal policy may be to

realize the long term gain, in which case v(P, p.                          t) =    (1 - TL)P        + TLP, or
to   defer it, in which case V(P, P, t) > (1 —
                                                                TL)P
                                                                           +         At those times

that v(P, P, t) > (1 —                + TLPI the value of a stock position is not a

market price because the investor may not sell the stock and transfer the

unrealized capital gain to the buyer.

       8/
            We say at least, because if     T=    t+        1   and T <                       the   loss
realized       at time T is short term and         (1   —              +t>                   — TL)PT + TLPt•
                                                 9

                                                                                A
       We   define the value of a stock      position,                v(P, p, t), as the after—tax
 shadow price, such that the investor is indifferent between having the stock
                A                                         *
with   basis    p   and age t, or having v(P, P, t) after-tax dollars.
                                                              A
       The function v(P, P, t) is convex in P. It is also homogeneous of

degree one in (P, P), under the additional assumption that the distribution

of the stock return, T't' at time t is independent of the price 't

These two properties imply that V(P, p, t) is convex in P. (The above

three statements are proved in Appendix 1.) The                            latter       property leads to a

partial characterization of the optimal trading policy when the price exceeds
the basis and the stock has been held for at least one year.

PROPOSITIoN 2: Under the assumptions of Proposition1, if it                                   is optimal to
realize     a long term gain when P = hp, h > 1, then it                            is also optimal to
                                             A                A
realize a long term gain for all P, P                P hP.
Proof:      If it is optimal to realize a long term gain when P = hP,                                 then


(1)                   V(h;, P, t) = (1       TL)hP +
                                         —
                                                           tLP

By Proposition 1,


(2)                           v(P, P, t) = P.                     t         1




Since V is convex in its first argument (see, Appendix 1, Lemma 3),

equations (1) and (2) imply


(3)          V(P, P, t)    (1 —
                                  tL)P + TLP     ,        P '           P < hP ,              t   1


But
(4)                    V(P, P, t)     (1 —            +
                                                          •tLP         ,            t     1
                                                  10


since   the investor has the option to sell the stock and realize a long term

gain. Combining equations (3) and (4) we obtain


(5)            v(P,    P, t) = (1   - TL)P   +
                                                  TLPI
                                                             P(    P   < hP,   t   )1

This proves the claim and completes the proof.

       In the next section we assume that the stock price follows a binomial
process and provide conditions under which it is              optimal to realize a long

term   gain. When these conditions are violated, it is optimal to defer all
long term (and short term) gains.

        4. THE OPTIMAL TRADING POLICY IN A BINOMIAL MODEL OF STOCK PRICES

4.1    Introduction

       We assume that the annual stock prices, Pt t+i ...,                         are generated by
a binomial process as follows:




                                       =   uP,         with probability 1 -         q
                  Pt                         -1
                                       = u P, with probability q



where u is constant over time and is greater than one. No dividends are

paid on the stock. Transactions costs are zero. The investor is infinitely
                                                                                    9/
lived and he is never forced to realize a capital gain or loss.

       There exists a single—period riskiess asset with after—tax interest

rate R — 1.     Irrespective of the tax rates                          the following condition
                                                              L'


       9/
       The conclusion in this section is that the investor should optimally
realize a long term capital gain or a short term capital loss in every period
on medium and high variance stocks. This conclusion remains valid if we allow
for forced realizations, provided that the investor is not forced to realize
capital gains short term.
                                                           11



 is necessary, if the after—tax cash flows of the risky and the riskless asset

 do    not dominate one another:

 (6)                                             u1 < R < u

        In   the remainder of the introduction we assume that the tax rate on                          short
term    capital gains and losses, t,                 equals       the tax rate on long term capital

gains and losses. We state some known results which we employ in Section 4.2

to characterize the optimal trading policy when there is a distinction between

the short term and long term status.

        With the two tax rates being equal, the value of a stock position is

independent of the time period that the stock has beeji held, and we write
V(P, P) without the argument t. The optimal policy, as stated in
Proposition 0, is to realize losses and defer gains, i.e.,
                                        A
                                 V(P,   P) =    (1   - T)P +      rP   ,         p   'C.   p
(7)


                                            >(1—t)P÷rp, P>P.
The functional form of V(P, P) is derived in Constantinides (1983) under the

assumption that the logarithm of the stock price follows a Wiener process with

drift. A similar derivation (see, Appendix 2) under the assumption that the

stock price follows a binomial process, yields the following:


(8)       V(P,     =   [i   _(i -   u1)(u
                                  uP. - 2   +
                                                -R)T
                                                u    P.
                                                                j (i       -
                                                                        uP. - 2
                                                                               u1)(u -R)t m ;1-m
                                                                                     +u         P.




                                                                                               P u1P
where

(9)                         in   = [2.n(u — R)       —    £n(uR —      1)]/nu        < 0
                                                  12


4.2 The Optimal Trading Policy

       The   following   proposition completes the characterization of an optimal

policy.


PROPOSITION 3:      Assume that trading occurs in one-year intervals only; there

are no forced realizations; the stock price is generated by a binomial process

with U1 < R         U; there are no dividends; transactions costs are zero; and

the tax rate on long term capital gains and losses is less than or equal to

the tax rate on short term capital gains and losses, i.e.,                   t.


       a. If
                                                       T
(10)
                                             uR—1
             at any time that P > uP, it is optimal to defer the gain.

       b. If
                                             L     u-R
                                             tuR—1'
             at any time that P = uP,            it is optimal to realize the gain, and
                                      1 0/
             realize it long term.




       10/
          Under this policy we leave unspecified the action when P > uP
because thi contingency never arises: Before P > uP, the price will have
equalled uP at some earlier period, a long term capital gain will have been
realized, and the basis will have been updated.
     This argument hinges on our earlier assumption that the stock price can
increase by only one step each year. If, instead, the stock price were
generated by a trinomial process, P4 =    uP     or uP or u2P, then we
would have to consider separately three candidate policies:

 (a) Defer a gain if P          uP.

 (b) Realize a gain if P = uP            but defer a gain if P > u2P.

 (c) Realize a gain if P          uP.

Our discussion following Table 1 in this section suggests that our conclusions
do not critically depend on the binomial process.
                                              13


Proof:     By Proposition 2, when the stock price exceeds the basis, an optimal

policy is either to defer all gains, or to defer short term gains and realize

long term gains.

        Assume,   for the sake of the argument, that the optimal policy is        to defer

all gains. Since only losses are realized, and are always realized short
term,    the value of a position, V(P, P, t),        is independent of the long       term
rate.     In particular, the value of a position is given by equation (8), which

was obtained under the assumption that short term and long term gains and

losses are taxed at the same rate,        r. Since, by assumption, it is optimal to

defer the gain when P = uP,       we impose the condition


(12)                   V(uP, P, t) > (1    .L)U; + TLP   ,     t ) 1.
Equations (8), (9) and (12) imply, after tedious manipulations, equation

(10). If equation (10) is violated the optimal policy is to realize a long

term gain when P = up.        This completes the proof.


        If the short term and long term tax rates     are equal, then
 L' =      > Cu — R)/(uR — 1)    and it is optimal to defer a long term gain. For

sufficiently low long term tax rate relative to the short term rate, it is

optimal to realize long term gains. The function (u — R)/(uR            —   1)   is

decreasing in R. For a sufficiently high interest rate condition (10) is

satisfied and the optimal policy is to defer a long term gain because the

future benefits associated with the short term tax status become less

valuable. The function (U - R)/(u.R       —   1)   is increasing in u. For

sufficiently high value of u condition (10) is violated and the optimal

policy is to realize a long term gain. The higher u is, the larger the

variance of the stock return. Thus it is optimal to. realize long term gains

on high variance stocks but not on low variance stocks.
                                                      14


        For the assumed binomial           process,    the conditional mean of the annual

logarithmic stock          return,       p, is


(13)                              P =                        = (1 —    2q)nu
                                        E[9.n(Pt+i/Pt)IPt]

and the conditional variance, a2, is


(13')                      a2 =                             = 4q(1 —   q)(Lnu)2
                                  var(9n(Pt+i/Pt)IPt]

We eliminate q from equations (13) and (13') and obtain

                                                           22
(14)                                         u


In Table 1 we report u (in brackets) and the critical tax ratio,

(u —    R)/(uR   —   1),    for a range of the parameters ii, a and R. If the tax

ratio, tL/T is below the critical ratio, the optimal policy is to realize
long term capital gains; otherwise the optimal policy is to defer long term

and short term gains. The range of a is representative of the stocks listed

on the NYSE and AMEX, with the median being about a = .40                      per year. With

the ratio TL/T = .4            and      with the tax-exempt, annual interest rate taken to
be   5%, the first panel states that the investor                should sell the stock and
repurchase    it at the end of every year and realize a short term loss or a long

term gain, whatever the case may be. The second panel, with the tax—exempt

annual interest rate taken to be 10%, states that the investor should refrain

from realizing long term gains in few cases, marked in the table with an
asterisk. These cases refer to stocks with very low variance (the bottom                       25%

of   all NYSE and AMEX listed stocks) and expected rate of return lower                   or equal

to   the   expected    rate of return on riskless tax—exempt bonds. We conclude
that, at least in the absence of transactions costs, the                    investor   optimally
sells the stock and repurchases it every year.
                                                 15



       Our conclusion may be criticized on the grounds that it is specific to

the assumed binomial process. For example the entry in Table 1 with

R = 1.05,     ji   = .05 and a = .40 is u = 1.50               and the critical ratio of tax

rates is .78. That is, provided the ratio                         is less than .78, if the

stock price is 1.50 times the basis one year after purchase, the investor

optimally realizes a long term gain. Suppose, however, that the stock price

follows a different stochastic process so that one year after purchase it

could be any multiple of the basis. It does not necessarily follow that the

investor optimally realizes a long term gain, however large the gain may be.

An investor realizes a long term gain, however large the gain may be (within

the context of the binomial model), provided


(15)                    v(P, P, t)       (1 —
                                                 tL)P   +   t1:;, V

Equations (8) and (15) imply

(16)
                                          (1 —   u)(u — R)
                                     t
                                          uR-2+u1R
The entries in Table 1 with a dagger signify the stocks for which the investor

optimally realizes a long term gain, however large that gain may be, in order

to reestablish the short term status, when the ratio of the tax rates is 'tL/t

=   .40.   We conclude that, in the absence of transactions costs, the investor

optimally realizes a long term gain on medium and high variance stocks,

however large the gain may be.


4.3 Proportional Transactions Costs

       With proportional transactions costs the optimal policy is complex. We

simply assume that transactions costs are small so that it is plausible to

limit our attention to the two policies which are optimal in the absence of

transactions costs. As in Sections 4.1 and 4.2, we first assume that it is
                                                                        16



optimal to defer gains. We then state conditions on the parameters such that

this policy        dominates the policy of realizing long term gains.
        The one—way proportional transactions costs rate is y, where
                                                                    a                                                A
o      y    1 •    When the stock price is P, the investor pays                                           (1 +   y)P         to buy

one share, i.e.,

                                        A
(17)                                  V(P, (1 +                y)P,          0) = (1    + y)P

If the     price    falls to uP, the investor realizes a short term loss, and

receives, net of tax            and   transactions costs,

                          A               A                                                        A             A
(18)               V(u P, (1 + y)P, 1) =                       (1       —    r)(1   —
                                                                                        y)u     P +    r(1 + y)P
                                                                                              -I




If   the price first rises, by assumption, the investor defers the gain; if the

price first rises and then falls to the level of the purchase price, the

investor sells the stock to reestablish the short term status, i.e.,


            v(P, (1 +         y)P, t) =       (1       —
                                                           TL)(l
                                                                         -    y)P +     TL(l + y)P,      P = P,      t)1
(19)
                                      > (1         —                    — y)P       + tLl + y)P,        P > P, t         1




.s   in Appendix 2, but now with proportional transactions costs, we compare

portfolios        with different bases and obtain the following:

(20)       V(P,    (1   + y)P, t) = R1U1                   —
                                                               k)V(uP,           (1 +    y)P, t + 1)+kV(u1P, (1 + y)P, t + 1)
where

(21)                                                       k
                                                         17



We combine equations (17), (18), (19) and (20) and obtain

                       (1 +         > R((1 — k){(1           —   t)(l    —   y)u + L + y)}
(22)
                                       + k((1 —   r)(1   —       y)u1P   + t(1 + y)P}J

Using equation (21) we eliminate k from equation (22) and obtain


(23)
                         L      (u —   R){(1 + y)u — (1 - y)} — 2(u - u1)uRy/t
                                             (uR — 1){1 — y)u — (1 + y)}


Note that, in the absence of transactions costs, equation (23) becomes

              Cu   —   R)/(uR   —   1),     which is the earlier equation (10).
 1/
        In Table 2 we assume 4% round—trip transactions costs rate, i.e.,

2 = .04            and 50% short term tax rate.                      We report u (in brackets) and

the critical tax ratio (i.e., the right—hand side ofequation (23)) for a

range of the parameters                   1.1, a and R. If the tax ratio, T/t, is below the

critical ratio, the optimal policy is to realize long term capital gains

when P =       u;        otherwise, the optimal policy is to defer long term and short

term gains. With the ratio                        =   .40, and with the tax—exempt annual
interest rate taken to be either 5% or 10%, Table 2 indicates that the

investor should sell the stock and repurchase it annually to realize a short

term loss or long term gain on all high variance stocks, a                               .60. The

investor should do the same annually on medium variance stocks                            (a =   .40)

also,    if   transactions costs are negligible but not if they are substantial.


        —
        11/
           Stoll and Whaley (1983) estimate the round—trip transactions costs as
the sum of the bid—asked spread and the minimum commission schedule provided
in the NYSE Fact Book until 1974, the last year of fixed commissions. For
1960—1979, they find the average round-trip transactions costs to be 6.77% for
the largest decile NYSE—listed stocks, and 2.71% for the smallest decile NYSE—
listed stocks. These estimates exaggerate the transactions costs applicable
to medium size and large investors: First, negotiated commissions are
small. Second, sophisticated investors, who can wait a few days before they
execute a trade, need not have the full bid—asked spread work against them.
Analyzing 215,000 individual tickets on over $27 billion of equity trades by
thirteen organizations in 1978 and 1979, Beebower and Surz (1980) conclude
that the average round—trip transactions costs rate is less than 1% f or each
one of these organizations.
                                        18


(Compare Tables 1 and 2.) These conclusions are supported by the simulation

reported in the next section.


                       5. SIMULATING TRADING POLICIES WITH
                          ACTUAL STOCK PRICES, 1962-1977

5.1 Introduction

    We simulate three trading policies over the fifteen year period, 1962-

1977, and compare their performance against the buy—and-hold policy. We start

in 1962, the first year covered by the University of Chicago's CRSP Daily

Stock Master file. The investment in each stock is made on December 3, 1962,

and trading in future years occurs only once every year at the beginning or

middle of December.        (The description of the tradThg policies explains how

the exact trading day is chosen.)

     We assume that the 1982 tax law was in force over the simulation

period. The simulation then predicts the future effectiveness of the active

trading policies under the current tax   law, if the price fluctuations in the
1962—1977 period are representative of the future. The holding period beyond

which short term capital gains and losses become long term is taken to be one

year instead of six or nine months (which was the statutory time interval in

the 1962-1977 period). The marginal tax rate on ordinary income and on short

term capital gains and losses is taken to be 50%. The marginal tax rate on

long term capital gains and losses is taken to be 20%. The limit on the




        12/
           With individual investors' capital gains and losses taxed only once
every   year, investors have an incentive to realize their losses in December
instead of the following January and defer their gains from December to the
following January. The implied trading volume seasonality is discussed in
Section 6.2 in connection with the January stock return anomaly.
     A referee suggested that we simulate a policy in which losses are
realized in December and gains are realized in January. We discuss this
policy in Section 5.4 as policy V and argue that it is practically indis—
tinguishable from policy III which we simulate.
                                            19


capital      loss deduction from ordinary income is assumed nonbinding. This

assumptionS overestimates the effectiveness of the active policies.

        The sample includes all securities which were on the CRSP Daily Stock

Market file as of December 3, 1962, and remained on file until December

1977. Of the 2,027 securities on file on December 3, 1962, only 1,147

remained on file until December 1977, and qualify for inclusion in the

sample. In a merger, reorganization, or exchange, if a security on file is

replaced by another security on file until December 1977, then the security is

included in the sample. If a security is delisted from the NYSE and

immediately     relisted on   the AMEX (or vice versa), the security is included in

the   sample, provided it is on file until December 1977. Finally, suspension
of    trading by the SEC or halting of trading by the exchange for more than one
year disqualifies a security for inclusion in the sample.
       The highest variance stocks are the ones most likely to be delisted from

the NYSE or AMEX. Our exclusion from the sample of all stocks not

continuously listed over the 15-year simulation period eliminates from the

sample many high variance stocks.          Furthermore, the highest variance stocks

are likely to be small firms traded over-the—counter and therefore exclUded

from the sample. The selection procedure eliminates many       high   variance stocks

for which the active trading policies work best.

       By eliminating stocks which the investor would be forced to sell before

the completion of the 15—year period, the selection procedure overestimates

the effectiveness of the policy of deferring gains throughout the 15—year

period (policy I) but not of the policy of realizing all gains and losses in

       — Before
       13/
                 exclusion, 40% of the stocks are classified as high variance,
30%   as medium variance, and 30% as low variance. After eliminating the stocks
not   continuously listed over the 15-year period, 32% of the remaining stocks
are   in the high variance group, 32% in the medium variance group, and 37% in
the   low variance group.
                                        20


every year (policy II). The selection procedure only slightly overestimates

the effectiveness of the poiicy of realizing gains in alternate years (policy

III).

        All securities on the CRSP file are classified by CRSP into ten port-

folios with equal number of securities, based on the variance of the daily

excess return in 1962. Portfolio one includes the securities with the highest

variance and portfolio ten includes those with the lowest. We classify the

sample of 1,147 securities into three groups as follows: 367 high variance

stocks with CRSP variance classification 1—4; 361 medium variance stocks with

CRSP variance classification 5—7; and 419 low variance stocks with CRSP

variance classification 8—10. We do not reclassify the stocks into groups in

subsequent years although their CRSP variance classification may change

annually.

        One hundred dollars are invested in each stock on December 3, 1962. The

number of purchased shares is maintained constant throughout the 15—year

period, adjusted only for stock splits, stock dividends, mergers, reorganiza-

tions and exchanges. Cash dividends, partial liquidations, and cash proceeds

from selling rights are not used to repurchase stock. These cash distribu-

tions are taxed at the marginal tax rate of 50%, if appropriate, and are

deposited each December in a cash fund that we associate with each stock and




    — Annual
        14/
               reclassification of stocks by variance would be meaningless in
our simulation because we compare the performance of the active policies
against a policy of buying the stock and holding it over 15 years. One of the
conclusions derived from the simulation is that the active trading policies
work best for high variance stocks. This conclusion would be reinforced if
the simulation was done with stocks which not only had high variance in 1962
but which maintained high variance throughout the 15-year period.
                                         21


for each policy.       The cash fund is invested each December in one—year

Treasury bills, with the interest earned on the Treasury bills being taxed at

50% and reinvested until December 1977. If a capital loss is realized on the

stock, the tax rebate is also deposited in this fund. If a capital gain is

realized on the stock, the tax due is subtracted from the fund. The balance

of the cash fund may   be positive or negative. In December 1977 this balance
is added to the after—tax proceeds from selling the stock.


5.2 Policy I:   Realize Losses in Every December and Defer Gains

     One hundred dollars are invested in the stock on December 3, 1962. One
                                                               1 6/
year later, on December 3, 1963, we observe the stock price.          If the stock
                                                      ,
has a capital gain, we defer it. If the stock has a capital loss, we sell the

stock, realize the loss short term and deposit the tax rebate in the cash fund

associated with the stock. On the following trading day we repurchase the

same number of shares.      We repeat the procedure each December until 1977.

In Decembers after 1963 a capital loss is realized short term only if the

stock was last sold and repurchased in the previous December; otherwise any

loss realized is long term.    ifl December 1977 the stock is sold and a capital

gain or loss is realized.     (The capital gain can always be realized long term

by waiting one more day before selling the stock.) The cash fund, which has


     15/
        For example, the cash distributions between December 3, 1962, and the
next trading date in December 1963 are held, earning no interest, until the
December 1963 trading date. At that time they are deposited in one—year
Treasury bills.
     1 6/
        If this date is not a valid trading date, we observe the stock price
on the last trading date on which capital losses qualify for short term
status.
    — If
     17/
           the number of shares in the active trading policy were not kept
constant, the comparison of after tax cash values of the active and buy—and—
hold policies would be meaningless because a different amount of risk would be
associated with each policy.
                                        22


the after—tax cash distributions and tax rebates with interest, is added to
the after—tax proceeds from selling the stock. The sum is the net proceeds in
year 1977 under policy I.
       Under the buy—and—hold, one hundred dollars are invested in the stock on
December 3, 1962. On the same date in December 1977 that the stock is sold

under policy I, the stock is sold under the buy-and-hold. Capital gains or

losses are realized long term. The cash fund associated with this policy and

which has the after-tax cash distributions with interest, is added to the

after—tax proceeds from selling the stock. The sum is the net proceeds in

year 1977 under the buy—and—hold.

      The ratio XI/XBH of the net proceeds of policy I and the buy—and—hold

is a measure of their relative performance.      Adjustment for risk is

unnecessary in this comparison because the number of shares is held constant

in both policies.       In Table 3 and in Figure 1 we report this ratio for the

three variance groups of stocks with zero transactions costs and with 4%

round—trip transactions costs. Referring to Figure 1, in the absence of

transactions costs the wealth relatives are never less than one because policy

I   dominates the buy-and—hold. Policy I outperforms the buy—and-hold by a
greater margin for high variance stocks than for medium or low variance
stocks. The option to realize losses and defer gains is more valuable for
high variance stocks than for medium or low variance stocks.


       18/
          An alternative measure of their relative performance, (X1 — 100)/(XBH
-   100), exaggerates the benefit of the active policy for stocks that have low
realized return over the simulation period, i.e., XBH    100.
       19/
        This statement is correct only to a first approximation. By analogy,
a portfolio consisting of a call option and a bond paying off the exercise
price at the option's maturity, has the same risk as a share of stock only to
a first approximation. There is no practical way to refine the adjustment for
risk in our simulation or even estimate the direction of bias.
                                             23


       The superiority of policy I over the buy-and-hold is modest. For the

 group of high variance stocks the median wealth ratio of policy I and the buy—

and—hold is 1.043 with zero transactions costs, and 1.016 with 4% round—trip

transactions costs. In policy II the investor realizes even long term gains

in order to reestablish the tax—advantageous short term status. As we shall

see,   this policy pays off handsomely.

5.3    Policy II: Realize Gains and Losses in Every December

       One hundred dollars are invested in the stock on December 3,        1962.   One

year   later, on December 3, 1963, we observe the stock price. If the stock has
a capital loss we realize it     short   term and repurchase the same number of
shares   on the following trading day. We deposit the tax rebate in the cash

fund associated with the stock. If, instead, the stock has a capital gain, we

wait until the following trading day. If the stock still has a capital gain,

we realize it long term and repurchase the same number of shares on the
following   trading day. The capital gains tax is paid out of the cash fund

associated with the stock. We repeat the procedure until 1977. In December

1977   the stock is sold. The after—tax proceeds plus the balance of the cash
fund is the net proceeds under policy II. Under the buy—and—hold, one hundred
dollars are invested in the     stock   on December 3,   1962.   On the same date in
December 1977 that the stock is sold under policy II, the stock is sold under

the buy-and—hold. The after-tax proceeds plus the balance of the cash fund is

the net proceeds under the buy—and—hold.

       The ratio   of the net proceeds under policy II    and the buy—and—hold is

reported   in   Table 3 and Figure 2. The performance of policy II is spectacular

for high and medium variance stocks, even with 4% round-trip transactions

costs. Updating     the basis yearly and reestablishing the short term      status is

far more profitable    than the policy of realizing losses and deferring gains.
                                            24

 The results are in agreement with the theoretical prediction of Section 4 and

 Tables 1 and 2.

        The optimal policy, as discussed in Section 4, is to realize gains long

 term, provided the ratio of the stock price to the basis is below some

 critical number. It is only for stocks which satisfy equation (16) and which

 are marked with a dagger in Table 1 that the optimal policy is to realize a

 gain, however large it may be. In policy II gains are realized however large

 they may be. Therefore, the results underestimate the effectiveness of a more

 sophisticated policy of deferring large gains on low variance stocks.

        Under the assumption that the holding period for long term capital gains

and losses is six months (as was indeed the case in he years 1962—1976)

instead of one year, policy II is dominated by the policy of realizing all

capital gains long term and all capital losses short term every December and

June.   (This statement is true even though short term losses and long term
gains incurred in the same year offset each other one to one.) Therefore
policy II underestimates the effectiveness of a more sophisticated policy

applicable in the years 1962—1976.

       In a different sense policy II overestimates the benefits of tax

trading. If the investor applies policy II to a portfolio of assets (instead

of a single asset), each year he typically realizes short term losses on some

stocks and long term gains on others. The offsetting of gains and losses

undermines the effectiveness of policy II. The next policy is designed to

overcome   this problem.

5.4    Policy III: Realize Gains in Alternate Deceabers and
       Realize Losses in Every December

       One hundred dollars are invested in    the    stock on December 3, 1962. In

Decembers of odd years gains are deferred and losses are realized, short term

if   possible.   In odd years the problem   of one   to one offsetting between short
                                          25



term losses and long term gains does not arise because no gains are

realized.     In Decembers of even years both gains and losses are realized.

Gains are realized long term. The investor may be able to realize the losses

short term provided the asset was last purchased one year ago, and there are

no realized long term gains on other assets to offset the short term gain one

to one. We cannot ascertain whether the investor has realized long term gains

on other assets in the same year without having observed the realized returns

on all of the portfolio assets. In policy III we simply assume that all

losses realized in even years (but not in odd years) are realized long term.

This assumption being conservative, policy III underestimates the

effectiveness of the optimal policy.

     On December 1977 the stock is sold. The after-tax proceeds plus the

balance of the cash fund is the net proceeds under policy III. On the same

date in December 1977 that the stock is sold under policy III, the       stock is
sold under the buy-and—hold. The after-tax proceeds plus the balance of the
cash fund is the proceeds under the buy—and—hold.
     The ratio of the net proceeds under policy III and the buy-and-hold is
reported    in Table 3   and Figure 3. Even though policy III exaggerates the
adverse effect of tax offsetting between short term losses and long term
gains, it substantially outperforms the buy—and—hold for all categories of
stocks. Even with 4% round—trip transactions costs, policy III outperforms
the buy—and—hold for high variance and some medium variance stocks.
    A variant of policy III, which we may call policy IV, is to defer gains
and realize losses,      preferably short term, in odd years. So   far the policy is
the same as policy III. But in policy IV, in even years gains are realized
long term and losses are deferred. This differs from policy III in that in
policy III losses are realized long term in even years. A momentts reflection
should convince the reader that policy III dominates policy IV in the absence
                                                26

 of   transactions costs. In the presence of transactions costs policy III does

 not dominate policy IV because it involves more frequent transactions.

 Simulations not reported here confirm that, in the absence of transactions

 costs, policy III dominates policy IV. With 4% round—trip transaction costs

 policy III still outperforms policy IV.

         Yet another variant of policy III, which we may call policy V, is to

 realize     losses, preferably short term, every December; and realize long term
 gains   only on the Januaries of odd years (instead of realizing them on          the
Deceers        of even years). An upper bound on the performance of this policy is

obtained      by replacing the tax rate on long      term gains in policy III by

 r/(1       + r), where r is the interest rate; and leaving the tax rates on
long term and short term losses unchanged. We conclude           that policy V is   only
marginally     superior to policy III.


5.5 The Timing option

       Inbuying stock, a taxable investor obtains a timing option on the
realization of capital gains and losses. The option is utilized under the
optimal trading policy but is wasted under the naive buy—and—hold policy.

Suppose that one hundred dollars invested in stock become XBH dollars after

tax in fifteen years under the buy—and-hold and X0 under the optimal

policy. If XO/XBH =         2   we say that the timing option represents fifty

dollars of the initial investment. More generally, we say that the timing
option represents fraction 1 - XBH/XO of the initial investment. The timing
option provides an alternative interpretation of Table 3. For example, for
high variance stocks and trading policy III, the timing option represents, on
average,     fraction 1 —   1/1.747 = .43     of the original investment without
transactions     costs, or fraction     1 —   1/1.359 = .26 with 4% round—trip
transactions costs.
                                        27




                           6.   EMPIRICAL IMPLICATIONS


6.1   The Abnormal Returns of Small Firms

      Banz (1981) and subsequently Reinganum (1981) and others document the

small-firm anomaly: Classifying all NYSE-traded stocks into five portfolios

based on stock market value, and using monthly returns over the period 1931—

1978, Keim (1983b, Table 2) reports that the annual average excess return of

the smallest quintile firms exceeds the annual average excess return of the

largest quintile firms by 16%. We argue that tax trading, not only fails to

explain the anomaly, but also casts doubts on Stoll and Whaley's (1983)

explanation which is based on transactions costs.

      If tax trading is to explain the anomaly, we must identify some

characteristic of large firms which makes them better candidates for tax

trading than small firms. Variance of return is not the sought-after

characteristic. Small firms have higher variance of return than large

firms. Then the tax timing option is more valuable for small than for large

firms and the prediction is that small firms have lower before-tax mean return




      — Also
      20/
             there are at least three pieces of empirical evidence which cast
doubts on a tax trading and/or transactions costs explanation of the size
anomaly. First, Brown, Kleidori and Marsh (1983) find that, although ranking
on firm size appears to produce excess returns inconsistent with the CAPM, the
sign of the excess returns is unstable over time. Second, Keim (1983a) finds
that nearly half of the excess returns are due to just the month of January.
Third, Chen (1983) finds that APT factor risk premia partly explain the
anomaly; and Chan, Chen and Hsieh (1983) find that macroeconomic variables
suggested by factor analysis and the APT partly explain the anomaly.
                                            28




than large firms. This argument not only fails to explain, but exacerbates
               21/
the anomaly.

       Relying on the differential transactions costs between small and large

firms,   Stoll and Whaley (1983)    claim to explain the anomaly. They compare the

before tax returns,      net of transactions costs, of small and large firms   listed
on the NYSE.     They   find that the abnormal returns of small firms become
statistically insignificant, provided that the round-trip      transactions costs

are incurred at least annually, and interpret their findings as a resolution

of the anomaly. Whereas they explicitly incorporate transactions costs, they

omit from their calculations the perceived benefit which prompts investors to

trade despite the presence of these costs. If the rceived benefit from

trading in small firms is larger than the benefit from trading in large firms,

it may   compensate     the investor for the higher transactions costs associated

with   small firms, thereby leaving the anomaly unexplained.




       —
       21/
        The following (contrived) argument based on transactions costs may
explain the direction, but not the magnitude, of the anomaly. For small firms
transactions costs are large and investors follow the buy—and--hold policy.
For large firms taxable investors follow an active policy, taking advantage of
the distinction between the short term and the long term tax rates. With zero
transactions costs, after fifteen years of tax trading, the mean wealth ratio
under policy II and the buy—and-hold is 1.604 (see, Section 5.3 and Table
3). Effectively, the government subsidizes the investment in the stock of
large firms at the annual rate of (1/15)9n 1.604 = .032. No such subsidy
applies to the stock of small firms. Taxable investors bid up the stock
prices of large firms and, in equilibrium, the annual, after-tax mean return
of small firms exceeds the mean return of large firms by 3.2%. Assuming 20%
capital gains tax, the before—tax difference in the mean returns is
3.2/.8 = 4.0%. The benefit disappears once we recognize that (1) for large
firms the variance of stock return is below the average variance, (2) the
differential transactions costs are exaggerated, and (3) we must follow a
trading policy (e.g., policy III) to avoid the disadvantageous offsetting       of
short term losses and long term gains.
                                        29



     To illustrate the point, consider the subset of trades generated by
                                                                     22/
taxable investors following trading policy III (see, Section 5.4). We

capture the differential transactions costs between small and large firms by

assuming that the round—trip transactions costs rate is 4% for small firms and

zero for large firms. We also recognize the fact that the stock returns of

small firms are more variable than the stock returns of large firms. For high

variance stocks and 4% transactions costs, the mean wealth relative of policy

III and the buy-and-hold is 1.359 for medium variance stocks and zero

transactions costs, the mean wealth relative is very similar, being 1.383

(see, Table 3).   For   small firms, the high variance of stock return

compensates   for the high transactions costs. At least in this example, the
differential transactions costs fail to explain the small—firm anomaly.

6.2 The Abnormal January    Returns

     Wachtel (1942) and subsequently Dyl     (1973), Officer (1975), Rozeff and
Kinney (1976), and others document the abnormally high January stock

returns. Dyl (1973) and Branch (1977) find positive abnormal returns for

stocks that have experienced losses during the previous year. Roll (1983)

finds that most of the abnormal returns occur on the last trading day of

December and the first four trading days of the following January. Also




     22/
        We do not claim that capital gains tax is the most important reason
for trading. In fact it is difficult to explain the observed volume of stock
trading without explicitly recognizing that agents are asymmetrically
informed. Glosten and Milgrom (1982) present a model of heterogeneously
informed traders to explain the bid-asked spread and the trading volume. The
price path is such that the uninformed traders' rate of return equals the
discount rate, if they hold the stock for T periods. Our point remains
valid in the context of their model also: The informed traders' rate of
return exceeds the discount rate. Also, an uninformed trader has an incentive
to hold the stock for longer than T periods and earn a rate of return higher
than the discount rate. This is so because there is no endogenous reason in
the model to sell the stock after T periods.
                                        30



Givoly   and Ovadia (1983), Reinganum (1983) and Roll (1983) find that the

abnormal   returns of stocks, that have experienced losses during the previous
year, are substantially larger for small rather than large firms.
     Several of these studies discuss tax-loss selling as a possible explanation of
the anomaly. Dyl (1973, 1977) finds abnormally low (high) December trading volume
for stocks that have appreciated (depreciated) during the year but correctly argues
that the volume seasonality does not imply a price seasonality, if the demand for
stocks   is perfectly elastic. Gultekin and Gultekin (1982) and Korajczyk (1982)

study the seasonality in stock index returns in several countries, with widely

differing tax laws and tax year—end. With some reservations, Gultekin and Gultekin

(1982) interpret their findings as providing support for the tax—loss selling

hypothesis. Brown, Keim, Kleidon and Marsh (1983) find that Australian stocks have

positive abnormal returns in January and July and, to a lesser degree, in December

and August, although the tax year—end in Australia is June 30. Also Berges,

McConnell and Schlarbaum (1982) find that Canadian stock have positive abnormal

January returns even before 1972, although capital gains were not taxed in Canada

before 1972.

     Our contribution to this debate is to identify the critical assumptions in a

tax-related explanation of the seasonality in trading volume and stock prices. We

consider four scenarios with different assumptions on tax rates and transactions

costs.

     In the first scenario there is no distinction between the short term and long

term tax rates, and transactions costs are zero. The investor optimally realizes a

loss whenever it occurs, arid defers gains. Even though taxes are paid only at year—

end, the investor realizes a loss immediately, lest the stock price rises and the

opportunity of taking the loss vanishes. This scenario does not predict an increase

in tax—loss selling at year-end.
                                               31




        In the second scenario realized capital gains and losses are taxed at the lower

 long term rate; long term gains do not offset short term losses dollar for dollar,

even if incurred in the same tax year; and transactions costs are zero. The

investor optimally realizes short term losses immediately, lest they become long

term or vanish. This scenario does not predict an increase in tax-loss selling at

year—end. The investor has an incentive to realize long term gains on medium and

high    variance stocks and reinstate the short term status. He also has an incentive
to   defer the realization   of capital gains from the end of one year to the beginning
of the next one and    save the interest   on the tax. This senario predicts decreased
tax-gain    selling at the end of a year and increased tax-gain selling at the

beginning of a year. If the selling pressure were to depress the price, this

scenario would predict a negative abnormal January return for stocks that have had

gains during the previous year.

        In the third scenario realized capital gains and losses are taxed at the lower

long term rate; long term gains offset short term losses dollar for dollar in the

same year; and transactions costs are zero. The optimal policy is complex but we

identify the relevant factors: The investor wishes to realize short term losses

immediately, lest they become long term or vanish. However, if he has already

realized large long term gains earlier in the year, he wishes to defer the short

term losses to the following year, if possible. The investor wishes to realize long

term gains on medium and high variance stocks, preferably at the beginning of the

following    year. The important message is that none of these incentives predicts
increased tax—loss    selling   at year-end.
        In the fourth scenario we assume that there is no distinction between the
short   term and long term tax rates, but there are transactions costs. If

there is no price seasonality, the investor realizes his losses by following a
control—limit policy, as in Figure 4. At the beginning of the year he is
                                                32



 reluctant to incur the transactions costs and realize a small capital loss.

 Towards the end of the year his reluctance is overcome by his preference for a

 tax   rebate this year rather than next year. This policy predicts that tax-
loss selling gradually increases from January to December and suddenly ceases
in the first few days of January; realizing the loss at the end of December
dominates the realization of the same loss at the beginning of January.

        An objection to the above argument is that, without            the distinction
between the short term and long term tax rates, transactions costs may
dissipate    the benefit of tax trading and the optimal policy may be to refrain
from tax—loss selling. However, when we draw the distinction between the

short term and long term tax rates, our simulation demonstrates that

transactions costs do not significantly decrease the benefit from tax trading

(see, Table 3). The optimal trading policy becomes complex, but the essential

point remains that, with transactions costs, tax-loss selling gradually

increases from January to December and suddenly ceases in the first few days

of January.

        The selling pressure may or may not          affect the   stock price. The crucial

assumption is that, after selling the stock to realize a loss, investors do

not    repurchase the same stock   or   the stock sold by other investors to realize
a    loss. Then tax—loss selling depresses the price of stocks traded in

illiquid markets, such as the stocks       of    small firms.      With   the tax—loss
selling drying up at the beginning of January, the stocks experience positive
abnormal returns in January.
       This explanation is subject to the criticism that otherwise sophisticated
tax—loss sellers are irrational or, at least, ignorant of the stock price
seasonality. Rational tax—loss      sellers should repurchase different stock sold

by   other tax-loss sellers at about the same time. Effectively, pairs of tax-
                                              33



loss    sellers swap stocks      and this activity does not depress the price of
either one      of the stocks.

        If   a tax—loss seller has a special reason (e.g., inside information) to

repurchase the same stock, he can wait at least one month before the

repurchase,      and bypass the wash sale   provision. Being rational, he can modify

the    trading policy illustrated in Figure 4,     accelerate tax—loss sales from

December     to the previous October or November, and thereby repurchase the stock
in time to receive the abnormal January returns. Alternatively, the investor
can change his tax year to end in a month other than December.
       We conclude that tax—loss selling in the presence of transactions costs
predicts a seasonal pattern in trading volume. It predicts a seasonal pattern
in stock prices only if we further assume irrationality or ignorance on behalf
of investors.

                                   7. CONCLUDING REMARKS

       Tax trading does not explain the small—firm      anomaly, but predicts a

seasonal pattern in trading volume which maps into a seasonal pattern in stock

prices, the January anomaly, only if we assume irrationality or ignorance on

behalf of investors. These results in no way detract from the basic message

of our theoretical calculations and simulation: For those investors who can

draw   the distinction between the short term and long term tax rates, the
benefit of optimal tax trading on medium and high variance stocks outweighs
even   large transactions costs.
                                           34



                                         TABLE   1



    CRITICAL RATIO OF THE LONG TERM TO THE SHORT TERM TAX RATE BELOW WHICH
           THE OPTIMAL POLICY IS TO REALIZE LONG TERM CAPITAL GAINS:
                       THE ZERO TRANSACTIONS COSTS CASE



Expected Annual                 Standard Deviation of Annual Stock Return
Stock Return (p)
                    a=.10       a=.20        a=.40      a=.6O         a=.80      a=1.Oo

                       ANNUAL   RISKLESS RETURN R      = 1.05
      .05             .40          .62           .78           .85      .88        .90
                    (1.12)       (1.23)      (1•50)t    (133)t        (2•23)f    (2•72)t
      .10             .48         .64            .79           .85      .88        .90
                    (1.15)      (1.25)       (151)t     (184)t        (224)t     (273)t
                                                          -,
      .15             .58         .67            .79       .85          .88        .90
                    (1.20)      (1.28)       (153)t     (186)t        (226)t     (275)t
      .20             .64         .71          .80         .85          .88        .90
                    (1.25)      (1.33)       (1•56)t    (188)t        (228)t     (277)t
                       ANNUAL RISKLESS      RETURN R = 1 • 1 0

      .05             .09*         37*           .62       .72          .78        .81
                    (1.12)      (1.23)       (i50)t     (183)t        (2.23)t    (272)t
      .10             .19*        .40            .62       .72          .78        .81
                    (1.15)      (1.25)       (151)t     (184)t        (224)t     (273)t
      .15             .31*        .44            .63       .73          .78        .81
                    (1.20)      (1.28)       (1.53)t    (1•86)t       (226)t     (2•75)t
      .20             .40         .50          .64         .73          .78        .82
                    (1.25)      (1.33)       (1•56)t    (188)t        (228)t     (277)t

     In parentheses the parameter u of the binomial process generating
annual prices. The asterisk denotes stocks for which the optimal policy is to
defer the realization of a long term gain when the price equals u times the
basis and T/t = .40. The dagger denotes stocks for which the optimal policy
is to reali'e a long term gain, however large the gain may           be, where
 T /1 = .40.
  L
                                            35




                                         TABLE 2

       CRITICAL RATIO OF THE LONG TERM TO THE SHORT TERM TAX RATE BELOW
       WHICH THE OPTIMAL POLICY IS TO REALIZE LONG TERM CAPITAL GAINS:
           THE CASE WITH FOUR PERCENT ROUND-TRIP TRANSACTIONS COSTS




                                Standard Deviation of Annual Stock Return
Expected Annual
StockReturn(ij)     =.1O        a=.20        a=.40           a=.60     c=.80    a=1.00

                       ANNUAL RISKLESS RETURN R = 1.05

      .05           NEVER*        .12*             .55         .69       .76      .81
                    (1.12)      (1.23)           (1.50)      (1.83)    (2.23)   (2.72)

      .10           NEVER*        .18*             .56         .70       .76      .81
                    (1.15)      (1.25)           (1.51)      (i,.84)   (2.24)   (2.73)

      .15           NEVER*        .26*             .57         .70       .77      .81
                    (1.20)      (1.28)           (1.53)      (1.86)    (2.26)   (2.75)
                            *           *
      .20             .18         .36              .59         .71       .77      .81
                    (1.25)      (1.33)           (1.56)      (1.88)    (2.28)   (2.77)

                       ANNUAL RISKLESS RETURN R =             1.10
      .05          NEVER        NEVER*             .38*        .56       .66      .72
                    (1.12)      (1.23)           (1.50)      (1.83)    (2.23)   (2.72)
                         *           *                   *
      .10          NEVER        NEVER              .39         .57       .66      .72
                   (1.15)       (1.25)       (1.51)          (1.84)    (2.24)   (2.73)

      .15          NEVER*         .03*         .40             .57       .66      .72
                    (1.20)      (1.28)       (1.53)          (1.86)    (2.26)   (2.75)
      .20          NEVER*         .14*             .43         .58       .67      .72
                    (1.25)      (1.33)       (1.56)          (1.88)    (2.28)   (2.77)

     The short term tax rate is 50%. In parentheses             the parameter u of the
binomial process generating annual prices. The asterisk denotes stocks for
which the optimal policy is to defer the realization of a long term gain when
the price equals u times the basis and T/t = .40.
                                        36




                                      TABLE 3

                     WEALTH RELATIVES OF POLICIES I, II, III
                              AND THE BUY-AND-HOLD

                    HIGH VARIANCE        MEDIUM VARIANCE         LOW VARIANCE
                     (367 stocks)            (361   stocks)       (419   stocks)
                  2y = 0   2y = 4%a     2y = 0       2 =        21 = o     21 =

       POLICY I: REALIZE LOSSES IN EVERY DECEMBER AND DEFER GAINS.       WEALTH
                  RELATIVES OF POLICY I AND BUY-AND-HOLD.

Mean               1.120    1.084        1.058        1.028     1.039       1.000

25 percentile      1.002    1.000        1.000         .990     1.000       .982
50 percentile      1.043    1.016        1.007        1.000     1.019      1.000
75 percentile      1.168    1.110        1.059        1.022     1.060      1.008


       POLICY II: REALIZE GAINS AND LOSSES IN EVERY DECEMBER.    WEALTH RELATIVES
                   OF POLICY II AND BUY-AND-HOLD.

Mean               2.242    1.720        1.604        1.224     1.381      1.050

25 percentile      1.521    1.188        1.296         .995     1.245       .957
50 percentile      1.966    1.521        1.468        1.109     1.323      1.008
75 percentile      2.651    2.050        1.694        1.293     1.445      1.095


       POLICY III: REALIZE GAINS IN ALTERNATE DECEMBERS AND REALIZE LOSSES
                      IN EVERY DECEMBER. WEALTH RELATIVES OF POLICY III AND
                    BUY-AND-HOLD.

Mean               1.747    1.359        1.383        1.094     1.275      1.011
25 percentile      1.308    1.040        1.173         .964     1.176        .930
50   percentile    1.547    1.214        1.300       1.034      1.238        .982
75 percentile      1.922    1.501        1.444       1.162      1.324      1.064


     The marginal tax rate on ordinary income and on short term capital gains
and losses is 50%. The marginal tax rate on long term capital gains and
losses is 20%. The initial investment is made in December 1962 and the wealth
relatives are compared in December 1977.

       aThe round—trip transactions costs rate is 4%.
                                                                   FIGURE 1

                                 POLICY   I:  REALIZE LOSSES IN EVERY DECEMBER AND DEFER GAINS.
                                          WEALTH RELATIVES OF POLICY I AND BUY-AND-HOLD.

                                                          ZERO TRANSACTIONS COSTS



                                                                                                         'I.

                                                                                                         1$


                                                                                    .
                                                    4$.                                                  4$



                                               r3$
                                               ft


                                                                                                        12$




                                                    ':                                   .—    .—   .               .....   :.
           HIGh VARIANCE                                               MEDIUM VARIANCE                                                LOW VARIANCE

                                                                                                                                                       (2)




                                                     4% ROUND   TRIP TRANSACTIONS COSTS




                                                    :
•
    ,.--
    I..        1.1         1.1      1.3                                  1.1                  1.3               1.4              IS           1.1

                                                                                                               ..
            HIGh! VARIANCE                                            MEDIUM VARIANCE                                                 LOW   VARIANCE
                                                                                                                   FIGURE                 2


                                                                      POLICY II: REALIZE GAINS AND LOSSES IN EVERY DECEMBER.
                                                                          WEALTH RELATIVES OF POLICY   AND BUY-AND-HOLD.                      II
                                                                                           ZERO TRANSACTIONS COSTS




                                                                                                                                                                                                            pC
                                                                                                                                                                                                            a
                                                                                                                                                                                                            I.
                                                                                                                                                                                                            r.
                                                                                                                                                                                                            I.
                                                                               A   l•-                                                                                                                      A    Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                            C
                                                                                                                                                                                                            £


                                                                                   IA-                                                                                                                           IA



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        IgtflS_._....amI_                   ——
0.0     l.A     1.2        1.4            1.4                                                                                                                                                                                                   r.r—-.
                                                  i.e    ..     212                 0.0         1.1         l.A         1.4         l.A         l.a        U.S         2.2         2.4         2.0         2.5        I   .0        1.2        1.4         1.0         1.1         2.5         2.2         2.4

                                      HIGH VARIANCE                                                                           MEDIUM VARIANCE                                                                                                        LOW VARIANCE


                                                                                   4% ROUND TRIP TRANSACTIONS COSTS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          pI A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          C

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          C




  0.5     I.e         .2         .4         l.A    I..    2.5                             S.C         1.1         1.2         1.4         1.4                    2.1         1.2         2.4         2.0          2.0          AS         .5
                                                                                                                                                      II                                                                                             1.2         1.4         l.A         l.A         2.5         2.

                                      I   IGI!    VARI ANCE                                                                   MEDIUM VARIANCE                                                                                                        LOW VARIANCE
                                                                                                                                FIGURE 3

                                            POLICY    III:         REALT7.E GAINS IN ALTERNATE DECEMBERS AND REALIZE
                                                                                                                     LOSSES                                                                                             IN EVERY DECEMBER.
                                                                          WEALTH RELATIVES OF POLICY     AND BUY-AND-HOLD.                          III

                                                                                                          ZERO TRANSACTIONS COSTS




                                                                                                    4.-

                                                                                               P

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          L   30-
                                                                                               C
                                                                                               I.
                                                                                               o   to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0 20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10

        MUWt

0.l       1.0        1.2    1.4       l.1     1.1    2.0    2.?     2.4                                                                                                                                                       0                                          —
                                                                           2.    2.0    2.0         •.           I   .0         I.?                                                                                                 r
                                                                                                                                            1.4         l.a         .1        2..         2.2         2.4         2.0             S..   1.5   1.2     1.4    1.0   1.1   2.1   2.2

                            11kG!!      VARIANCE                                                                                         MEDIUM VARIANCE                                                                                            LOW     VARIANCE

                                                                                        4% ROUND TRIP TRANSACTIONSCOSTS




 'v.0          1.1    I.?     1.4      l.a     1.0    2.5
                                                            •.''f10
                                                             2.2     2.4   2.6    2.0    3.I               4.6            1.0         5.2         1.4         l.a        IS         2.0         2.2         2.4                    •'.•       5.2     1.4    l.a   ..    .•
                            iiic,ii    VARIANCE                                                                                         MEDIUM VARIANCE                                                                                             LOW VARIANCE
                                       40




                                   Figure 4



     THE OPTIMAL TRADING POLICY WITH ANNUAL TAXATION OF CAPITAL GAINS
          AND LOSSES, TRANSACTIONS COSTS AND WITHOUT DISTINCTION
                  BETWEEN SHORT AND LONG TERM TAX STATUS




Price to basis
ratio, P(t)/P




                                                   J




        1


                          Defer gains and losses


                 A
                           Realize losses
                                                         I
                 Jan. 1                                Jan. 1
                                            41




                                       APPENDIX 1


Proof that V(P, P, t) is convex in P

Lemmas 1 and 2 lead to the main result, Lemma 3. Lemmas 1, 2, and 3

correspond to Merton's (1973b) Theorems 4, 9,- and 10.


LEMMA 1: V(P, P, t) is convex in P.


Proof: Consider two portfolios. Portfolio A consists of a shares with
                                                 A
price P per share, purchased at price p per share t periods ago; and
1 — a      shares with price P per share, purchased at price P per share t

periods ago. We restrict a by 0 ( a '. 1.               The value of portfolio A is
                                                               -
aV(P, P, t) + (1 — a)V(P, P, t).

       Portfolio    B is simply one share with price P per share, purchased at
                        A

price aP + (1 — a)P         per share t periods ago.

       If portfolio B is optimally liquidated at time T when the stock price

is P ,       the   after—tax proceeds are   (1 —             + TL{aP + (1 —           a)P}. At
                                                     TL)PT
time    T, the after—tax proceeds in liquidating portfolio A are
       —       +       + (1 - a){(i - TL)PT +     and equal the after-tax
         TL)PT    TLP}                        TL}
proceeds    in liquidating portfolio B. Therefore the value                of portfolio A at
time    t is at least as large as the value of portfolio B, i.e.,


           aV(P, P, t) + (1 — a)V(P,   P, t)     V(P, aP +         (1 —   a)?,   t)



LEMMA 2:     Assume that the distribution of the stock return, Tt' at time

t is independent of the price P. Then, V(P, P, t) is homogeneous of

degree one in (P, P), i.e., v(hP, hP, t) = hV(P, P, t), h > 0.


The proof is left to the reader.
                                                      42



LEMMA 3:     Assume that the distribution of the stock return is price—
                                  A
independent.     Then v(P, P, t) is convex in P.


Proof: For any        z, 0 ( a ( 1,


                                      V(c&P + (1 —         a)P',   P, t)



                 aP +                         + (1 —        a)P'    (aP + (1- a)P') ,          t)
                        (1   —
                                 a)P'             +                   ciP + (1 — ct)P'
                 +
                     aP + (1 —      )P'   v(cLP       (1 —   a)P', (                      ) p,   t)


by the convexity of V in its second argument (see, Lemma                              1). We simplify
the   right-hand side using the        property       that V is homogeneous of degree one

in    its first and second arguments (see, Lemma 2) and obtain
                                  A
          V(aP + (1 —   a)P',     P, t)      aV(P, P, t) + (1 -            ci)V(P',    P, t)
                                                   43




                                              APPENDIX 2


Determination of the function V(P, P) when the short term and long term tax

rates are equal.

         We determine the functional form of V(P, P) in the case P                     P by
comparing two      positions    in the same stock       but   with different bases. Consider

two portfolios with the following composition:


First portfolio
                                      A

   (1)      V(uP, P) —    V(u1P, P) shares with basis P, P                 P.
                                                                                                   A

 (ii)       A riskless, one-period bond with price R1[V(uP, P) - V(u1P, P)]V(uP, P).

Second portfolio

   (i)      V(uP, P) —    V(u1P, P) shares with basis P, P . P.
 (ii)       A riskiess, one—period bond with price R1[V(uP, P) — V(u1P, P)]V(uP, P).


One period later, the stock price is either uP or u'1P. If the stock price

is uP,      the   first portfolio's value is


             [V(uP, P) —     V(u1P,       P)]V(uP, P) + [V(uP, P) —       V(u1P,   P)]V(uP,    )




and equals the second portfolio's value. If the stock price is u1P, the

first portfolio's value is


             [V(uP, P) —     V(u1P, P))V(u1P, P) + [V(uP, P) — V(u1P,               P)]V(uP, P)


and again equals the second portfolio's value. Therefore, the investor is

indifferent between the two portfolios at the beginning of the period and we

obtain


   [V(uP, P) -    V(u1P, P)]v(P, P) ÷ R1[V(uP, P) - V(u1P,                 ;)]V(uP, P)


    = [V(uP, P) -      V(u1P,     )   ]V(P, P) + R1 [V(uP, P) - V(u1P,          P) ]V(uP, P)
                                                     44




Rearranging, we obtain
                         A                 A               A                     A
               V(P, P) —     RV(uP,        P)   = V(P, P) —
                                                            R        V(uP, P) -= — R -1 k
(2.1)
               V(uP, P) — V(u         P             V(uP, P) —      V(u1P,       )


where k is a constant to be determined. Since the left-hand side is
                     A

independent of P and the right—hand side is independent of P, k is

independent of P. P. Since V(P, P) is homogeneous of degree one in (P,

P),      it follows that V(P, 0) is homogeneous of degree one in P. Setting P

= 0     in (2.1) we obtain


(2.2)                                           - u-R
                                                 u-u
Equations (6) and (2.2) imply 0 < k < 1.

        We rewrite equation (2.1) as


(2.3)         V(P, 1') =     R1((1    -   k)V(uP,      )       +kV(u1P,   P)],         P ' P



We interpret     1   —   k, k as the pseudoprobabilities of the                      two states   which

occur    in the binomial process, as in Cox, Ross and Rubinstein (1979).

Equation (2.3) has the following interpretation: V(P, P) is the expected

value of positions (uP, P) and (u1P, P) discounted by R, where the

expectation is with respect to the pseudoprobabilities 1 - k                              and k        The

actual probabilities 1 -         q, q do not enter equation (2.3). The
corresponding result in the option pricing theory of Black and Scholes (1973)

is    that the option price is independent of the expected rate of return of the
underlying security.
    We eliminate k from              equations (2.2)            and (2.3) and obtain the          difference

equation    in P
(2.4) V(P, P) = Rl[(R
                      I
                                U
                                          ) V(uP,          +   (ufl V(uP, P)]              ,       p
                                               45




with general solution


(2.5)                  v(P, P) = AP + BPm       ;lm              p u1P

where


(2.6)                  m    [Ln(u — R) — £n(UR —          1)]/Znu      < 0


        It remains to determine the constants A and B. Using equation (7),

continuity of the function V at P              P requires

                                           A    A     A
(2.7)                                    v(P, P) = P


and continuity at P = u     P requires

                                                                   a
                               1 A   A
                                                          isP
(2.8)                      V(u P, P) = (1 —         t)u         + TP


The boundary conditions (2.7) and (2.8) uniquely determine the constants A and

B and we obtain equation (8).
                                            46



                                       REFERENCES

Banz, R. W., 1981, "The Relationship Between Return and Market Value of Common

      Stocks," Journal of Financial Economics 9, March, 3-18.

Beebower, G. L. and R. J. Surz, 1980, "Analysis of Equity Trading Execution

      Costs," Proceedings of the Seminar on the Analysis of Security Prices,

      University of Chicago, November, 149—163.

Berges, A., 3. J. McConnell and G. G. Schiarbaum, 1982, "An Investigation of

      the Turn—of-the—Year Effect, the Small Firm Effect and the Tax—Loss-

      Selling—Pressure Hypothesis in Canadian Stock Returns," manuscript,

      July.

Black, F. and M. S. Scholes, 1973, "The Pricing of Options and Corporate

      Liabilities," Journal of Political Economy 81, May/June, 637—659.

Branch, B., 1977, "A Tax Loss Trading Rule," Journal of Business 50, April,

      198—207.

Breeden, D. T., 1979, "An Intertermporal Asset Pricing Model with Stochastic

      Consumption and Investment Opportunities," Journal of Financial

      Economics    7, September, 265—296.
Brennan, M. 3.,    1973,   "Taxes, Market Valuation and Corporate Financial
      Policy," National Tax Journal 23, 417—427.
Brown, P., A. W. Kleidon and T. A. Marsh, 1983, "New Evidence on the Nature of
      Size    Related Anomalies in Stock Prices," Journal of Financial Economics

      (forthcoming).

Brown, P., D. B. Keim, A. W. Kleidon and T. A. Marsh, 1983, "Stock Return

      Seasonalities and the 'Tax—Loss Selling' Hypothesis: Analysis of the

      Arguments and Australian Evidence," Journal of Financial. Economics

      (forthcoming).
                                       47



Chan, C., N. Chen and D. Hsieh, 1983, "An Exploratory Investigation of the

      Firm Size Effect," Center for Research in Security Prices, Graduate

      School of Business, University of Chicago, W.P. No. 99, June.

Chen, N., 1983, "Some Empirical Tests of the Theory of Arbitrage Pricing,"

      Journal of Finance (forthcoming).

Constantinides, G. M., 1980, "Short Term versus Long Term Capital Gains and

      Losses," manuscript, Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago,

      November.

Constantinides, G. H., 1983, "Capital Market Equilibrium with Personal Tax,"

      Econometrica 51, May, 611-636.

Constantinides, G. M. and J. E. Ingersoll, Jr., 1983, "Optimal Bond Trading

      with Personal Taxes: Implications for Bond Prices and Estimated Tax

      Brackets and Yield Curves," Center for Research in Security Prices,

      Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago, W. P. No. 70, May.

Constantinides, G. M. and M. S. Scholes, 1980, "Optimal Liquidation of Assets

      in the Presence of Personal Taxes: Implications for Asset Pricing,"

      Journal of Finance, May, 439—449.

Cox, J. C., S. A. Ross and M. Rubinstein, 1979, "Option Pricing: •A Simplified

      Approach," Journal of Financial Economics 7, September, 229—263.

Dyl, E. A., 1973, "The Effect of Capital Gains Taxation on the Stock Market,"

      unpublished doctoral dissertation, Graduate School of Business, Stanford

      University, August.

Dyl, E. A., 1977, "Capital Gains Taxation and Year—End Stock Market Behavior,"

      Journal of Finance 32, March, 165—175.

Givoly, D. and A. Ovadia, 1983, "Year-End Tax-Induced Sales and Stock Market

      Seasoriality," Journal of Finance 38, March, 171—185.
                                           48



Glosten, L. R. and P. R. Milgrom, 1982, "Bid, Ask and Transaction Prices in a

      Specialist Market with Heterogeneously Informed Traders," manuscript,

      Northwestern University, October.

Gultekin, M. N. and N. B. Gultekin, 1982, "Stock Market Seasonality and End of

      the Tax Year Effect," manuscript, University of Pennsylvania, March.

Holt, C. C. and 3. P. Shelton, 1962, "The Lock-in Effect of the Capital Gains

      Tax," National Tax Journal 15, December, 337—351.

Keim, D. B., 1983a, "Size-Related Anomalies and Stock Return Seasonality:

      Further Empirical Evidence," Journal of Financial Economics

      (forthcoming).

Keim, D. B., 1983b, "The   Interrelation   between Dividend Yields, Equity Values

      and Stock Returns: Implications of Abnormal January Returns,"

      unpublished doctoral dissertation, Graduate School of Business,

      University of Chicago.

Korajczyk, R., 1982, "Seasonality in Stock Returns: Some International

      Evidence," manuscript, Graduate School of Business, University of

      Chicago, April.

Merton, R. C., 1973a, "An Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Model,"

      Econometrica 41, September, 867—887.

Merton, R. C., 1973b, "Theory of Rational Option Pricing," The Bell Journal of

      Economics and Management Science 4, Spring, 141—183.

Reinganum, M. R., 1981, "Misspecification of Capital Asset Pricing: Empirical

      Anomalies Based on Earnings Yields and Market Values," Journal of

      Financial   Economics, 9, March, 19—46.
Reinganum, M. R., 1983, "The Anomalous Stock Market Behavior of Small Firms     in
      January:    Empirical Tests for Year—End Tax Effects," Journal   of

      Financial Economics (forthcoming).
                                        49



Roll,   R., 1983, "The Turn—of—the—Year Effect and the Return Premia of Small
        Firms," The Journal of Portfolio Management, 18—28.
Rozeff,   M. S. and W, R. Kinney, Jr., 1976, "Capital Market Seasonality: The

        Case of Stock Returns," Journal of Financial Economics 3, October, 379—

        402.

Smidt, S., 1982, "Capital Gains Taxes and the Seasonal Behavior of Stock

        Prices and Trading Volumes," manuscript, Cornell University, October.

Stiglitz, J. E., 1983, uSome Aspects of Taxation of Capital Gains," National

        Bureau of Economic Reseaih, W.P. No. 1094, March.

Stoll, H, R. and R. E. Whaley, 1983, "Transaction Costs and the Small Firm

        Effect," Journal of Financial Economics (forthcoming).

Varian, H. R., 1981, "Optimal Wash Sales," manuscript, University of Michigan,

        September.

Wachtel, S. B., 1942, 'Cer1j Observations on Seasonal Movements in Stock

        Prices," Journal of Business 15, 184—193.

Williams, J., 1981, "Trading Depreciable Assets," manuscript, Graduate School

        of Business, New York University, October.
