NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTEREST RATES, EXCHANGE RATES
AND INTERNATIONAL ADJUSTMENT
Michael P. Dooley
David Folkerts-Landau
Peter M. Garber
Working Paper 11771
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11771
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2005

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2005 by Michael P. Dooley, David Folkerts-Landau, and Peter M. Garber. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Interest Rates, Exchange Rates and International Adjustment
Michael P. Dooley, David Folkerts-Landau, and Peter M. Garber
NBER Working Paper No. 11771
November 2005
JEL No. F02, F32, F33
ABSTRACT
In this paper we examine the behavior of interest rates and exchange rates following a variety of
shocks to the international monetary system. Our analysis suggests that real interest rates in the US
and Europe will remain low relative to historical experience for an extended period but converge
slowly toward normal levels. During this adjustment interval, the US absorbs a disproportionate
share of world savings. After a substantial initial appreciation of floating currencies relative to the
dollar, the dollar and other floating currencies remain constant relative to each other. An
improvement in the investment climate in Europe during the adjustment period would generate an
immediate depreciation of the euro relative to the dollar. In real terms, the dollar and the floating
currencies will eventually have to depreciate relative to the managed currencies. But most of the
adjustment in the US trade account will come as US absorption responds to increases in real interest
rates.
Michael P. Dooley
Department of Economics
Engineering II
University of California, Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER
mpd@ucsc.edu
David Folkerts-Landau
1331 21 Street, NW
Washington, DC 20036
Peter M. Garber
Deutsche Bank
60 Wall Street
New York, NY 10005
and NBER
vic2eroy@aol.com

Introduction
In this paper we set out in greater detail how we think about the emergence of
China and Asia as major players in world capital and foreign exchange markets.
Our approach, which has come to be known as Bretton Woods II, provides a
coherent explanation for the current structure of interest rates, exchange rates
and current account balances. The framework developed below also provides a
guide to the dynamics of the system following a variety of changes in the
economic environment.1
Conventional analyses are based on the assertion that the BW II system cannot
hold together for much longer. This may or may not turn out to be correct but it
does not offer any guidance if the system does survive for an extended time
period, as we believe it will.
For simplicity, our framework divides the world into three regions, emerging Asia,
the US, and Euroland.2 Euroland includes all countries outside the US with open
capital markets and market-determined exchange rates. We will use the euro to
stand for the currencies of these countries since it is the dominant currency
among them. Asia includes all countries with relatively closed capital markets
and managed exchange rates and we use the renminbi to stand in for their
currencies.
Some observers have questioned the usefulness of aggregating the managed
rate countries into a single zone because of the differing incentives and
constraints facing these countries. We agree, for example, that current account
surpluses and reserve gains for China, oil-exporting countries and Japan are
products of quite different developments and incentives and are likely to have
different degrees of persistence over time (see Dooley, Folkerts-Landau and
Garber, 2005 pp.158-160). Our forecast is that individual countries will join and
exit the bloc of countries that manage their dollar exchange rates, and their
management will find different degrees of success, but the bloc will nevertheless
remain a lasting and economically important feature of the international monetary
system.3

1

See Dooley, Folkerts-Landau and Garber, 2003, 2004a, 2004b, 2004c.
Because there is no necessity of geographic contiguity, we have referred to these regions in other essays from the
functional viewpoint as the trade account region, the center country, and the capital account region.
2

3

We have consistently argued that the system, not its current manifestation, would last for the foreseeable future, “Fixed
exchange rates and controlled financial markets work for twenty years and countries that follow this development strategy
become an important periphery. These development policies are then overtaken by open financial markets and this, in
turn, requires floating exchange rates. The Bretton Woods system does not evolve, it just occasionally reloads a
periphery.” (Dooley, Folkerts-Landau and Garber, 2003, p 3).

The analysis will lean on four assumptions. We believe these assumptions are
realistic, and they dramatically simplify the dynamics of a three-region analysis:
1. Asian financial markets are assumed to be poorly integrated with the other two
regions because of capital controls and the threat of sovereign interference with
capital flows. This allows Asia to manage the dollar-renminbi exchange rate so
that the renminbi appreciates in real terms slowly over an adjustment period of
many years.
2. The US and Euroland financial markets, in contrast, are assumed to be very
well integrated and their respective assets very close substitutes, an assumption
consistent with a great deal of empirical work. The US and Euroland do not
manage the euro-dollar exchange rate.
3. The dominant change in the economic environment that is driving the main
features of the world economy is the rapid growth of savings rates and the level
of savings in Asia and their exportation to the rest of the world.
4. The US and Euroland differ in their capacities to utilize Asian savings, with the
US having a much greater absorptive capacity.
Some of the significant departures of our analysis from the conventional
approach include the following:
1a. Conventional analysis considers Asian financial markets sufficiently
integrated with international markets so that Asian governments will not be able
to manage real exchange rates at reasonable costs. Moreover, they will not want
to distort real exchange rates for much longer to encourage export-led growth.
2a. Conventional analysis assumes that US and Euroland financial markets are
not well integrated. Diversification of Asian reserves is thought to have an
important effect on the dollar-euro exchange rate. This assumption seems to us
inconsistent with substantial evidence that intervention and reserve management
by US and Euroland authorities have not had a large or lasting effect on industrial
country exchange rates.
3a. The conventional analysis usually identifies a fall in the US household
savings rate or a rise in the government fiscal deficit rate as the driving force
behind the US current account deficit.
4a. Interest rate movements have not been consistent with this assumption—
falling instead of rising. To circumvent this contradiction, it is conventionally
asserted that interest rates and asset prices are driven by incorrect expectations,
a misunderstanding of the dangerous nature of the system, or bubbles.

The interesting results of our analysis following a sudden, long-term rise in
exports of Asian savings include:
•
•
•
•
•

•
•

•
•

•

There is a substantial immediate appreciation of the euro against the
dollar.
Real interest rates in the US and Euroland remain low relative to historical
experience but converge slowly toward normal rates as Asian markets
become integrated with international markets.
The dollar and the euro gradually depreciate relative to the renminbi but,
after the initial euro appreciation vs. the dollar, remain constant relative to
each other.
More rapid expected growth in Europe would depreciate the euro relative
to the dollar and renminbi and raise interest rates in the US and Europe.
More rapid expected growth in the US would tend to depreciate the dollar
relative to the euro and renminbi. Because the dollar–renminbi is
managed, the dollar would not fall immediately but would begin to
depreciate more rapidly. The euro would appreciate immediately and then
match the dollar’s more rapid rate of depreciation against the renminbi.
Shifts in currency composition of Asian reserves from dollars to euros
would have little or no lasting effect on dollar-euro exchange rates.
Effective protection in the US and Euroland or a fall in the savings rate in
Asia would generate a stronger dollar in the long run. The immediate
effect would be less rapid dollar depreciation against the renminbi. The
euro could go either way against the dollar.
A decision by Asian governments to manage their exchange rates relative
to a dollar/euro basket would reduce the volatility of the dollar-euro
exchange rate but not its current or long term level.
In real terms, the dollar will eventually have to depreciate relative to the
renminbi. But most of the adjustment in the US trade account will come
as US absorption responds to increases in real interest rates. Slow
adjustment in the composition of US output toward traded goods over an
extended time period will not require unprecedented dollar depreciation.
High oil prices and high consumption by oil exporters would generate a
slower rate of dollar depreciation against the renminbi and higher interest
rates in the US and Euroland. The dollar-euro rate could go either way.

Analysis
In our framework, the fundamental shock to the system is a change in the supply
of savings from Asia and a suspension of the usual home bias in allocating these
savings across world markets. It may not seem all that important to decide
whether it was because US savings fell or Asian savings increased to drive the

pattern of current accounts we now see. But it is, in fact, crucial for
understanding the system and the direction it will take.
The first obvious departure from the conventional analysis is the observation that
Asian real exchange rates are not market-determined prices but are heavily and
successfully managed by Asian governments. As noted above, the conventional
analysis assumes this troublesome fact will soon go away. We argue that this
policy behavior will eventually go away but is a central feature of Asian
development policies and will not dissipate for a long time. It follows that if the
rest of the world is to adjust now to a savings shock emanating from Asia the
primary adjustment mechanism will not be changes in Asian real exchange rates.
To manage real exchange rates, Asian governments must intervene in foreign
exchange markets. That part of the intervention that is sterilized is, in fact,
intervention in credit markets. Asian finance ministries or central banks sell
domestic securities reducing the supply of loanable funds to domestic borrowers
and buy foreign securities, thereby increasing the supply of loanable funds in the
US and Euroland. The resulting shift in interest differential is possible because of
effective capital controls. That is, Asian governments can manage exchange
rates and interest rates because their domestic assets are made imperfect
substitutes for foreign assets in private portfolios by policy, if not by private
preference.
Because Asian exchange rates are managed, adjustment must proceed through
current account balances and real interest rates. To understand current
accounts we have to understand savings and investment. The question is: how
are savings and investment changed in the US, Euroland and elsewhere as
Asian savings are offered to the rest of the world? In particular, can we
understand why real interest rates might fall in both the US and Euroland while
current account balances adjust by very different amounts? In our view, this is a
very easy case to understand.

Figure 1
Current Account and Interest Rates
US
r

Euroland
S

S’

r

Asia
S

S’

r

S’

r1
r0

r0

r1

r1

r0
I

I
0
Surplus

Deficit

CA

S

I
0
Surplus

Deficit

CA

0
Surplus

Deficit

CA

We can illustrate our approach first with a set of figures focusing on interest rates
and current accounts for Asia, the US, and Euroland and then with another set
focusing on net foreign debt positions and exchange rates.
Figure 1 shows real interest rates for the US, Euroland, and Asia on the vertical
axes. The horizontal axes are the current accounts for these three regions. The
upward sloping curves labeled S are national savings. The curves labeled S’ are
national savings augmented by imports or exports of savings. The downward
sloping curves labeled I are investment. For convenience, we start with balanced
current accounts at a common interest rate, but any starting point for the
separate economies will do as long as real rates are the same in the US and
Euroland.
A policy to divert Asian savings to the US and Euroland reduces the supply of
savings available in Asia and shifts the Asian supply curve to the left. A current
account surplus is generated and interest rates in Asia rise.
In the US and Euroland, savings supply curves shift to the right as Asian savings
push in. The real interest rate in the US and Euroland falls as we move down the
investment demand curves. The demand curves are downward sloping because
investment increases relative to domestic savings as interest rates fall. Moreover,
consumption rises with a fall in interest rates so domestic savings fall as well.
The rise in consumption and investment is matched by an inflow of foreign
savings and the current account deficit increases. The increase in Asia’s current
account surplus is matched by the sum of the increases in the current account
deficits of the US and Euroland.
In the US, the increase in savings demanded is large because investment and
savings are quite sensitive to the rate of interest.4 Euroland sees the same
4

This means that there are many viable projects or confident consumers ready to go with a small improvement in
financing costs relative to Euroland.

qualitative changes. But investment and the current account deficit increase only
slightly because there are few profitable investment opportunities and
consumption is not very responsive. The fundamental factor driving the different
responses of the US and Euroland current account deficits is the different
opportunities to efficiently utilize foreign savings as the interest rate falls in both
regions.
An important aspect of the adjustment process is the equalization of real rates of
return on capital invested in the US and Euroland through private arbitrage.
When we turn to exchange rate determination below, we will use the result that
real interest rates are equalized by flows of savings. It is clear, however, that
expected rates of return on capital in the US and Euroland could be equalized by
expected real exchange rate changes in addition to real interest rates.
This apparent indeterminacy between real interest rates and expected changes
in real exchange rates during the adjustment period is resolved at the end of the
period. When the new equilibrium is established there is no reason to predict
that the real exchange rate between the euro and the dollar would continue to
change over time. Since the capital stocks must have the same expected rate of
return looking forward at the end of the adjustment period, it follows that real
interest rates must be the same at that time. Arbitrage across time will ensure
that any capital put in place in the US and Euroland during the adjustment period
that will remain in place in a new steady state must have the same rate of return.
The optimal policy over time for Asian governments is to allow gradual real
exchange rate appreciation. This reduces over time their intervention in credit
markets and their exports of savings. By the end of the adjustment period real
interest rates will have equalized across the three regions.
We now turn to the foreign exchange markets.
understanding the three cross exchange rates.

There are three keys to

First, for some years, Asian governments can and will manage the real dollar
value of their currencies. They can do so because capital controls make Asian
domestic assets imperfect substitutes for US and Euroland assets in private
portfolios. Their ability to manage their real exchange rate will erode over time as
capital controls become less effective and their domestic asset markets are
integrated with international capital markets. Their desire to maintain the system
will also erode as their surplus labor is absorbed. But they will manage rates as
long as they can because undervaluation is an important part of their
development strategy.
Second, in the long run, say ten years more or less, the real value of the three
currencies will have to adjust to changes in the international investment positions
of the three regions generated during the adjustment period. Asia’s net asset

position will improve while the US and Euroland positions will deteriorate by
relatively large and small amounts, respectively.
The relationship between the long run exchange rate and the net foreign debt
position of each region is not controversial. As net foreign debt increases, larger
trade balance surpluses are needed to service net debt (balance the current
account). So a fall in net foreign assets is associated with a depreciation of the
real exchange rate. The implication is that the dollar and the euro must
depreciate against the renminbi, but the dollar must depreciate by more.
Therefore, the dollar must depreciate against the euro.5
Third, exchange rates today would normally reflect these long run expectations to
some degree. But intervention by Asian governments is sufficient to manage
strictly the dollar-renminbi exchange rate. Intervention will not keep the renminbi
undervalued forever, but it can extend the adjustment period. As we have
argued elsewhere, the optimal path (from China’s perspective) for Asian real
exchange rates is a gradual appreciation toward their new long run values.
In contrast, the euro cross-rates both today and along the adjustment path are
determined by private investors. The relevant context for these portfolio choices
is that dollar and euro assets are perfect substitutes.6 The key implication is that
once the system comes to be understood the euro and the dollar must depreciate
at the same rate over time relative to the renminbi. Recall that real interest rates
on capital invested in the US and Euroland are equalized by net savings flows. It
follows that investors must expect the euro-dollar exchange rate to remain
unchanged. Put another way both currencies must depreciate, and be expected
to depreciate, at the same rate against the renminbi.
The result of a shift in Asian savings exports is then an immediate euro
appreciation against the dollar and the renminbi followed by a constant
dollar/euro rate. This means that there will be immediate, maximal political
pressure for relief in a Euroland unable to absorb the shock easily and
continuous, though declining, pressure thereafter.
These results are illustrated in Figure 2. Starting from an initial value of the
renminbi-dollar rate in the top panel and a renminbi-euro rate in the bottom
panel, we can follow the effects of an increase in Asian savings and intervention.
The increase in savings and intervention raises interest rates in Asia and lowers

5

In our view, the amount of the eventual dollar depreciation is often overestimated. Recall that the primary factor driving
the increase in the US trade and current account deficit is the relatively strong response of US investment and
consumption to a decline in interest rates. Over the adjustment period interest rates will rise, thereby causing an equally
strong reverse effect; and this will help reduce the US deficit. The exchange rate adjustment therefore must be consistent
with a slow shift in US output toward traded goods.
6

See Henderson and Leahy (2005) for a three country analysis of intervention where imperfect asset substitution is
assumed for all three regions.

Figure 2
Exchange Rates
RMB/ $

A

B

0

T

RMB/ €

E
C
D

0

T

interest rates in the US and Euroland. Asia generates a current account surplus
matched by deficits in the US and Euroland. This continues until Asian savings
and intervention return to normal levels. In Figure 2, this interval is from 0 - T.
The eventual fall in the dollar against the renminbi from A to B is required to
generate the trade surplus needed to service the higher level of US debt at time
T and after.

Without intervention, we would expect an immediate depreciation of the dollar;
but this can and will be delayed by intervention.7 Along the adjustment path AB,
the dollar is supported by a flow of intervention. Private investors know the dollar
will depreciate but nevertheless are willing to hold the stock of dollars, reduced
by Asian purchases of US assets.8 US debt to foreigners is growing more rapidly
than it would have if the fall in interest rates had been partially offset by a marketdetermined depreciation of the dollar.
The renminbi-euro rate starts at C and must eventually move to D, a much
smaller depreciation. Like the US, Euroland will accumulate debt (or reduce net
assets below their previous path) during the adjustment period. But in this case
Asian governments are not intervening to manage the exchange rate either at
point C or along the adjustment path. The question is then: where will the market
set euro exchange rates?
We can make our analysis more realistic and much more transparent by
assuming that US and Euroland assets are close substitutes in private portfolios.
This is an important departure from the usual portfolio balance model because it
implies that the currency composition of Asian intervention is of secondary
importance. If euro and dollar assets are close substitutes in private portfolios,
Asian governments could intervene in either dollars or euros to stabilize the
dollar value of their currencies. Moreover, diversification of Asian reserves would
have little or no lasting effect on the dollar-euro exchange rates, contrary to a key
conclusion of the conventional view.9 The irrelevance of Asian reserve
diversification is consistent with a very large body of empirical evidence that
sterilized intervention has had no lasting effect on exchange rates among
industrial countries.10
The practical importance of this assumption is that the two adjustment paths in
Figure 2 must have the same slope. If they did not, more rapid dollar
depreciation against the renminbi, relative to euro depreciation against the
renminbi, implies expected depreciation of the dollar against the euro. Since
interest rates in the US and Euroland are the same, arbitrage would be profitable.
Private investors would immediately bid for euros against dollars and would do
so until the euro jumps to E. From this initial appreciation the euro now
depreciates against the renminbi at the same rate as the dollar. Note that along
7

We could replace time with net debt on the horizontal axis and have a diagram similar to that presented in Blanchard,
Giavazzi and Sa (2005). The case we present here is similar to their discussion of intervention following a shift in
preferences away from US goods. The interested reader is encouraged to work through their analysis of an imperfect
substitutes model. Their analysis assumes that interest rates are unchanged and changes in absorption are assumed to
be related to fiscal policies
8
The portfolio balance equilibrium is based on the idea that residents of all countries prefer home assets but can be
moved away from their preferred portfolio by differences in expected yields, that is, by interest differentials adjusted for
expected changes in exchange rates.
9
See Eichengreen (2005).
10
We have also explored the effects of diversification under the assumption of imperfect substitution between dollar and
euro assets. Our conclusion was that it is not in the interests of Asian governments to diversify and recent data from the
IMF shows that they have not done so through the end of last year. See Dooley, Folkerts-Landau and Garber, 2004a.
The argument presented here suggests that Asian governments can diversify if they choose to do so but that this would
have no lasting effect on dollar exchange rates.

this adjustment path the euro remains “overvalued” relative to the dollar and the
renminbi throughout the adjustment interval, although the degree of
overvaluation shrinks over time.
We can now iterate through the current account analysis. The euro has
appreciated against the renminbi and the dollar, so Euroland’s current account
deficit, already increased by the fall in interest rates, tends to widen. The dollar
is unchanged against the renminbi and has depreciated against the euro so the
already increased US current account deficit is reduced. The Asian surplus is
increased by the euro’s appreciation. These second round effects on the current
account positions of the three regions would not alter our basic story assuming
the reactions of absorption to interest rates is very different in the US and
Euroland.
Where Are We Now?
The discussion above suggests that the dollar should have depreciated against
the euro when market participants realized that US imports of savings from Asia
would generate a substantial increase in US net investment income payments.
But there has been no obvious correspondence between the US current account
deficit or the increase in net US international debt and the value of the dollar.
The current account deteriorated sharply and net debt began to grow at a
historically unprecedented rate in 1996 but the dollar was strong until 2002.
One explanation is found in Chart 1, which shows US net investment income
payments. As of mid 2004 the US still earned more on its stock of gross financial
assets than it paid on its larger stock of gross international debt. Indeed, in the
eight most recent quarters, Q2/2003-Q1/2005, US net earnings totaled $86 billion
compared to $47 billion in the previous eight quarters.
The lesson is clear: it is not enough to forecast changes in the US net debt
position but also stocks of gross international assets and liabilities and rates of
return on these stocks. Our framework suggests that over time the growth in net
US debt will generate net investment payments in part because we expect net
debt to grow and US interest rates to rise over the adjustment period. But we
also expect very substantial capital gains on US owned foreign direct investment
and this tends to limit the growth in the market value of US net debt and reduces
net investment income payments. Expectations of the long run value of net
investment income payments require a difficult evaluation of the evolution of net
and gross investment positions and rates of return.11
Moreover, it would not be surprising if market participants were uncertain about
the durability of US deficits. The conventional story still insists that a speculative

11

See Gourinchas and Rey, (August 2005) for a detailed breakdown of the denomination of US gross foreign assets
and liabilities.

attack on Asian currencies that will force a revaluation is long past due. If it had
occurred, the path for US debt would have already started to reverse
Perhaps the best way to link the analysis with the experience of the past ten
years is to assume that, as the US deficit has moved to a historically high level
and stayed there for an extended period, market participants have placed
increased weight on the probability that the very gradual appreciation of Asian
currencies requires the substantial near-term rise of the euro against the dollar
described above. It would not be surprising if this learning process has some
way to go. If so, there may be periodic upward pressure on the euro. As the
learning curve flattens, the euro should stabilize against the dollar.
Chart 1

Interest and Exchange Rates during Adjustment
Of course, changes in many conditions will shift the dollar-euro exchange rates
along the adjustment path set out in the previous section. The framework
developed above is useful to evaluate changes in the economic environment
during the adjustment process, and the peculiar nature of the global system
produces some remarkable and unanticipated results.
1. A Stronger Euroland Outlook
Suppose, for example, that at time t1 an improved outlook for profits in Euroland
generates a positive shift in the demand for investment in Euroland. Figure 1

suggests that Asian savings will be shifted from the US to Euroland for the
balance of the adjustment period and that interest rates in both regions will rise.
The effects on exchange rates are illustrated in Figure 3. With more Asian
savings going to Euroland and less to the US, at the end of the adjustment
period, at T, the euro will be weaker and the dollar stronger than would have
been the case. If Asian intervention at t1 keeps the dollar at F in Figure 3, the
euro depreciates sharply at t1 for two reasons. First, it must now reach level J at
T and it must now depreciate more slowly to match the dollars reduced rate of
depreciation.
2. A Weaker Euroland Outlook
A weaker outlook for Euroland investment would have symmetric effects. In this
case there would be deterioration in the final expected debt position of the US
and an improvement in the final debt position of Euroland. This would require a
more rapid rate of dollar depreciation against the renminbi and another move up
for the euro. Interest rates in both regions would fall.
3. A Stronger US Outlook
Changes in US growth and investment would have similar effects. As US growth
increases, so does the expected stock of US debt. The greater long run
depreciation would not affect the current level of the renminbi-dollar but would
require a more rapid appreciation of the renminbi against the dollar for the
balance of the adjustment period.
The euro would appreciate against the renminbi and the dollar for two reasons.
First, its long run level would jump up and it would have to appreciate
immediately in order to match the dollar’s higher expected depreciation rate
against the renminbi.
This is illustrated in Figure 4. The expected renminbi-dollar at T shifts down from
G to B and the expected renminbi-euro moves up from D to K. The euro
immediately jumps from H to I as again the change in the euro is amplified by
arbitrage between dollar and euro assets. Interest rates in both regions would
rise.
4. Katrina
A larger fiscal deficit and demand for capital following destruction of US capital
increases US demand for foreign savings and will lead to an increased US
indebtedness at T. Therefore, scenario 3 analysis applies. The euro appreciates
against the dollar.

5. Protectionism Surges; Oil Exporters Start Consuming Asia’s Surplus Savings
It turns out that all of these have the same impacts on interest and exchange
rates.
5a. For example, effective protection against Asian exports in both the US
and Euroland would reduce net savings transfers to the US and Euroland from
Asia by forcing a reduction in Asia’s net trade surplus.
5b. Similarly, a decline in net Asian savings exported to the US and
Euroland would occur if a larger share of US, Euroland, and Asian income is
transferred to oil exporters via terms of trade shifts. As the oil exporters start to
consume a high fraction of this transfer, fewer excess savings are available to
accumulate US and Euroland debt.
Each of these developments can be analyzed as illustrated in Figure 5.
In these events expected US debt at T is reduced, which reduces the terminal
exchange rate from B to G. Euroland debt also falls, which reduces the renminbieuro from D to K. We assume that the new path for the renminbi-dollar does not
jump up at t1, but the rate of dollar depreciation is reduced so that the new path
for the renminbi-dollar is FG. The renminbi-euro must reach K at T and the path
from t1 must have the same slope as FG, that is, the renminbi-euro must have the
same expected rate of depreciation as the renminbi-dollar. The conclusion is
that the euro can either depreciate or appreciate immediately against the dollar
depending on the relative change in debt stocks in response to the new
environment. There is no necessary direction of effect for this key exchange rate.
Interest rates will rise both in the US and Euroland because of the reduction in
available savings.
A useful rule of thumb is that events that change expected US and Euroland debt
stocks and real exchange rates in opposite directions generate large and
immediate changes in the dollar/euro rate when expectations change. The
market rate changes in the same direction as the change in the expected future
rates. Events that move both expected debt stocks in the same direction have
ambiguous effects on the exchange rate at the point where expectations change.
6. A Basket Peg
The results discussed above would be altered if Asian authorities adjusted the
renminbi-dollar rate in reaction to changes in the dollar-euro rate. An interesting
change would be adoption of a basket peg by the Asian authorities. In the
absence of new shocks to the equilibrium path, a basket peg would have no
effect because the dollar-euro exchange rate is constant during the adjustment
period. However, in the face of the other shocks discussed above, a basket peg
would tend to reduce the volatility of the dollar-euro rate and would either

increase or decrease the average real value of the renminbi depending on the
nature of shocks. There is no implication that a move from a straight dollar peg
to a basket peg would weaken the dollar.
Figure 3
Exchange Rates
RMB/ $

A
F

G
B

0

t1

T

RMB/ €

E
H

C

D
I
J

0

t1

T

Figure 4
Exchange Rates
RMB/$

A
F

B
G
0

RMB/€

E
C

T

t1

I
H
K
D

0

t1

T

Figure 5
Exchange Rates
RMB/$

A
F
G
B

0

T

t1

RMB/€

E
H
C

I

K
D

0

t1

T

Further Thoughts on Asset Markets
The apparent failure of dollar exchange rates to respond to unprecedented
recent and projected US current account deficits is an important challenge for
economic analysis. It is generally agreed that a substantial increase in projected
debt levels should be associated with expectations that the real exchange rate
will eventually depreciate.
If private investors regard financial assets
denominated in different currencies and issued by residents of different countries
as perfect or very close substitutes, then the current exchange rate should be
tied to the expected future exchange rate through the interest parity condition.
Taken together, these ideas suggest that the dollar should have declined several
years ago against the floating currencies when expectations about future US
debt levels were revised.
Suppose, for example, that some event generates a forecast that US debt will
increase from zero to sixty percent of US GDP and then stabilize at that level at
some arbitrary future date, T. Most analysts would agree that a real depreciation
of the dollar by time T will be a part of the adjustment required to service this

higher level of debt.12 If the dollar is expected to be lower at T, if interest parity
holds, and if real interest rates are not affected by the shock that generated the
increase in expected debt, then the real exchange rate must depreciate
immediately and by the same amount as the long run expected value when
expectations change.
Research on exchange rates since the early 1970s has been dominated by
attempts to reconcile the data to this elementary notion. In the early years of
floating rates the question was why exchange rates were much more variable
than reasonable estimates of long run expected values. The current debate asks
why market rates now are so stable in the face of strong presumption that the
long run expectation has changed by a large amount.
To be sure, the market could have gotten it wrong then and could be getting it
wrong now. If so, a crisis with sharply rising interest rates and sharply falling
dollar exchange rates could be imminent, as conventional analysts predict. But it
seems prudent to carefully consider alternative possibilities that are currently
consistent with the salient evidence.

An Attempt to Reconcile Current Exchange Rates and Expectations
Market exchange rates need not move in lock step with expected exchange rates
if interest rates change or if interest rate parity does not hold. An approach that
was popular in the early 1980s to explain “excess volatility” of market exchange
rates explored the assumption that interest parity may not hold if assets
denominated in different currencies or issued in different countries are not perfect
substitutes.13 That is, if residents of a country for some reason prefer domestic
assets, they would have to be compensated with higher expected yields to move
away from their preferred portfolio. If rates of change toward a stable long run
equilibrium varied, it follows that current exchange rates could be much more
variable than long run expected exchange rates.
Moreover, sterilized
intervention alters relative supplies of securities and could have some influence
on expected rates of change and the levels of exchange rates.
In the current context, the implications of this portfolio balance approach are
straightforward.
If foreign residents prefer home securities and those
preferences are unchanged, US residents must pay a premium to finance a
current account deficit. If we assume “domestic” interest rates are not affected
by the shock that increases US foreign debt, foreign investors must be induced to
hold the growing stock of dollar-denominated claims on the US by an extra
expected return in the form of expected appreciation of the dollar. Since at T the
12

See Lane and Milesi-Ferretti, 2004, 2005 for discussion and evidence.

13

See Branson and Henderson, 1985 for a survey.

dollar has to be below its current level because of increased US indebtedness to
foreigners and since it must be expected to appreciate from now to T, the dollar
must depreciate by even more now.
At first glance, this does not seem to help much in understanding the current
situation where, it is argued, the dollar has not depreciated enough. But this can
be rationalized by assuming the initial shock was a spontaneous increase in
preferences for dollar assets. (Blanchard et al, 2005). If foreigners want dollar
assets, they can obtain them through current account surpluses and in the
interim will accept a lower expected yield on the dollar assets they do hold. It
follows that even though the dollar is expected to be lower at T it may not fall
much initially because an expected depreciation is consistent with an otherwise
unsatisfied demand for dollars during the adjustment period.
Is Intervention a Plausible Driver of the System?
Identifying plausible reasons for a shift in preferences toward dollars remains a
serious problem.14 As one explanation, if changes in governments’ balance
sheets are not systematically offset by private investors the shift in currency
preferences could be associated with government policies. In particular,
sterilized intervention could account for expected increases in US net
international debt but only gradual adjustment in dollar exchange rates.
But there are a number of reasons that the portfolio balance approach was
placed on a back burner of the profession’s research agenda. First, a very large
empirical literature was unable to find any lasting effect of intervention on interest
rates or exchange rates. Second, imperfect substitution is usually modeled as
aversion to exchange rate volatility. But sensible estimates of the degree of risk
aversion needed to match exchange rate data seemed implausible. Third,
imperfect substitution could be related to default risk or capital controls, but this
has generally been assumed to be irrelevant for industrial countries.
Finally, Dornbusch (1976) showed that monetary policy and associated changes
in real interest rate differentials could account for exchange rate volatility with
perfect substitution and stable long run expected values for real exchange rates.
In an era where monetary policies were quite variable, this solved the theoretical
puzzle of the day and moved portfolio balance models to the history of thought
reading list.
Nevertheless, it is clear that home bias in goods, equities and other financial
assets remains a central fact and puzzle for international economics.15 Obstfeld
14

Cooper (2001, 2004) offers a compelling argument for a change in private preferences for US assets. We agree that

this is part of the story but focus here on governments’ portfolio choices.
15
See Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000).

(2004) presents a thoughtful review of these issues and offers a guess that a
new theoretical basis for the portfolio balance approach will emerge from his
work with Ken Rogoff on the implications of imperfect goods market integration.
This would be welcome, but in the interim we remain largely in the dark about the
source of home bias for assets and its implications for models of portfolio
behavior.
Our own home bias in these matters is that capital controls and the threat of
sovereign interference with foreign investment is the most compelling argument
behind a portfolio balance framework.16 It follows that the portfolio balance
approach is more likely to be useful in understanding the behavior of countries or
groups of countries whose governments dominate private portfolio decisions
through controls and intervention and manage their exchange rates.
In our framework, the shift in preferences toward dollars is not just qualitative but
is measured by increases in international reserves of governments managing
their exchange rates. Moreover, sterilized intervention is effective in altering
interest differentials and exchange rates between managed economies and an
integrated international capital market. But shifts in the composition of reserves
do not change exchange rates within the larger integrated market.
While we use China/Asia and the renminbi as shorthand for the managed fixed
rate region and its currency, we do not argue that China alone is large enough to
dominate international interest and exchange rates. However, we estimate that
countries that actively manage their exchange rates comprise about one third of
world GDP and savings. The shock to the global system that we model is a
substantial increase in savings rates and levels among this group. These are
coupled with a decision of governments in the region to put a large share of the
increase, about half, into foreign assets.
We could extend the portfolio balance model as well to economic relationships
within the international capital market, i.e. to the relations between the US and
Euroland, but we do not do so for two reasons. First, the reasons for rejecting
this model in the past are still very powerful. Second a three zone portfolio
balance model is very difficult to work with, particularly when we are interested in
studying the endogenous responses of exchange rates and real interest rates to
various shocks. Since such models have a low insight to equation ratio, we stick
with the perfect substitutes model for the US and Euroland. Our guess is that
introducing a little bit of home bias in these portfolios will do little violence to our
results.

16

See Dooley and Isard, 1980.

References
Blanchard, Olivier, Francesco Giavazzi, Filipa Sa (2005), “The U.S. Current
Account Deficit and the Dollar”, NBER Working Paper w11137 (February).
Branson, William and Dale Henderson (1985), “The Specification and Influence
of Asset Markets,” in Ronald W. Jones and Peter B. Kenen, eds., Handbook of
International Economics, v. 2, North Holland, New York.
Cooper, Richard N. (2001), “Is the U.S. Current Account Sustainable? Will It Be
Sustained?” BPEA, 2001:1, 217-26.
__________________2004. “US deficit: It is not only sustainable, it is logical,”
Financial Times (October 31).
Dooley, Michael, David Folkerts-Landau and Peter Garber (2003), “An Essay on
the Revived Bretton Woods System,” NBER Working Paper no. 9971
(September).
______________________ (2004a), “The Revived Bretton Woods System: The
Effects of Periphery Intervention and Reserve Management on Interest Rates
and Exchange Rates in Center Countries” NBER Working Paper No. 10332
(March).
______________________ (2004b), “Direct Investment, Rising Real Wages and
the Absorption of Excess Labor in the Periphery” NBER Working Paper
No.10626 (July).
_______________________ (2004c), “The US Current Account Deficit and
Economic Development: Collateral for a Total Return Swap,” NBER Working
Paper No. 10727 (September).
_______________________ (2005), “Savings Gluts and Interest Rates: The
Missing Link to Europe,” NBER Working Paper No. 11520 (July).

Dooley, Michael and Peter Garber (2005), “Is it 1958 or 1968? Three Notes on
the Longevity of the Revived Bretton Woods System,” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 1: 147- 187.
Dooley, Michael and Peter Isard, (1980), “Capital Controls, Political Risk, and
Deviations from Interest Parity,” Journal of Political Economy, 88: 370-84.
Dornbusch, Rudiger (1976), “Expectations and Exchange rate Dynamics,”
Journal of Political Economy, 84: 1161-1176.
Eichengreem, Barry (2005), “Sterling'
s Past, Dollar'
s Future: Historical
Perspectives on Reserve Currency Competition”, NBER Working Paper w11336.
Gourinchas, Pierre Olivier and Helene Rey (2005), “From World Banker to World
Venture Capitalist: US External Adjustment and the Exorbitant Privilege”, NBER
Working Paper w11563 (August).
Henderson Dale, and Michael Leahy (2005), “A Note on Alternative Exchange
Rate Policies with Three Currencies,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System, Processed (August).
Lane, Philip R., and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti (2004), "The Transfer Problem
Revisited: Net Foreign Assets and Real Exchange Rates," Review of Economics
and Statistics 86: 841-57.
________________________________________, (2005), "Financial
Globalization and Exchange Rates," International Monetary Fund Working Paper
05/03 (January).
Obstfeld, Maurice (2004), “External Adjustment,” Review of World Economics, v.
140: 541-68.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff, (2000), "The Six Major Puzzles in
International Macroeconomics: Is there a Common Cause?" in Ben S. Bernanke
and Kenneth Rogoff (eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.

