                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               THE EFFECTS OF WAL-MART ON LOCAL LABOR MARKETS

                                          David Neumark
                                            Junfu Zhang
                                         Stephen Ciccarella

                                        Working Paper 11782
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w11782


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2005




We are grateful to Ron Baiman, Emek Basker, Marianne Bitler, Jan Bruckner, Eric Brunner, Colin
Cameron, Wayne Gray, Judy Hellerstein, Hilary Hoynes, Chris Jepsen, Giovanni Peri, Howard Shatz,
Betsey Stevenson, Brandon Wall, Jeff Wooldridge, two anonymous referees, and seminar participants
at Brookings, Clark, Cornell, HKU, IZA, PPIC, Stanford, UQAM, UC-Davis, UC-Irvine, UC-Riverside,
UC-San Diego, UConn, and USC for helpful comments. We are also grateful to Wal-Mart for providing
data on store locations and opening dates, and to Emek Basker for providing her Wal-Mart data set
and other code; any requests for Wal-Mart data have to be directed to them. Despite Wal-Mart having
supplied some of the data used in this study, the company has provided no support for this research,
and had no role in editing or influencing the research as a condition of providing these data. The views
expressed are those of the authors, and not those of Wal-Mart or the NBER. This is a revised version
of a preliminary draft presented at the Wal-Mart Economic Impact Research Conference, Washington,
DC, November 2005.

© 2005 by David Neumark, Junfu Zhang, and Stephen Ciccarella. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effects of Wal-Mart on Local Labor Markets
David Neumark, Junfu Zhang, and Stephen Ciccarella
NBER Working Paper No. 11782
November 2005, Revised July 2007
JEL No. J2,J3,R1

                                              ABSTRACT

We estimate the effects of Wal-Mart stores on county-level retail employment and earnings, accounting
for endogeneity of the location and timing of Wal-Mart openings that most likely biases the evidence
against finding adverse effects of Wal-Mart stores. We address the endogeneity problem using a natural
instrumental variables approach that arises from the geographic and time pattern of the opening of
Wal-Mart stores, which slowly spread out from the first stores in Arkansas. The employment results
indicate that a Wal-Mart store opening reduces county-level retail employment by about 150 workers,
implying that each Wal-Mart worker replaces approximately 1.4 retail workers. This represents a
2.7 percent reduction in average retail employment. The payroll results indicate that Wal-Mart store
openings lead to declines in county-level retail earnings of about $1.4 million, or 1.5 percent. Of course,
these effects occurred against a backdrop of rising retail employment, and only imply lower retail
employment growth than would have occurred absent the effects of Wal-Mart.

David Neumark                                        Stephen Ciccarella
Department of Economics                              Public Policy Institute of California
3151 Social Science Plaza                            500 Washington Street, Suite 800
University of California, Irvine                     San Francisco, CA 94111
Irvine, CA 92697-5100                                ciccarella@ppic.org
and NBER
dneumark@uci.edu

Junfu Zhang
Department of Economics
Clark University
Worcester, MA 01610
juzhang@clarku.edu
I. Introduction

         Wal-Mart is more than just another large company. It is the largest corporation in the world, with

total revenues of $285 billion in 2005. It employs over 1.2 million workers in the United States, at about

3,600 stores.1 To put this in perspective, the Wal-Mart workforce represents just under 1 percent of total

employment and just under 10 percent of retail employment in the United States. It exceeds the number

of high school teachers or middle school teachers, and is just under the size of the elementary school

teacher workforce. Wal-Mart is reported to be the nation’s largest grocer, with a 19 percent market share,

and its third-largest pharmacy, with a 16 percent market share [6].

         During the past two decades, as Wal-Mart sharply expanded its number of stores in the United

States, it increasingly encountered resistance from local communities. Opponents of Wal-Mart have tried

to block its entry on many grounds, including the prevention of urban sprawl, preservation of historical

culture, protection of the environment and “main-street” merchants, and avoidance of road congestion.2

Yet two of the most commonly-heard criticisms are that Wal-Mart eliminates more retail jobs than it

creates for a community, and that it results in lower wages, especially in retail.3 Wal-Mart executives

dispute these claims, especially with regard to employment. For example: its Vice President Bob

McAdam has argued that there are many locations where Wal-Mart creates jobs in other businesses in

addition to what Wal-Mart itself offers [37]; the Wal-Mart web-site Walmartfacts.com trumpets the

positive effects of Wal-Mart stores on retail jobs in the communities where stores open;4 and an

advertisement run in the USA Today, The Wall Street Journal, and The New York Times on January 14,

2005, displayed an open letter from Lee Scott, Wal-Mart President and CEO, stating “This year, we plan

to create more than 100,000 new jobs in the United States.”5 Of course Wal-Mart offers other potential

benefits in the form of lower prices for consumers ([3], [18]).



1
  See http://www.walmartfacts.com/newsdesk/wal-mart-fact-sheets.aspx#a125 (as of September 8, 2005).
2
  See, for example, [7], [23], [24], [27], [34], and [40].
3
  See, for example, [36], [39], and [48].
4
  See http://www.walmartfacts.com/newsdesk/wal-mart-fact-sheets.aspx (as of December 15, 2005).
5
  If this refers to gross rather than net job creation, it could be consistent with Wal-Mart destroying more jobs than it
creates.

                                                            1
        In this paper, we seek to provide a definitive answer regarding whether Wal-Mart creates or

eliminates jobs in the retail sector, relative to what would have happened absent Wal-Mart’s entry. Also,

because of concern over the effects of Wal-Mart on wages, and because policymakers may be interested

in the impact of Wal-Mart on taxable payrolls, we also estimate the effects of Wal-Mart on earnings in the

retail sector, reflecting the combination of influences on employment, wages, and hours. We believe that

our evidence improves substantially on existing studies of these and related questions, most importantly

by implementing an identification strategy that accounts for the endogeneity of store location and timing

and how these may be correlated with future changes in earnings or employment. Indeed, it has been

suggested that Wal-Mart’s explicit strategy was to locate in small towns where the population growth was

increasing [44, p. 92], and it is reasonable to expect that Wal-Mart entered markets where projected retail

growth was strong. If Wal-Mart tends to enter fast-growing areas in booming periods, then we might

expect to observe employment and earnings rising in apparent response to Wal-Mart’s entry, even if the

stores actually have negative effects.

        Our identification strategy is driven by a systematic pattern in the openings of Wal-Mart stores.

Sam Walton, the founder of Wal-Mart, opened the first Wal-Mart store in 1962 in Rogers, Arkansas, in

Benton County. Five years later, Wal-Mart had 18 stores with $9 million of annual sales. Wal-Mart first

grew into a local chain store in the northwest part of Arkansas. It then spread to adjacent states such as

Oklahoma, Missouri, and Louisiana. From there, it kept expanding to the rest of the country after closer

markets were largely saturated [44, pp. 28-29]. The relationship between Wal-Mart stores’ opening dates

and their distance to the headquarters is primarily a result of Wal-Mart’s “saturation” strategy for growth,

which was based on control and distribution of stores, as well as word-of-mouth advertising. In his

autobiography, Sam Walton describes the control and distribution motive as follows:

        “[Our growth strategy] was to saturate a market area by spreading out, then filling in. In the early
        growth years of discounting, a lot of national companies with distribution systems already in
        place—Kmart, for example—were growing by sticking stores all over the country. Obviously,
        we couldn’t support anything like that. … We figured we had to build our stores so that our
        distribution centers, or warehouses, could take care of them, but also so those stores could be
        controlled. We wanted them within reach of our district managers, and of ourselves here in
        Bentonville, so we could get out there and look after them. Each store had to be within a day’s


                                                   2
        drive of a distribution center. So we would go as far as we could from a warehouse and put in a
        store. Then we would fill in the map of that territory, state by state, county seat by county seat,
        until we had saturated that market area. … So for the most part, we just started repeating what
        worked, stamping out stores cookie-cutter style” [49, pp. 110-111].

        One might wonder whether this need to be near a distribution center requires a steady spreading

out from Arkansas. Why not, for example, open distribution centers further away, and build stores near

them? The explanation seems to lie in the word-of-mouth advertising advantage perceived to result from

the growth strategy Wal-Mart pursued:

        “This saturation strategy had all sorts of benefits beyond control and distribution. From the very
        beginning, we never believed in spending much money on advertising, and saturation helped us to
        save a fortune in that department. When you move like we did from town to town in these mostly
        rural areas, word of mouth gets your message out to customers pretty quickly without much
        advertising. When we had seventy-five stores in Arkansas, seventy-five in Missouri, eighty in
        Oklahoma, whatever, people knew who we were, and everybody except the merchants who
        weren’t discounting looked forward to our coming to their town. By doing it this way, we usually
        could get by with distributing just one advertising circular a month instead of running a whole lot
        of newspaper advertising” [49, p. 111].6

        Wal-Mart’s practice of growing by “spreading out” geographically means that distance from

Benton County, Arkansas, and time—and more specifically their interaction—help predict when and

where stores opened.7 Thus, the key innovation in this paper is to instrument for the opening of Wal-Mart

stores with interactions between time and the distance between Wal-Mart host counties and Benton

County, Arkansas, where Wal-Mart headquarters are located and the first Wal-Mart store opened.

II. Literature Review

        There are a number of studies that address claims about Wal-Mart’s impacts on local labor

markets, emphasizing the retail sector. However, we regard much of this literature as uninformative

about the causal impact of Wal-Mart on retail employment and earnings. Some of the existing work is by

advocates for one side or the other in local political disputes regarding Wal-Mart’s entry into a particular

market. These studies are often hastily prepared, plagued by flawed methods and arbitrary assumptions,

6
  See Holmes [22] for an explanation of Wal-Mart’s expansion pattern based on the cost savings of locating stores
close to one another. He calls such savings the “economies of density” that are derived from not just the word-of-
mouth advertising and shared distribution system. For example, opening new stores near existing ones also makes it
cost-effective for Wal-Mart to hire and train employees at existing stores and then transfer them to nearby new
stores once they open.
7
  For example, Wal-Mart’s expansion did not reach California until 1990. It first entered New England in 1991. In
1995 Wal-Mart opened its first store in Vermont and finally had a presence in all 48 contiguous states.

                                                      3
and sponsored by interested parties such as Wal-Mart itself, its competitors, or union groups (e.g., [5],

[13], and [41]), and can hardly be expected to provide impartial evidence on Wal-Mart’s effects. Hence,

they are not summarized here.

         There is also an academic literature on the impact of Wal-Mart stores, focusing on the effects of

Wal-Mart openings on local employment, retail prices and sales, poverty rates, and the concentration of

the retailing industry, as well as the impact on existing businesses. This research is limited by three main

factors: the restriction of much of it to small regions (often a single small state); its lack of focus on

employment and earnings effects; and its failure to account for the endogeneity of Wal-Mart locations,

either at all or, in our view, adequately.

         Many of these studies, especially the early ones, focus on the effects of Wal-Mart at the regional

level, spurred by the expansion of Wal-Mart into a particular region. Most of these studies focus on the

effects of Wal-Mart on retail businesses and sales, rather than on employment and earnings. The earliest

study, which is typical of much of the research that has followed, is by Stone [44]. He defines the “pull

factor” for a specific merchandise category as the ratio of per capita sales in a town to the per capita sales

at the state level, and examines the changes in the pull factor for different merchandise categories in host

and surrounding towns in Iowa after the opening of Wal-Mart stores. Stone finds that, in host towns, pull

factors for total sales and general merchandise (to which all Wal-Mart sales belong) rise after the arrival

of Wal-Mart. Pull factors for eating and drinking and home furnishing also go up because Wal-Mart

brings in more customers. However, pull factors for grocery, building materials, apparel, and specialty

stores decline, presumably due to direct competition from Wal-Mart. He also finds that small towns

surrounding Wal-Mart towns suffer a larger loss in total sales compared to towns that are further away.8

Related results for other regions—which generally, although not always, point to similar conclusions—

are reported in [1], [2], [9], and [28]. All of these studies use administrative data, and employ research



8
 Stone’s study was updated regularly (see, for example, [45], [46]), but its central message remained the same: Wal-
Mart pulls more customers to the host town, hurts its local competitors, but benefits some other local businesses that
do not directly compete with it. Using the same methods, Stone et al. [47] show similar results regarding the effects
of Wal-Mart Supercenters on existing businesses in Mississippi.

                                                        4
designs based on before-and-after comparisons in locations in which Wal-Mart stores did and did not

open.9

         The studies reviewed thus far do not address the potential endogeneity of the location and timing

of Wal-Mart’s entry into a particular market. In addition, these studies do not focus on the key questions

with which this paper is concerned—the effects of Wal-Mart on retail employment and earnings. A few

studies come closer to the mark. Ketchum and Hughes [29], studying counties in Maine, recognize the

problem of the endogenous location of Wal-Mart stores in faster-growing regions. They attempt to

estimate the effects of Wal-Mart on employment and earnings using a difference-in-difference-in-

differences (DDD) estimator that compares changes in retail employment and earnings over time in

counties in which Wal-Mart stores did and did not locate, compared to changes for manufacturing and

services. However, virtually none of their estimated changes are statistically significant and the data

appear very noisy, so the results are generally uninformative. More important, their approach does not

address the key endogeneity questions of whether Wal-Mart location decisions were based on anticipated

changes after stores opened, or instead only prior trends that were already different (despite the authors

posing these questions).10 Hicks and Wilburn [20], studying the impact of Wal-Mart openings in West

Virginia, estimate positive impacts of Wal-Mart stores on retail employment and the number of retail

firms. They do not explicitly account for endogeneity, although they do address the issue. In particular,

they report evidence suggesting that Wal-Mart location decisions are independent of long-term economic

growth rates of individual counties in their sample, and that current and lagged growth have no significant

effect on Wal-Mart’s decision to enter. However, these results do not explicitly address endogeneity with


9
  A couple of studies rely on surveys of local businesses rather than administrative data. McGee [32] reports results
from a small-scale survey of small retailers in five Nebraska communities conducted soon after Wal-Mart stores
entered. He finds that 53 percent of the responding retailers reported negative effects of Wal-Mart’s arrival on their
revenues while 19 percent indicated positive effects. In a survey of Nebraska and Kansas retailers, Peterson and
McGee [38] find that less than a third of the businesses with at least $1 million in annual sales reported a negative
effect after Wal-Mart’s arrival, while close to one half of the businesses with less than $1 million in annual sales
indicated a negative effect, with negative effects most commonly reported by small retailers in central business
districts. The research design in these surveys fails to include a control group capturing changes that might have
occurred independently of Wal-Mart openings. In addition, reported assessments by retailers may not reflect actual
effects of these openings.
10
   The second question can only be addressed via an instrumental variables approach, and the first requires looking
at changes in growth rates, not changes in levels; their study only does the latter.

                                                        5
respect to future growth. The latter, in particular, could generate apparent positive impacts of Wal-Mart

stores.

          In more recent work, Basker [4] studies the effects of Wal-Mart on retail employment using

nationwide data. Basker attempts to account explicitly for endogeneity by instrumenting for the actual

number of stores opening in a county in a given year with the planned number. The latter is based on

numbers that Wal-Mart assigns to stores when they are planned; according to Basker, these store numbers

indicate the order in which the openings were planned to occur. She then combines these numbers with

information from Wal-Mart Annual Reports to measure planned and actual openings in each county and

year; the data reflect some measurement error in store opening dates.11 Her results indicate that county-

level retail employment grows by about 100 in the year of Wal-Mart entry, but declines to a gain of about

50 jobs in five years as other retail establishments contract or close. In the meantime, possibly because

Wal-Mart streamlines its supply chain, wholesale employment declines by 20 jobs in the longer term.12

          The principal problem with this identification strategy, however, is that the instrument is

unconvincing. For the instrument to be valid, two conditions must hold. The first is that planned store

openings should be correlated with (predictive of) actual openings; this condition is not problematic. The

second condition is that the variation in planned openings generates exogenous variation in actual

openings that is uncorrelated with the unobserved determinants of employment that endogenously affect

location decisions. This second condition holds if we assume, to quote Basker, that “the number of

planned Wal-Mart stores … for county j and year t is independent of the error term … and planned Wal-

Mart stores affect retail employment per capita only insofar as they are correlated with the actual

construction of Wal-Mart stores” [4, p. 178]. The second part of the assumption is potentially

problematic; actual stores should, of course, be the driving influence, although planned stores—even if


11
  This is detailed in an appendix available from the authors.
12
  Using the same instrumental variables strategy, Basker [3] estimates the effects of Wal-Mart entry on prices of
consumer goods at the city level, finding long-run declines of 8-13 percent in prices of several products including
aspirin, detergent, Kleenex, and toothpaste, although it is less clear to us why location decisions would be
endogenous with respect to price. Ordinary least squares (OLS) estimation also finds long-run negative effects of
Wal-Mart on prices for nine out of ten products, although only three are significant and all are smaller than the IV
results. Hausman and Leibtag [18] study the effects of Wal-Mart on food prices.

                                                        6
they do not materialize or do so only with delay—may still affect decisions of other businesses.13 The

first part of the assumption is a more serious concern, though, as it seems most likely that planned

openings will reflect the same unobserved determinants that drive endogenous location as are reflected in

actual openings, and we cannot think of an argument to the contrary (nor does Basker offer one). In this

case if the OLS estimate of the effect of Wal-Mart stores on retail employment is biased upward because

of endogeneity, the instrumental variable (IV) estimate may also be upward biased, and more so than the

OLS estimate.14

         Using various data sources, Goetz and Swaminathan [14] study the relationship between Wal-

Mart openings between 1987 and 1998 and county poverty rates in 1999, conditional on 1989 poverty

rates (as measured in the 1990 and 2000 Censuses of Population). They also use an IV procedure to

address the endogeneity of Wal-Mart entry, instrumenting for Wal-Mart openings during 1987-1998 in an

equation for county poverty rates in 1999. Their IVs include an unspecified pull factor, access to

interstate highways, earnings per worker, per capita property tax, population density, percentage of

households with more than three vehicles, and number of female-headed households. The results suggest

that county poverty rates increase when Wal-Mart stores open, perhaps because Wal-Mart lowers

earnings (although the authors offer other explanations as well). However, why the IVs should affect

Wal-Mart openings only, and not changes in poverty directly (conditional on Wal-Mart openings), is not

clear, and it is not hard to construct stories in which invalid exclusion restrictions would create biases

towards the finding that Wal-Mart openings increase poverty.15



13
   A telling example occurred in 2003, after Wal-Mart announced plans to build 40 Supercenters in California.
Supermarket chains in southern California including Albertsons, Ralphs, and Vons immediately sought to lower
costs and avoid being undercut by Wal-Mart, leading to four months of labor conflict, all before Wal-Mart opened
its first Supercenter in California (in March 2004). See, for example, [16] and [21].
14
   See the discussion in the longer working paper version of this study [35]. Basker also motivates the IV as
correcting for bias from measurement error in the actual opening dates of Wal-Mart stores in her data. But the same
argument against the validity of planned openings as an instrument applies.
15
   For example, consider the use of the number of female-headed households as an IV, and suppose that this variable
is positively correlated with changes in poverty rates (because of rising inequality over this period), and also
positively correlated with Wal-Mart openings (because they locate in lower-income areas). In this case the IV
estimate of the effect of Wal-Mart openings on changes in poverty rates is biased upward because of the positive
correlation between the instrument (female-headed households) and the error term in the equation for the change in
the poverty rate. In addition, although the authors do not specify how they construct their pull factor, we assume it

                                                       7
         Our research addresses the four principal shortcomings of the existing research on the effects of

Wal-Mart on local labor markets. First, we estimate the effects of Wal-Mart openings on retail

employment (as well as earnings). Second, we have—we believe—a far more convincing strategy to

account for the potential endogeneity of Wal-Mart openings. Third, we are able to use administrative data

on Wal-Mart openings that eliminate the measurement error in recent work. And finally, we use a data

set that is national in scope.

III. Data

         The analysis is done at the county level. Aside from following Basker’s strategy, this strikes us

as a reasonable geographic level of disaggregation at which to detect the effects of Wal-Mart stores—not

so small that many of the effects may occur outside of the geographic unit, and not so large that the

effects may be undetectable.

         Employment and payroll data are drawn from the U.S. Census Bureau’s County Business Patterns

(CBP).16 CBP is an annual series that provides economic data by industry and county. The series

includes most economic activity, but excludes data on self-employed individuals, employees of private

households, railroad employees, agricultural production workers, and most government employees.

Payroll in the CBP includes salaries, wages, reported tips, commissions, bonuses, vacation allowances,

sick-leave pay, employee contributions to qualified pension plans, and taxable fringe benefits, and is

reported before deductions for Social Security, income tax, insurance, etc.17 It does not include profit or

other compensation earned by proprietors or business partners. Payroll is reported on an annual basis.

The employment measure in the CBP data is a count of jobs, rather than the number of people employed

(in one or more jobs). Employment covers all full- and part-time employees, including officers and

executives, as of the pay period including March 12 of each year. Workers on leave are included, while

proprietors and partners are not.

is similar to the measure described above—a ratio of county to statewide retail sales. Given that this is a dependent
variable in other studies of the effects of Wal-Mart, it is hard to justify using it as an IV for Wal-Mart openings.
16
   A good description of the CBP data is available at http://www.census.gov/epcd/cbp/view/cbpview.html (as of
August 15, 2005).
17
   Given that it excludes non-taxable fringe benefits, of which the most important is health insurance, we refer to the
CBP measure as earnings, rather than compensation.

                                                        8
         The most significant limitation of the CBP data for studying the effects of Wal-Mart is that a

wage cannot be computed. The CBP data do not provide a breakdown of employment into full-time and

part-time workers, or any information on skill composition. Thus, we cannot tell whether changes in

payrolls reflect changes in pay rates for comparable workers or shifts in skill composition or hours. As a

consequence, these data cannot be used to address questions of the effects of Wal-Mart on wages. We

can, though, estimate Wal-Mart’s effect on total retail payrolls.

         We use CBP data from 1977 through 2002. We began with 1977 because CBP data are not

continuously machine-readable for the years 1964-1976, and ended with 2002 because that was the last

year available. As explained below, however, most our analysis goes only through 1995—a period for

which our identification strategy is most compelling.

         We study the retail sector as a whole, as well as the general merchandising subsector—which

includes Wal-Mart and other general department-style stores.18 Looking at results for these different

retail sectors is useful for assessing and understanding the results. For example, if Wal-Mart reduces

retail employment, we might expect the employment reduction to show up for the aggregate retail sector,

but to be offset by a sizable increase in general merchandising. Some complications arise in working with

the CBP data because by federal law no data can be published that might disclose the operations of an

individual employer. As we look at more disaggregated subsets of industries, it is more likely that data

are suppressed and so our sample becomes smaller. We therefore constructed two samples with which we

can consistently compare at least some retail industry sectors for the same set of observations:

     •   A sample: all county-year observations with complete (non-suppressed) employment and payroll

         data for aggregate retail, and in total.

     •   B sample: all observations in the A sample that also have complete data for the general

         merchandising retail subsector to which Wal-Mart belongs.

18
  General merchandising includes retail stores which sell a number of lines of merchandise, such as dry goods,
apparel and accessories, furniture and home furnishings, small wares, hardware, and food. The stores included in
this group are known as department stores, variety stores, general merchandise stores, catalog showrooms,
warehouse clubs, and general stores. (See http://www.census.gov/epcd/ec97sic/def/G53.TXT, as of June 13, 2007).
Based on 1997 Census data, general merchandising makes up about 2.2 percent of all retail establishments, and 10.7
percent of all retail employment.

                                                      9
         Because the rules for whether or not data are disclosed depend on the size of the retail sector and

the size distribution of establishments within it, sample selection is endogenous. We therefore emphasize

results for the A sample, which includes nearly all counties and years. We use the B sample only to

compare estimates for aggregate retail and general merchandising; as long as any biases from selection

into the B sample are similar across retail subsectors, the estimates for aggregate retail and general

merchandising can still be meaningfully compared.19

         Wal-Mart provided us with administrative data on 3,066 Wal-Mart Discount Stores and

Supercenters. The data set contains every Discount Store and Supercenter still in operation in the United

States at the end of fiscal year 2005 (January 31, 2005), as well as the opening date.20 Because

employment in the CBP data is measured as of early March in each year, we code store openings as

occurring in the first full calendar year for which they are open. If we instead coded the store opening as

occurring in the previous calendar year (sometime during which the store did in fact open), in most cases

(unless the store opened before early March) we would be using an employment level prior to the store

opening as a measure of employment post-opening.21

         After dropping stores in Alaska and Hawaii, we used 2,211 stores in our main analysis through

1995, and 2,795 stores when we use the full sample period through 2002. By 2005, Wal-Mart also had

551 Sam’s Club stores in the United States (the first opened in 1983), on which we also obtained data,

although the data were less complete (for example, lacking information on square footage). We do most




19
   Basker [4] also focuses on the retail subsector excluding eating and drinking places and automotive dealers and
gasoline service centers—subsectors that are least likely to compete directly with Wal-Mart. However, constructing
data for this subsector results in nearly two-thirds of county-year pairs being discarded because of non-disclosure, in
which case endogenous sample selection can be severe.
20
   Unfortunately, we are often missing information on when Discount Stores converted to Supercenters, which is
frequent in the latter part of the sample. All we know is the current store type. We also received data identifying a
small number of stores (54, as of 2005) that closed. We return to this issue in some of our robustness analyses. This
data set also indicated some store relocations within counties, which are treated as continuing stores because Wal-
Mart replaced smaller, older stores with larger ones in nearby locations.
21
   The measurement error corresponding to stores opening in January through early March of the previous year is
less important in the IV estimation than in OLS estimation, because the IV estimation identifies the effect from the
predicted probability of store openings rather than actual openings, and these predictions typically will not vary
much between adjacent years.

                                                       10
of our analysis considering the Wal-Mart stores other than Sam’s Clubs, but also some analysis

incorporating information on the latter.22

        We constructed a county-year file by collecting county names and FIPS codes for the 3,141 U.S.

counties from the U.S. Census Bureau.23 We created time-consistent geographical areas accounting for

merges or splits in counties during the sample period. For counties that split during the sample period we

maintained the definition of the original county, and for counties that merged during the sample period we

created a single corresponding county throughout.24 This led to a file of 3,094 counties over 19 years (26

years when we use the full sample), to which we merge the CBP and Wal-Mart data. We assigned to the

counties population data for each year from the U.S. Census Population Estimates Archives.25 Finally, we

compiled latitude and longitude data for each county centroid from the U.S. Census Bureau’s Census

2000 Gazetteer Files.26 We constructed distance measures from each county to Wal-Mart headquarters in

Benton County, Arkansas, for reasons explained below,27 creating dummy variables (denoted DIST) for

county centroids in rings within a radius of 100 miles from Benton County, Arkansas, 101-200 miles, etc.,

out to the maximum radius of 1800 miles (with the vector of these dummy variables denoted DIST below).

IV. Empirical Approach and Identification

        We estimate models for changes in retail employment and payrolls. We generally capture

increased exposure to Wal-Mart stores via a measure of store openings in a county-year cell—i.e., the

change in the number of stores. We define changes in employment, payrolls, and number of stores on a

per person basis, to eliminate the undue influence of a small number of large employment changes in

extraordinarily large counties. As long as we divide all of these changes by the number of persons in the

county, the estimated coefficient on the Wal-Mart variable still measures the effect of a Wal-Mart store


22
   Sam’s Clubs are different because customers have to become members, like at Costco. The small number of Wal-
Mart Neighborhood Markets is not included in any data we have, but the first one did not open until 1998, beyond
the sample period used for most of our analysis.
23
   Downloaded from http://www.census.gov/datamap/fipslist/AllSt.txt (as of April 5, 2005).
24
   The code for creating consistent counties over time through 2000 was provided by Emek Basker, and
supplemented by us.
25
   Downloaded from http://www.census.gov/popest/archives/ (as of April 5, 2005).
26
   Downloaded from http://www.census.gov/tiger/tms/gazetteer/county2k.txt (as of April 5, 2005).
27
   We use the Haversine distance formula for computing distances on a sphere [42].

                                                    11
opening on the change in the level of retail employment or earnings. To control for overall income

growth that may affect the level of demand for retail, we include changes in total payrolls per person as a

control variable, to capture economic shocks specific to counties and years that could coincidentally be

associated with the distance-time interactions that make up the instrumental variable, since these shocks

likely affect specific regions in specific periods. In addition, all models include fixed year effects to

account for aggregate influences on changes in retail employment or earnings that might be correlated

with Wal-Mart openings, which occur with greater frequency later in the sample.

        We denote the county-level measures of retail employment and payrolls (per person) as Y, the

number of Wal-Mart stores (per person) as WM, total payrolls per person as TP, and year fixed effects (in

year s) as YRs. Indexing by county j (j = 1,…,J) and year t (t = 1,…,T), and defining α, β, γ, and δs as

scalar parameters, our baseline model for the change in the dependent variable for each observation jt is:

                                             T
(1)     ΔY jt = α + βΔWM jt + γΔTPjt + ∑ δ s YRs + ε jt .
                                             s =1


        Fixed county differences in the levels of the dependent variables drop out of the first-differenced

model. However, there may be systematic variation in these first differences across different regions,

corresponding to faster or slower growth. We allow for this in a highly flexible manner by also

estimating the first difference models including county fixed effects (CO), which allows for a different

linear trend for each county, so the model becomes

                                             T             J
(1’)    ΔY jt = α + β ΔWM jt + γΔTPjt + ∑ δ s YRs + ∑ ϕ i COi + ε jt ,
                                             s =1         i =1


where the φi are also scalar parameters.

Endogeneity of Wal-Mart Location Decisions and Identification

        Consistent estimation of equations (1) or (1’) requires that εjt is uncorrelated with the right-hand-

side variables. If Wal-Mart location decisions are based in part on contemporaneous and future changes

in employment or payrolls, then this condition could be violated. This endogeneity is natural, since Wal-

Mart would be expected to make location decisions (including the location and timing of store openings)



                                                    12
based on current conditions and future prospects, which might be related to both employment and payroll.

As but one example, Wal-Mart may open stores where real estate development and zoning have recently

become favorable to retail growth.

        Our identification strategy in light of this potential endogeneity is based on the geographic pattern

of Wal-Mart store openings over time. Figure 1 illustrates how Wal-Mart stores spread out

geographically throughout the United States, beginning in Arkansas as of 1965, expanding to Oklahoma,

Missouri, and Louisiana by 1970, Tennessee, Kansas, Texas, and Mississippi by 1975, much of the South

and the lower Midwest by 1985, more of the Southeastern seaboard, the plains, and the upper Midwest by

1990, and then, in turn, the Northeast, West Coast, and Pacific Northwest by 1995. After 1995, when the

far corners of the country had been entered, there was only filling in of stores in areas that already had

them. This pattern is consistent with Wal-Mart’s growth strategy, discussed in the Introduction.

        This pattern of growth generates an exogenous source of variation in the location and timing of

Wal-Mart store openings that provides natural instrumental variables for Wal-Mart store openings.28 In

particular, time and distance from Benton County, Arkansas predict where and when Wal-Mart stores will

open. However, this does not necessarily imply that time and distance can serve as instrumental variables

for exposure to Wal-Mart stores. If we posit an equation for Wal-Mart openings of the form

                                      J               T
(2)      ΔWM jt = κ + πΔTPjt + ∑ λi DISTi + ∑ μ sYR s + η jt ,
                                     i =1            s =1


then because equation (1’) already includes year and county fixed effects, and the latter capture all the

variation in distance, the time and distance variables in equation (2) give us no identifying information.

        However, equation (2) does not accurately capture the geographic and time-related pattern of

Wal-Mart openings. In particular, the additivity of the distance and year effects in equation (2) implies

28
   Jia [25] addresses the endogeneity of Wal-Mart store locations in a more structural fashion. In particular, she
studies the entry of chain stores such as Wal-Mart and K-Mart stores into local markets and their effects on the
numbers of small retailers (rather than retail employment) as a two-stage game in which Wal-Mart and K-Mart first
enter local markets, and in the second stage small retailers decide whether to enter. Her estimates suggest that
during the 1988-1997 sample period Wal-Mart’s expansion is responsible for half to three quarters of the decline in
the number of small retailers. In addition, she shows that estimating a reduced-form model and ignoring the
endogeneity of entry decisions could underestimate the adverse effects of Wal-Mart on small retailers by 50-60
percent.

                                                      13
that differences across years in the probability of Wal-Mart openings are independent of distance from

Benton County. But as shown Figure 2, which depicts openings only, in the area near Arkansas openings

are concentrated in the earliest years, whereas in the 1981-1985 period, for example, openings are more

concentrated further away from Arkansas. This pattern becomes more obvious in the 1986-1990 and

1991-1995 maps, where openings thin considerably in the area of Wal-Mart’s original growth, and are

more common first in Florida, then in the Southeast and the lower Midwest, and finally in California, the

upper Midwest, and the Northeast.

         The fact that the rate of openings slows considerably in the Southeast, for example, in the later

years, and increases in areas further away—in a rough sense spreading out from Benton County like a

wave (albeit irregular)—contradicts the additivity of distance and time effects in equation (2), and instead

implies that the model for Wal-Mart openings should have a distance-time interaction, with the

probability of openings higher early in the sample period in locations near Benton County, but higher

later in the sample period further away from Benton County. Because this relationship holds through

1995, when Wal-Mart had begun to saturate border areas, we restrict most of our analysis to this period,

although we also report results using the full sample through 2002. The most flexible form of this

interaction, expanding on equation (2), includes interactions between dummy variables for year and for

the different distance ranges, as in

                                        J               T             T    J
(3)      ΔWM jt = κ + πΔTPjt + ∑ λi DISTi + ∑ μ s YRs + ∑∑ ϑis ( DISTi × YRs ) + η jt .
                                       i =1            s =1          s =1 i =1


         Given this specification, the endogenous effect of Wal-Mart openings is identified in equation (1’)

by using the distance-time interactions as instruments for exposure to Wal-Mart stores.29,30 Throughout,


29
  Soon after our research was completed, we discovered recent research done concurrently by Dube et al. [12],
which also exploits the geographic pattern of Wal-Mart openings to identify their effect on retail earnings growth.
This paper focuses only on earnings, and restricts the analysis to the 1992-2000 period. The discussion of the maps
in Figures 1 and 2, which suggest that Wal-Mart’s “fanning out” growth strategy had run its course after 1995 or so,
raises concerns about identification of the effects of Wal-Mart stores using data only from 1992-2000. In addition,
Dube et al. estimate the models in levels—i.e., retail earnings growth on the number of stores (both on a per person
basis)—instrumenting for the number of stores with distance-time interactions. However, as Figures 1 and 2 make
clear, it is openings that are predicted by the distance-time interaction, not the total number of stores; for example,
the number of stores remains high near Benton County late in the sample period. As a consequence, this model is
misspecified. If the distance-time interactions appear in the equation for openings (or the first difference for the

                                                        14
we report standard errors that cluster on state and year, which are robust to heteroscedasticity of the error

across state-year cells, and to spatial autocorrelations across counties within states.31

         A few comments regarding identification of the model are in order. First, although there are,

technically speaking, more instruments than are needed to identify the model, overidentifying tests are in

our context uninformative about the validity of the instruments. Conceptually, there is one instrument—

the interaction of distance and time—and all we do here is to use a flexible form of this variable. Were

there a good reason—based, for example, on location strategies gleaned from Sam Walton’s writings—to

think that there were particularly exogenous location decisions in a narrower time period or at a specific

distance from Benton County, then arguably one might want to use this information to identify the model,

and test for the validity of distance-time interactions from other periods or further distances using

overidentification tests. Walton’s writings, however, bolstered by the maps in Figure 2, suggest that

distance and time acted in a similar fashion throughout the entire period during which Wal-Mart stores

spread to the borders of the United States. Thus, the entire set of instruments is either jointly valid, based

on a priori arguments, or it is not.32

         Second, in addition to the distance-time interactions predicting store openings, we also must be

able to exclude distance-time interactions from the models for changes in retail employment and payrolls.

Given that points at a given distance from Benton County are located on a circle with Benton County at

its center, there is no obvious reason why this condition would be expected to be violated. A particular


number of stores), the equation in levels would have to have these interactions multiplied by a linear time trend,
which would capture the fact that the number of stores grew faster, for example, at distances far from Benton
County late in the sample period. An even more recent paper is by Drewianka and Johnson [10], who echo our
concern about the IV identification strategy in the more recent period they study (1990-2004). They instead simply
control for county-specific trends. However, the fact that the IV strategy we use probably makes little sense in part
of the period they study does not negate the endogeneity problem, which they do not address.
30
   See a longer working paper version of this paper [35] for a simple theoretical model that gives more rigorous
justification for our empirical specifications.
31
   Below, we also report estimates clustering on state only, which also allows temporal autocorrelation. The
standard errors are only slightly larger and the qualitative conclusions are unchanged. One problem with this level
of clustering is that given the large set of instrumental variables we have, the implicit number of degrees of freedom
falls below the number of exclusion restrictions, so we cannot calculate an F-statistic for the exclusion restrictions in
the first stage.
32
   More generally, suppose there is a continuous instrumental variable Z that is argued to be valid on a priori
grounds. One could not create a set of dummy variables corresponding to each value of Z and do an
overidentification test to establish the validity of Z as an instrument.

                                                        15
area—say, 500 miles straight east from Benton County—may have economic conditions or structure that

differ from those in Benton County and hence also have systematically different trends (or changes) in

retail employment or earnings. But this does not imply that we should expect similar influences at the

same time at points that are a common distance from Benton County, aside from the effects of Wal-Mart

in these areas. Indeed this seems likely to be particularly true for retail, which should exhibit little or no

regional concentration, but instead be roughly the same across regions with similar levels of income. In

contrast, this is less likely to hold for other industries, which—because they need not be located near their

customers—can be regionally concentrated; manufacturing is the prime example, but the same is true of

many other industries. Nonetheless, the model with fixed county effects allows for different trends by

county over the sample period, and thus should largely capture differential changes in economic

conditions across regions. Hence, even when looking at retail, we have more confidence in the exclusion

restrictions for the validity of the instruments when the county fixed effects are included. Moreover, for

this specification there is less reason to be skeptical of using this framework to study employment

changes in other industries, which can serve as a falsification test; in particular, we estimate the model for

manufacturing employment, which should not be affected, locally, by the opening of Wal-Mart stores.33

         Third, one might view the pattern of roll-out of Wal-Mart stores as indicating that store openings

are exogenous and therefore it is not necessary to correct for endogeneity. However, while the overall

pattern and timing appear to be exogenous, the exact counties in which stores locate are not. That is,

Wal-Mart’s decision to enter an approximate “ring” around Benton County, Arkansas, in a particular




33
  On the other hand, we cannot completely rule out some correlation of retail activity with county and year specific
shocks. Of course the most flexible model is the fully saturated one that includes county-specific fixed effects as
well as their interactions with the year fixed effects in the equations we estimate, allowing for arbitrary differences
in the changes in the dependent variables by county and year. In this case, of course, the distance-time interactions
would provide no identifying information. But even in the absence of attempts to account for endogeneity, a model
with unrestricted time effects for each county would not permit the identification of the effects of Wal-Mart stores.
Thus, a more restricted version of how distance-time interactions enter the employment and earnings equations
would have to be imposed whether or not we were addressing the endogeneity of Wal-Mart openings.

                                                        16
period may be exogenous, but where in the ring they enter is not, and it is this endogeneity with which we

are concerned, and for which our instrument corrects.34

V. Empirical Results

Descriptive Statistics

        Descriptive statistics for population, employment, and payroll are reported in Table 1. Most of

the statistics are for the A sample, with the exception of those for general merchandising. Statistics for

the B sample were similar, although counties in the B sample are larger since data are less likely to be

suppressed for larger counties and counties with larger retail sectors. On average, counties have

approximately 78,000 residents. The data cover 3,032 counties, 98 percent of the total. The average level

of aggregate retail employment is 5,659, or about 5.5 percent of total employment. Employment in

general merchandising is about one-sixth of the retail total, or 966 workers on average. Average

aggregate retail payrolls are around $92 million, and general merchandising payrolls are about $14

million. Although not reported in the table, average retail payrolls per worker across counties is around

$13,700, and the figure for general merchandising is around $13,100.

        Table 2 provides some descriptive statistics on Wal-Mart stores, as of 1995. As indicated in the

first row, for counties with one or more stores open the average number of stores is 1.43. The second row

indicates that just over half of counties have at least one Wal-Mart store. The remaining rows of the table

report the distribution of number of stores per county (for counties with one or more stores). Around 78

percent of the counties with Wal-Mart stores have only one store, about 13 percent have two stores, and

around 4 percent have three stores. There is then a smattering of observations with more stores (with a

maximum of 17 stores at the end of the sample period in Harris County, Texas, which includes Houston).

Preliminary Evidence on Endogeneity Bias

        It is useful to ask whether we can detect evidence of endogeneity, and infer something about the

direction of endogeneity bias, without relying explicitly on the identifying assumptions underlying the IV

34
  Khanna and Tice ([30], [31]) have also noted the geographic pattern of the spread of Wal-Mart stores that we
exploit. Based on this pattern, they study the effect of Wal-Mart entry on incumbent firms, treating Wal-Mart entry
as exogenous. They use somewhat larger areas than we do (based on the first three digits of zip codes), but even so,
decisions as to which of these to enter may be endogenous.

                                                      17
estimation. One way to get some indirect evidence on endogeneity is to look at the relationship between

past growth in retail employment and decisions to open Wal-Mart stores. As Figures 1 and 2 indicate, the

correct comparison for any period is not between all counties where stores did and did not open. Rather,

for a particular period we should identify the region in which many stores were opening, and ask

whether—within that region—stores were opening in fast-growing counties.35

        We did this comparison for different selected periods and regions to give a sense of what this

calculation yields throughout the sample. We first focused on store openings in the early 1980s, in states

close to Arkansas, restricting attention to openings in the 1983-1985 period. We computed openings per

state, and chose the ten states with the highest number of openings. These ten states are shaded in the first

map in Figure 3, which clearly shows that these are states in relatively close proximity to Arkansas (as

well as Florida). The map also shows the same openings, in the 1981-1985 period, which were displayed

in Figure 2. The overlaying of these openings and the shaded states makes clear that these were the states

in which openings were concentrated in this period. For each county in these ten states, we computed the

annualized rate of growth of retail employment over the immediately preceding five-year period 1977-

1982.36 We then estimated linear probability models for whether Wal-Mart entered a county (opening its

first store, which, as Table 2 shows, would be the case for most openings), as a function of the prior

growth rate of retail employment. We add controls for county population as well as state dummy

variables, to account for the effects of population density as well as other unspecified features of states on

store openings. We then did the same for the 1988-1990 period, using retail employment growth from

1982-1987, and the 1993-1995 period, using retail employment growth from 1987-1992. The

corresponding maps are shown in the second and third panels of Figure 3.

        The results, reported in Table 3, indicate that Wal-Mart stores entered counties—among an

appropriate comparison group—that had previously had faster retail employment growth. For the 1993-

1995 estimation, the set of ten states with the most openings includes California and Washington, which


35
   A recent study commissioned by Wal-Mart (Global Insight, 15) instead does the first comparison, and erroneously
concludes that there is no evidence of endogeneity bias.
36
   This window is arbitrary, but follows the calculation in the Global Insight study [15].

                                                     18
are quite far geographically from the other eight states and therefore the comparison to counties in those

other states may not be appropriate; we therefore also show results excluding these two states. As the

table shows, in every case the relationship between prior growth and whether a store opened is positive

(and sometimes significant, although that is not of foremost interest here). This evidence does not

directly address the issue of endogeneity bias—which concerns the link between store openings and

future retail employment absent store openings. But it does suggest that endogeneity is a concern.

First-Stage Estimates

        Turning to our main analysis, Figure 4 displays information on the estimated coefficients of the

distance-time interactions from the first stage, although for ease of interpretability we present estimates

for the change in the number of stores rather than the number of stores per person. The omitted categories

are 900-1000 miles and 1988. The first-stage regression includes 272 distance-time interactions (between

17 year dummy variables and 16 distance dummy variables). In Figure 4, we break these up into the 16

distance groups, for each distance range around Benton County.

        Starting with distances near Benton County, Arkansas, we see that store openings were more

likely early in the sample period, and less likely later on. Conversely, at distances far from Benton

County store openings were much more common later in the sample period. Alternatively, store openings

were much more likely at nearby distances early in the sample, and at farther distances later in the sample.

Thus, these regressions confirm the impression from the maps in Figure 2 that store openings spread out

over the sample period, concentrated near Benton County early in the sample period and farther later.

Effects on Retail Sector Employment

        We now turn to the OLS and IV estimates. The OLS estimates identify the effect of Wal-Mart

simply from differences in outcomes in counties and years where stores opened compared to those where

they did not. In contrast, the IV estimates identify the effect from differences in outcomes in counties and

years with a high versus a low predicted probability of store openings, as depicted in Figure 4. Thus, for

example, a negative effect of Wal-Mart openings on retail employment will be inferred when retail

employment fell (or grew more slowly) in county-year pairs that were in geographic regions (defined by


                                                   19
distance from Benton County, Arkansas) and years in which store openings were more likely, without

reference to the actual counties within these regions in which stores opened.

         Table 4 reports estimates for retail employment. The dependent variable is the change in retail

employment per person at the county level, and the Wal-Mart measure is the change in the number of

stores per person. We report estimates both excluding and including county-specific time trends

(equations (1) and (1’)); the latter is our preferred specification. The estimates for retail employment (and

earnings) turn out to be insensitive to the inclusion of the county fixed effects, which bolsters the validity

of the assumption that the instrumental variables are not correlated with the error terms.

         The OLS estimates point to increases of 40-55 workers in both aggregate retail and general

merchandising employment from a Wal-Mart store opening.37 For the A sample, the estimates imply an

increase in county-level aggregate retail employment of about 0.8 percent at the mean. The estimate for

general merchandising is slightly greater than the estimate for aggregate retail, for the B sample for which

these estimates are comparable, suggesting that there is at most a small reduction in employment in the

rest of the retail sector; however, the difference is not significant. Finally, as we would expect, the

estimated coefficient of total payrolls per person is positive.

         In contrast to the OLS estimates, the IV estimates—which conditional on the identification

strategy being valid are interpretable as causal effects of Wal-Mart openings on retail employment—point

to employment declines in the aggregate retail sector.38 Without county-specific trends, the estimates for

the A sample indicate that a Wal-Mart store opening reduces employment at the county level by about

167 workers. With county-specific trends the estimate falls to 146. In the B sample the estimates are

smaller by about 30. Since the average number of workers in a Wal-Mart store is about 360 [4], the

estimated employment decline (using a figure of 150, close to the equation (1’) estimate) implies that

each Wal-Mart worker takes the place of 1.4 retail workers. On a county basis, this estimate implies a 2.7

37
  The retail estimates are similar to the long-run OLS estimates reported by Basker [4].
38
  The F-statistics for the joint significance in the first-stage regression of the distance-time interactions that serve as
instruments range from 3.9 to 12.8 across the different samples and specifications in Table 4. These F-statistics are
sometimes small enough that asymptotic results may not apply well [43]. However, in such cases bias in the IV
estimates is in the direction of the OLS bias [8], and therefore such bias cannot account for the differences between
our IV and OLS results.

                                                          20
percent reduction in retail employment attributable to a Wal-Mart store opening. This could reflect a

combination of closings of other retail establishments and employment reductions at those establishments.

And of course these estimates do not imply absolute declines in retail employment, but only that retail

employment was lower than it would have been had Wal-Mart stores not opened.

         The estimated magnitude strikes us as plausible. Government data indicate that sales per

employee are much higher at large retailers than at small retailers,39 and a McKinsey study [26] suggests

much higher sales per employee at Wal-Mart than at other large retailers (in 1995, 70 percent higher than

Sears, and 36 percent higher than K-Mart). In addition, a negative employment effect would be expected

if Wal-Mart is indeed more efficient and can be profitable while charging significantly lower prices.40

Finally, Wal-Mart is currently about 1 percent of the workforce, but it was smaller during most of sample

period, so this displacement figure does not imply large-scale employment declines; as noted above, it

implies that a store opening results in a 2.7 percent decline in retail employment.

         For general merchandising, the IV estimates continue to point to increases in employment

(sometimes significant), qualitatively similar to the OLS estimates although smaller. We might expect

increases in general merchandising employment since this is the sector in which Wal-Mart is classified.

However, the evidence that the estimated increase in general merchandising employment is much less

than the size of an average Wal-Mart store suggests that Wal-Mart reduces employment mainly at other

employers in the general merchandising sector, rather than in the remainder of the retail sector.41 Thus,

the estimates are consistent with Wal-Mart reducing overall retail employment, although shifting its

39
   See, for example, data from the 2002 Economic Census, at
http://factfinder.census.gov/servlet/IBQTable?_bm=y&-geo_id=&-ds_name=EC0244SSSZ1&-_lang=en (as of
September 21, 2006).
40
   There is a potential countervailing positive effect from Wal-Mart’s greater efficiency if lower prices in retail boost
consumer demand enough through either income or substitution effects that overall retail sector employment
increases. However, this “retail scale” effect may be small if the types of products sold at Wal-Marts and the retail
establishments with which they compete are more likely to be inferior goods, so that much of the increase in real
income stemming from lower prices is spent in other sectors of the economy (including higher-end retail).
41
   There is a potentially important implication of this finding for interpreting our estimates. In particular, the
estimated effects of Wal-Mart openings could be exaggerated if Wal-Mart store openings tend to spur the opening of
other large retailers in the same area, in which case we are effectively estimating the impact of more than just Wal-
Mart stores. (It is unlikely that the issue is one of Wal-Mart opening where other large retailers already exist, given
the geographic pattern of Wal-Mart openings. Also, even if this sometimes happens, our IV estimates will not pick
up the effects of these other stores because their openings will not be predicted by the first stage.) But given that
general merchandising employment scarcely rises when Wal-Mart stores open, this seems unlikely.

                                                        21
composition toward general merchandising; recall, though, that the evidence for general merchandising

(and the B sample overall) may be tainted by endogenous sample selection because of suppressed data.

        The finding that the OLS estimates of employment effects for the aggregate retail sector are

generally positive, and the IV estimates negative, is consistent with Wal-Mart endogenously locating

stores in places where retail growth is increasing. As shown in the table, there is always statistically

significant evidence of endogeneity bias in the aggregate retail sector. We also reject exogeneity in the

estimates for general merchandising, and the bias still appears to be upward, which is what we would

expect if Wal-Mart enters markets where prospects for general merchandising are good. However, we

should not expect much endogeneity bias in the estimated effect of Wal-Mart on employment in this

subsector, and that is reflected in the much smaller difference between the OLS and IV estimates of the

effects of Wal-Mart on general merchandising employment. Wal-Mart may well have chosen to locate in

areas where retail growth was likely to be strong, but the composition of the retail sector is more likely to

be a direct consequence of where Wal-Mart chose to locate than a determinant of its location decisions.

Effects on Retail Sector Earnings

        Table 5 turns to effects on retail sector earnings. The dependent variable is now the change in

retail payrolls per person. The first three columns report results without county-specific trends, and the

last three columns including these trends. The results are similar in both cases.

        The OLS estimates indicate that a Wal-Mart store opening is associated with increases in retail

payrolls of about $0.2 to $0.3 million in aggregate retail and about $0.44 million in the general

merchandising sector. In contrast, the IV estimates indicate that aggregate retail payrolls fall when a Wal-

Mart store opens, by approximately $1.1 to $1.7 million for the A sample; the range is slightly smaller for

the B sample. In addition, the evidence is weaker statistically for the B sample and when county-specific

trends are included (not significant for the A sample). However, the positive effect of Wal-Mart openings

on payrolls in general merchandising remains, and the estimates are a bit larger than the OLS estimates.

        The payroll results largely parallel those for employment. Of course, much of the public debate

over Wal-Mart concerns the levels of wages Wal-Mart pays and whether it drives down wages of


                                                   22
competitors. As pointed out earlier, because the CBP data do not distinguish part-time from full-time

workers, the data cannot be used to compute hourly wages. In addition, the data do not allow any controls

for individual worker characteristics that would be required to determine whether wages were changing

for comparable workers. Nonetheless, we estimated models for changes in retail earnings per worker,

with the Wal-Mart variable in this case simply measuring the change in the number of stores. The point

estimates were positive for the A sample (although small—indicating increases of $7 to $47—and

insignificant); they were negative and insignificant for the B sample. Thus, there is certainly no evidence

that Wal-Mart openings reduce retail earnings per worker. Taken literally, the implication of no impact of

store openings on wages would imply that the labor supply curve to the retail industry is close to perfectly

elastic. A highly elastic labor supply curve may not be unreasonable, given that retail is a small share of

the overall labor market, and is a very low-skill sector in which labor supply can respond very quickly

and strongly to wage changes (in contrast to a highly-skilled sector). However, we remind the reader that

the CBP data could be quite misleading about wage effects. For example, if Wal-Mart induces a shift

toward older or full-time workers, increased retail earnings per worker could be consistent with a lower

wage rates for comparable workers.42 Regardless, the combined estimates indicate that overall earnings

in the retail sector decline after Wal-Mart stores open.

Identification

         A natural principal concern with our approach is identification. We therefore address a few

issues related to identification in Table 6, focusing on the aggregate retail employment estimates for the

full (A) sample. First, if we are actually detecting effects of Wal-Mart stores, then paralleling the

evidence of adverse effects on retail, we should fail to find evidence of store openings on industries

unlikely to be affected. Employment in service industries and retail sectors other than department stores

do not necessarily provide useful falsification exercises of this type, since the location of retail activity


42
  In principle, one could study these issues using data from the Current Population Survey (CPS) or the Decennial
Census of Population. However, in the CPS most county identifiers are suppressed for reasons of confidentiality.
Census data are less attractive because they are not available for each year but only once a decade. Furthermore, in
downloadable Census estimates by county from all long-form respondents, neither hours, education, nor income are
available by industry.

                                                      23
may affect these other industries and sectors. However, it is useful to look at manufacturing. Although

this industry might be affected by cost pressures exerted by Wal-Mart, there is no reason why the effects

of Wal-Mart openings should be felt on local manufacturers. As noted earlier, we are skeptical of using

our instrumental variables approach to study an industry like manufacturing when the county fixed effects

are excluded, since the other industry may have strong region-specific trends; but we are more confident

with the county fixed effects included. The results for manufacturing are reported in row 2 of Table 6.

We find that in the specifications with the county dummies, there is no effect of Wal-Mart openings. On

the other hand, the specifications without the county dummies show a positive effect. The fact that we

only get an effect when we exclude the county dummies (which means we do not allow for county-

specific trends) helps confirm our concerns about the validity of the instrument for manufacturing, as the

differences in results imply that the instrument(s) is (or are) correlated with these trends. But the results

with the county dummies clearly provide a better falsification test, and show no effect of Wal-Mart

precisely where we should see none.

        A second concern is that our distance-time interaction instrumental variables do not simply

capture the beginning of the period when Wal-Mart stores first “reach” a region, but also periods in which

they were filling in regions where numerous stores had already opened. For example, Figure 4 shows that

in the band 200-300 miles from Benton County, there are higher predicted openings through 1982, when

stores were first opening in this region, as well as in 1987, when stores were filling in this region. This is

not necessarily problematic for the IV strategy. The distance and time interactions predict where and

when stores were opened, whereas the endogeneity we are trying to purge concerns the choice about the

particular counties in which to open stores given that Wal-Mart was opening stores in a particular region.

So the first-stage estimates will also reflect stores opening in the 200-300 mile band in 1987. But all

counties in this band in this year have a higher predicted probability of a store opening, not just the

specific counties where stores opened. Nonetheless, it might be preferable to focus on the variation in

store openings associated with Wal-Mart’s initial wave of entry into a region, which may be more

exogenous than where the company chose to fill in stores. To do this, we restricted the distance-time


                                                    24
interactions included in the first stage to those picking up either observations early in the sample period

close to Benton County (1982 or earlier and within 500 miles of Benton County), and observations late in

the sample period far from Benton County (1992 or later and 1,000 miles or more from Benton County).

Figure 4 suggests that these periods and distances capture distinct initial waves of Wal-Mart openings.

The estimates, reported in row 3 of Table 6, are relatively similar to the baseline estimates, although the

specification with county dummy variables included provides weaker evidence (significant only at the 10-

percent level) of negative employment effects.43

           Finally, our identification strategy requires that there not be unmeasured shocks to the dependent

variable that are common to points on a ring of given radius around Benton County. We argued that this

condition seems likely to hold, since there is no obvious reason why all points within, say 400-500 miles

should exhibit systematically different changes in particular periods relative to Benton County (aside

from the effects of Wal-Mart). However, for short distances around Benton County it is possible that

there are common shocks, and if it is the differences in retail employment growth between these short

distances and greater distances that identifies the effects of Wal-Mart in our empirical analysis, then we

could be picking up a spurious relationship. In rows 4-6 of Table 6, we present evidence assessing this

possibility, dropping all observations on counties within, in turn, 100, 200, and 300 miles of Benton

County. As the table shows, the results are robust to dropping these counties.

Robustness and Other Analyses

           We close the empirical analysis by briefly describing some additional analyses exploring the

robustness of our results on retail employment, and some other issues, in Table 7. As noted earlier, we

have reported standard errors clustered on state and year. In row 2, we instead report estimates (which are

the same) with standard errors clustered on state only, which allows temporal autocorrelation within and

across counties in each state. The standard errors are larger in all cases, although not by that much, and

the statistical conclusions are unchanged. Note also that in column (2) the standard error changes by less.




43
     This specification uses 58 instead of 272 instruments.

                                                          25
This is what we would expect if the inclusion of the county-specific trends captures sources of

dependence between observations on the same county.

        We have included a control for total payrolls per person in all of the specifications reported thus

far. Because this variable includes retail payroll, it is potentially endogenous. In rows 3 and 4 we

therefore report two additional specifications: one with retail payrolls subtracted out of total payrolls; and

the other simply dropping the total payrolls control. The qualitative conclusions are very similar,

although both changes—and more so dropping the total payroll control—yield slightly larger negative

effects on retail employment. Next, we drop counties that never had a Wal-Mart store during the sample

period. In this case, identification of the effects of Wal-Mart stores comes only from the time-series

variation in store openings for the set of counties that got a store, providing a potentially “cleaner” control

group. The results, reported in row 5, are qualitatively similar, although the estimated negative

employment effects are smaller.

        We also consider some other differences in the sample definition. Row 6 reports estimates

dropping the small number of counties with stores that closed; these estimates are very close to the

baseline estimates.44 Following that, row 7 reports estimates extending through the entire period covered

by the data—ending in 2002 rather than 1995—even though, as discussed earlier, the identifying

relationship between time, location, and store openings is strongest through 1995. For the longer period

the evidence suggests sharper declines in retail employment. Thus far we have ignored information on

Sam’s Clubs. We do not necessarily want to treat these as equivalent to other Wal-Mart stores, so we

study them in two ways. First, we omit all counties that had a Sam’s Club at some point during the

sample period; 97 percent of these counties also had a Wal-Mart. Second, we use the full sample but treat

each Sam’s Club store like other Wal-Mart stores. As the table shows in rows 8 and 9, the results

dropping the counties with Sam’s Clubs are qualitatively similar, although the estimated effects are

smaller. The results are quite insensitive to simply treating Sam’s Clubs like other Wal-Mart stores.


44
  An alternative is to incorporate information on store closings as reductions in the number of Wal-Mart stores.
However, we are skeptical that store closings and openings have symmetric (opposite-sign) effects, and we do not
have a natural instrument for store closings.

                                                     26
        To this point we have simply used a count of Wal-Mart stores (on a per capita basis) to measure

exposure to Wal-Mart. But store size varies—for example, counties with smaller populations may get

smaller stores45—and the exposure measure should perhaps take this into account. Thus, we computed an

exposure measure that weights by store size relative to the average store size. These estimates are

reported in row 10, and reveal somewhat larger effects. Note, however, that in our data size is measured

as of the end of the sample period only, and will not pick up things such as the conversion of a regular

store to a Supercenter.

        The effects of Wal-Mart stores may depend on the type of area in which they are located. In rural

and less dense counties Wal-Mart may have a larger impact because there are fewer other large-scale

competitors before they enter. Alternatively, in these areas the stores may be more likely to create jobs

because shoppers (and workers) come from other counties. As shown in Figure 5, Wal-Mart stores

originally opened more commonly in rural areas, and over time shifted to more urban areas. (This

classification is based on whether the store opened in what is now classified as an MSA.) Because we do

not have a clean classification of counties located in MSA’s or not, we instead focus on county population,

and estimate the models for two samples: those with above median population at the beginning of the

sample period, and those with below median population. As shown in rows 11 and 12, there is no clear

connection between density and the effects of Wal-Mart stores.

        Finally, we use equations differenced over two and then three years, rather than one year. We do

this for a few reasons. First, there may be some anticipatory effects of Wal-Mart store openings. This

could lead to effects of store openings that are biased towards zero, if the shorter differences do not

include these anticipatory effects (which seem likely to be in the same direction as those occurring after

stores open). Second, the effects of store openings might not all occur within a year. Allowing for longer

differences can pick up longer-term effects, and it is ambiguous whether these are likely to be larger or

smaller.46 Third, because of how we code store openings, in about one-sixth of cases (for stores opening


45
  This may in part reflect whether or not the Wal-Mart store is a Supercenter.
46
  In principle, one can study contemporaneous and lagged effects more directly by including lagged store openings
as well. However, experimenting with such specifications in the IV setting led to uninformative estimates, because

                                                      27
between January and early March) the employment change and store opening may be misaligned, likely

biasing the estimated effect towards zero. By using longer differences, we reduce this problem

substantially. As the estimates in the last two rows of Table 7 show, with two- and three-year differences

the estimates are qualitatively very similar (and were for the other samples, for general merchandising,

and for OLS as well as IV), but always slightly larger in absolute value the longer the differences, as we

might have expected from the first and third considerations discussed above.47

VI. Conclusions and Discussion

         Motivated in large part by local policy debates over Wal-Mart store openings, and the large size

of Wal-Mart relative to the retail sector, we estimate the effects of Wal-Mart stores on retail employment

and earnings. Critics have charged that Wal-Mart’s entry into local labor markets reduces employment

and wages, and the company (and others) have countered that these claims are false, and touted Wal-

Mart’s retail job creation effects.

         Our analysis emphasizes the importance of accounting for the endogeneity of the location and

timing of Wal-Mart openings that—in our view, and as borne out by the data—is most likely to bias the

evidence against finding adverse effects of Wal-Mart stores. Our strategy for addressing the endogeneity

problem is based on a natural instrumental variables approach that arises because of the geographic and

time pattern of the opening of Wal-Mart stores, which slowly spread out in a wave-like fashion from the

first stores in Arkansas.

         The findings in this paper rather strongly belie claims, as well as recent research findings,

suggesting that Wal-Mart store openings lead to increased retail employment. On average, Wal-Mart

store openings reduce retail employment by about 2.7 percent, implying that each Wal-Mart employee

replaces about 1.4 employees in the rest of the retail sector. Driven in part by the employment declines,

retail earnings at the county level also decline as a result of Wal-Mart entry, by about 1.5 percent. It is

predicted values of store openings at different lag lengths were very highly correlated, which is not surprising given
the nature of our IV.
47
   Finally, although not reported in the table, we also estimated a simpler specification for the change in retail
employment per person on the change in the number of Wal-Mart stores (with the latter not on a per capita basis,
unlike the rest of the estimates reported in the paper). Both the OLS and IV estimates were qualitatively similar to
those reported in Table 4, and implied similar percentage changes in retail employment.

                                                       28
harder to draw any firm conclusions regarding the effects of Wal-Mart on wages, although the data do not

provide any indication that retail earnings per worker are affected by Wal-Mart openings.

         Note that the estimated adverse effects on retail employment do not imply that the growth of Wal-

Mart has resulted in lower absolute levels of retail employment. Like in all studies of this type, the

estimates are relative to a counterfactual of what would have happened to retail employment absent the

effects of Wal-Mart. From 1961, the year before the first Wal-Mart store opened, through 2004, the last

full year for which we have a count of the Wal-Mart Discount Stores and Supercenters, retail employment

in the United States grew from 5.56 million to 15.06 million, or 271 percent, considerably faster than

overall employment (242 percent).48 If each of the 3,066 stores present in January of 2005 reduced retail

employment by our estimate of 146 workers (Table 4, column (4)) relative to the counterfactual, then our

estimates imply that, in the absence of Wal-Mart, retail employment would have instead grown to 15.51

million as of 2004, or 3 percent higher than the observed figure. So the negative employment effects of

Wal-Mart that we estimate simply imply that retail employment growth was a bit more modest than it

would otherwise have been, growing by 271 percent from 1961 through 2004, rather than 279 percent.

The estimates do imply, however, that retail employment is lower than it would have been in counties that

Wal-Mart entered, and hence that Wal-Mart has negative rather than positive effects on net job creation in

the retail sector.

         The lower retail employment associated with Wal-Mart does not necessarily imply that Wal-Mart

stores worsen the economic fortunes of residents of the markets that these stores enter. Our results apply

only to the retail sector, and we suspect that there are not aggregate employment effects, at least in the

longer run, as labor shifts to other uses. Wage effects are more plausible, although these may operate

more on the manufacturing side through the buying power that Wal-Mart exerts, as opposed to the retail

side which is a low-wage sector regardless of Wal-Mart—although there are exceptions such as relatively

highly-paid grocery workers who may be harmed from competition with Supercenters. If there are wage

(or employment) effects that arise through cost pressures on Wal-Mart’s suppliers, however, they would

48
   See http://data.bls.gov/PDQ/servlet/SurveyOutputServlet?&series_id=CEU4200000001 and
ftp://ftp.bls.gov/pub/suppl/empsit.ceseeb1.txt (as of December 22, 2006).

                                                   29
not necessarily be concentrated in the counties in which stores open, so that our methods would not

identify them.

         Moreover, Wal-Mart entry may also result in lower prices that increase purchasing power, and if

prices are lowered not just at Wal-Mart but elsewhere as well, the gains to consumers may be widespread.

Furthermore, the gains may be larger for lower-income families [19], although it is also possible that

labor market consequences for these families are also more adverse.

         Another line of criticism of Wal-Mart is that through lowering wages it increases the burden on

taxpayers by increasing eligibility for and receipt of government benefits.49 However, a key implicit

assumption is that in the absence of Wal-Mart, employees of the company would have higher-paying jobs,

rather than, for example, no jobs. Thus, the validity of this criticism hinges on whether Wal-Mart’s entry

into a labor market affects overall employment and wages. It is also worth pointing out that if Wal-Mart

causes both earnings and price declines for low-income families, then taxpayer burden could increase

even if the price declines more than offset the earnings declines for these families, because government

programs are typically tied to earnings.

         Thus, aside from the question of employment effects, there are numerous remaining questions of

considerable interest regarding the effects of Wal-Mart on labor markets and goods markets, on

consumption, and on social program participation and expense. In addition, of course, there are non-

economic issues that play a role in the debate over Wal-Mart, such as preferences for downtown shopping

districts versus suburban malls. The identification strategy developed in this paper may prove helpful in

estimating the effects of Wal-Mart stores on some of these other outcomes as well.




49
  A report by the Democratic Staff of the Committee on Education and the Workforce of the U.S. Congress [33]
claims that because of Wal-Mart’s low wages, an average Wal-Mart employee costs federal taxpayers an extra
$2,103 in the form of tax credits or deductions, or public assistance such as healthcare, housing, and energy
assistance (see also [11]). There are many heroic assumptions needed to construct such estimates, and this is not the
place to dissect them.

                                                       30
                                               References

[1] Artz, G.M., J.C. McConnon, Jr., The impact of Wal-Mart on host towns and surrounding communities
in Maine, Working Paper, Office of Social and Economic Trend Analysis, Iowa State University (2001).
Available at http://www.seta.iastate.edu/retail/publications/artz_narea_paper.pdf (as of September 7,
2005).

[2] Barnes, N.G., A. Connell, L. Hermenegildo, L. Mattson, Regional differences in the economic impact
of Wal-Mart, Business Horizon 39 (1996) 21-25.

[3] Basker, E., Selling a cheaper mousetrap: Wal-Mart’s effect on retail prices, Journal of Urban
Economics 58 (2005a), 203-229.

[4] Basker, E., Job creation or destruction? Labor market effects of Wal-Mart expansion, Review of
Economics and Statistics 87 (2005b), 174-183.

[5] Bianchi, D., D. Swinney, Wal-Mart: A destructive force for Chicago communities and companies,
Center for Labor and Community Research (2004). Available at
http://www.clcr.org/publications/pdf/walmart_impact_analysis.pdf (as of September 7, 2005).

[6] Bianco, A., W. Zellner, Is Wal-Mart too powerful? Business Week, October 6 (2003). Available at
http://209.157.64.200/focus/f-news/990922/posts (as of October 31, 2005).

[7] Bowermaster, J., When Wal-Mart comes to town, New York Times, April 2, Section 6, Part 2 (1989),
p. 28.

[8] Chao, J.C., N.R. Swanson, Alternative approximations of the bias and MSE of the IV estimator under
weak identification with an application to bias correction, Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper No. 1418,
Yale University (2003).

[9] Davidson, S.M., A. Rummel, Retail changes associated with Wal-Mart’s entry into Maine,
International Journal of Retail & Distribution Management 28(2000), 162-169.

[10] Drewianka, S., D. Johnson, Wal-Mart and local labor markets, 1990-2004, unpublished paper,
University of Wisconsin—Milwaukee (n.d.).

[11] Dube, Arindrajit, and Ken Jacobs, Hidden cost of Wal-Mart jobs: Use of safety net programs by
Wal-Mart workers in California, Briefing Paper Series, UC Berkeley Labor Center, August (2004).

[12] Dube, A., B. Eidlin, B. Lester. Impact of Wal-Mart growth on earnings throughout the retail sector in
urban and rural counties, unpublished paper, University of California, Berkeley (2005).

[13] Freeman, G., Wal-Mart Supercenters: What’s in store for southern California? Los Angeles County
Economic Development Corporation, January (2004).

[14] Goetz, S.J., H. Swaminathan, Wal-Mart and county-wide poverty, AERS Staff Paper No. 371,
Department of Agricultural Economics and Rural Sociology, Pennsylvania State University (2004).
Available at http://cecd.aers.psu.edu/pubs/PovertyResearchWM.pdf (as of September 7, 2005).

[15] Global Insight, The economic impact of Wal-Mart (2005).

[16] Goldman, A., N. Cleeland, The Wal-Mart effect; An empire built on bargains remakes the working
world, Los Angeles Times, November 23, Business Desk, Part A (2003), p. 1.
[17] Hausman, J., Specification tests in econometrics, Econometrica 46 (1987), 1251-1271.

[18] Hausman, J., E. Leibtag, CPI bias from Supercenters: Does the BLS know that Wal-Mart exists?
Working Paper No. 10712, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts (2004).

[19] Hausman, J., E. Leibtag, Consumer benefits from increased competition in shopping outlets:
Measuring the effect of Wal-Mart, unpublished paper, MIT (2005).

[20] Hicks, M.J., and K. Wilburn, The regional impact of Wal-Mart entrance: A panel study of the retail
trade sector in West Virginia, Review of Regional Studies 31 (2001), 305-313.

[21] Hiltzik, M., Golden state; UFCW sacrifices workers while declaring victory, Los Angeles Times,
March 4, Business Desk, Part C (2004), p. 1.

[22] Holmes, T., The diffusion of Wal-Mart and economies of density, unpublished paper, University of
Minnesota (2005).

[23] Ingold, J., Disdain for Wal-Mart pulls neighbors together; opposition becomes a social phenomenon,
Denver Post, April 18, A Section (2004), p. A-01.

[24] Jacobs, A., In a historic black hamlet, Wal-Mart finds resistance, New York Times, March 6, Section
A (2004), p. 8.

[25] Jia, P., What happens when Wal-Mart comes to town: An empirical analysis of the discount retailing
industry, unpublished paper, MIT (2006).

[26] Johnson, B.C., Retail: The Wal-Mart effect, McKinsey Global Institute (2002).

[27] Kaufman, L., Wal-Mart casts eye northward, New York Times, February 16, Section C (1999), p. 1.

[28] Keon, T., E. Robb, L. Franz, Effect of Wal-Mart stores on the economic environment of rural
communities, Working Paper, Business and Public Administration Research Center and College of
Business and Public Administration, University of Missouri (1989).

[29] Ketchum, B.A., J.W. Hughes, Wal-Mart and Maine: The effect on employment and wages, Maine
Business Indicators 42 (1997), 6-8.

[30] Khanna, N., S. Tice, Strategic responses of incumbents to new entry: The effect of ownership
structure, capital structure, and focus, The Review of Financial Studies 13 (2000), 749-779.

[31] Khanna, N., S. Tice, The bright side of internal capital markets, Papers and Proceedings of the Sixty-
First Annual Meeting of the American Finance Association (2001), 1489-1528.

[32] McGee, J.E., When Wal-Mart comes to town: A look at how local retailers respond to the arrival of
the retailing giant, Journal of Business and Entrepreneurship 8 (1996), 43-52.

[33] Miller, G., Everyday low wages: The hidden price we all pay for Wal-Mart, Democratic Staff of the
Committee on Education and the Workforce, U.S. House of Representatives (2004). Available at
http://edworkforce.house.gov/democrats/WALMARTREPORT.pdf (as of September 7, 2005).

[34] Nieves, E, Our towns; taking on Wal-Mart, ahead of time, New York Times, August 1, Section B
(1995), p. 5.
[35] Neumark, D., J. Zhang, S. Ciccarella, The effects of Wal-Mart on local labor markets, National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 11782 (2005, revised 2007).

[36] Norman, A., The Case Against Wal-Mart, Raphel Marketing, Atlantic City, New Jersey (2004).

[37] PBS, One, two, three, four … we don’t want your Superstore, Frontline program: “Is Wal-Mart Good
for America?” November 16 (2004). Available at
http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/walmart/transform/protest.html (as of September 7,
2005).

[38] Peterson, M., J.E. McGee, Survivors of ‘W-day’: An assessment of the impact of Wal-Mart’s
invasion of small town retailing communities, International Journal of Retail & Distribution Management
28 (2000), 170-180.

[39] Quinn, B., How Wal-Mart is Destroying America and the World and What You Can Do about It, Ten
Speed Press, Berkeley, California (2000).

[40] Rimer, S., Around New England, Main Street faces peril, New York Times, February 28, Section 1
(1993), p. 22.

[41] Rodino Associates, Report on research for big box retail/superstore ordinance, Prepared for
Industrial and Commercial Development Division, Community Development Department, City of Los
Angeles (2003). Available at
http://www.lacity.org/council/cd13/houscommecdev/cd13houscommecdev239629107_04262005.pdf (as
of September 7, 2005).

[42] Sinnott, R.W., Virtues of the Haversine, Sky and Telescope 68 (1984), 159.

[43] Staiger, D., J.H. Stock, Instrumental variables regression with weak instruments, Econometrica 65
(1997), 557-586.

[44] Stone, K.E., The effect of Wal-Mart Stores on businesses in host towns and surrounding towns in
Iowa, Working Paper, Department of Economics, Iowa State University (1988). Available at
http://www.econ.iastate.edu/faculty/stone/Effect%20of%20Walmart%20-
%201988%20paper%20scanned.pdf (as of September 7, 2005).

[45] Stone, K.E., Impact of Wal-Mart stores on Iowa communities: 1983-93, Economic Development
Review 13 (1995), 60-69.

[46] Stone, K.E., Impact of the Wal-Mart phenomenon on rural communities, in D.P.
Ernstes and D.M. Hicks (Eds.), Increasing Understanding of Public Problems and Policies, Farm
Foundation, Chicago, Illinois, 1997, 189-200.

[47] Stone, K.E., G. Artz, A. Myles, The economic impact of Wal-Mart Supercenters on existing
businesses in Mississippi, Mississippi State University Extension Service, Fall (2002). Available at
http://msucares.com/pubs/misc/m1283.pdf (as of September 7, 2005).

[48] Wal-Mart Watch, Low prices at what cost? Annual Report (2005). Available at
http://fivestones.sitestream.com/pdf/2005-annual-report.pdf (as of September 7, 2005).

[49] Walton, S. Made In America: My Story, Doubleday, New York, New York (1992).
                                         Figure 1: Location of Wal-Mart Stores, 1965-2005




*
    Includes all locations as of January 31, 2005.
                                         Figure 2: Location of Wal-Mart Openings, 1962-2005




*
    Includes all openings as of January 31, 2005.
Figure 3: Geographic Concentration of Wal-Mart Openings by Period and Geographic Area
       Change in Number of                            Change in Number of                                     Change in Number of                                                                         Change in Number of
             Stores                                         Stores                                                  Stores                                                                                      Stores




                                                                                                                                                                                                  -0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                          -0.1




       -0.15
       -0.05
           0
        0.05
         0.1
        0.15
         0.2
        0.25
         0.3
                                                      -0.15
                                                      -0.05
                                                          0
                                                       0.05
                                                        0.1
                                                       0.15
                                                        0.2
                                                       0.25
                                                        0.3
                                                                                                      -0.15
                                                                                                                     -0.05
                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                 0.05
                                                                                                                                        0.1
                                                                                                                                              0.15
                                                                                                                                                     0.2
                                                                                                                                                           0.25
                                                                                                                                                                  0.3




        -0.2
        -0.1
                                                       -0.2
                                                       -0.1
                                                                                                              -0.1
         19                                             19                                                     19                                                                                           19
           78                                             7                                                      7                                                                                            7
         19                                             19 8                                                   19 8                                                                                         19 8
           7                                              7                                                      7                                                                                            7
         19 9                                           19 9                                                   19 9                                                                                         19 9
           80                                             80                                                     8                                                                                            8
         19                                             19                                                     19 0                                                                                         19 0
           81                                             8                                                      8                                                                                            81
         19                                             19 1                                                   19 1                                                                                         19
           82                                             82                                                     8                                                                                            8
         19                                             19                                                     19 2                                                                                         19 2
           83                                             8                                                      83                                                                                           83
         19                                             19 3                                                   19                                                                                           19
           84                                             8                                                      8                                                                                            8
         19                                             19 4                                                   19 4                                                                                         19 4
           8                                              8                                                      85                                                                                           85
         19 5                                           19 5                                                   19                                                                                           19
           86                                             86                                                     8                                                                                            8
                                                        19                                                     19 6                                                                                         19 6


                                                                                                                                                                                           Year
         19




                                                                                               Year
                                                          8




                                               Year
                                                                                                                                                                                                              87




Year
           87                                                                                                    87
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0 - 100 Miles




                                                        19 7                                                   19                                                                                           19
         19                                                                                                      8                                                                                            8




                                                                                                                                                                        200 - 300 Miles
                                                          88




                                                                            400 - 500 Miles
           88




                             600 - 700 Miles
         19                                             19                                                     19 8                                                                                         19 8
           89                                             8                                                      8                                                                                            89
                                                        19 9                                                   19 9                                                                                         19
         19
                                                          90                                                     9                                                                                            9
           90                                                                                                                                                                                               19 0
         19                                             19                                                     19 0
           91                                             9                                                      91
                                                                                                                                                                                                            19
                                                                                                                                                                                                              91
                                                        19 1                                                   19
         19
                                                          9                                                      9                                                                                            9
           9                                                                                                   19 2                                                                                         19 2
         19 2                                           19 2                                                                                                                                                  93
           93                                             9                                                      93
                                                                                                                                                                                                            19
                                                                                                               19
         19                                             19 3
                                                          94                                                     9                                                                                            9
           94                                                                                                  19 4                                                                                         19 4
         19                                             19                                                                                                                                                    95
           95                                             95                                                     95




                                                      Change in Number of                                     Change in Number of                                                                         Change in Number of
       Change in Number of
                                                            Stores                                                  Stores                                                                                      Stores
             Stores
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.25




                                                                                                                                                                                                  -0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                          -0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.3




                                                                                                       0.05
                                                                                                       0.15
                                                                                                       0.25




                                                                                                       -0.2
                                                                                                      -0.15
                                                                                                       -0.1
                                                                                                      -0.05
                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                        0.1
                                                                                                        0.2
                                                                                                        0.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                           19




                                                       0.05
                                                       0.15
                                                       0.25




                                                       -0.2
                                                      -0.15
                                                       -0.1
                                                      -0.05
                                                          0
                                                        0.1
                                                        0.2
                                                        0.3
                                                                                                                     19
                                                                                                                                                                                                              7




       -0.15
       -0.05
           0
        0.05
         0.1
        0.15
         0.2
        0.25
         0.3




        -0.2
        -0.1
                                                        19
         19
           78                                              7                                                           7
                                                                                                                     19 8                                                                                  19 8
         19                                             19 8                                                                                                                                                  7
           79                                              7                                                           79
                                                                                                                                                                                                           19 9
                                                                                                                     19
         19                                             19 9                                                           8                                                                                      8
           80                                              8                                                                                                                                               19 0
                                                        19 0                                                         19 0
         19                                                                                                            81                                                                                     81
           81                                              81                                                                                                                                              19
                                                        19                                                           19                                                                                       8
         19                                                82                                                          8
           82                                                                                                        19 2                                                                                  19 2
         19                                             19                                                             8                                                                                      83
           83                                              83                                                                                                                                              19
                                                        19                                                           19 3                                                                                     8
         19                                                8                                                           84
           84                                                                                                        19                                                                                    19 4
         19                                             19 4                                                           8                                                                                      8
           8                                               85
                                                                                                                     19 5                                                                                  19 5
         19 5                                           19                                                             8                                                                                      8
           86                                              8                                                                                                                                               19 6
                                                                                                                                                                                           Year




                                                        19 6                                                         19 6
                                                                                               Year




         19                                                                                                                                                                                                   87




                                               Year
                                                           8                                                           87




Year
           87                                                                                                                                                                                              19
                                                        19 7                                                         19
                                                                                                                       8                                                                                      8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     100 - 200 Miles




         19                                                8
                                                                                                                                                                         300 - 400 Miles




                                                                             500 - 600 Miles




           88                                                                                                                                                                                              19 8




                             700 - 800 Miles
         19                                             19 8                                                         19 8
                                                                                                                       8                                                                                      8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Figure 4: First-Stage Results for Change in Number of Stores




           89                                              89                                                                                                                                              19 9
         19                                             19                                                           19 9
                                                                                                                       9                                                                                      9
           90                                              90                                                                                                                                              19 0
         19                                             19                                                           19 0
                                                                                                                       91                                                                                     9
           91                                              91                                                                                                                                              19 1
         19                                             19                                                           19
                                                                                                                       9                                                                                      9
           9                                               9                                                                                                                                               19 2
         19 2                                           19 2                                                         19 2
                                                                                                                       9                                                                                      9
                                                           9                                                                                                                                               19 3
           93                                           19 3                                                         19 3
                                                                                                                       9                                                                                      9
         19                                                94                                                                                                                                              19 4
           94                                           19                                                           19 4                                                                                     95
         19                                                95                                                          95
           95
                                                                                                                   Change in Number of                              Change in Number of                              Change in Number of                              Change in Number of
                                                                                                                         Stores                                           Stores                                           Stores                                           Stores




                                                                                                                   -0.15
                                                                                                                   -0.05
                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                    0.05
                                                                                                                     0.1
                                                                                                                    0.15
                                                                                                                     0.2
                                                                                                                    0.25
                                                                                                                     0.3
                                                                                                                                                                    -0.15
                                                                                                                                                                    -0.05
                                                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                                                     0.05
                                                                                                                                                                      0.1
                                                                                                                                                                     0.15
                                                                                                                                                                      0.2
                                                                                                                                                                     0.25
                                                                                                                                                                      0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.3




                                                                                                                    -0.2
                                                                                                                    -0.1
                                                                                                                                                                     -0.2
                                                                                                                                                                     -0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -0.1
                                                                                                                     19                                               19                                               19                                               19
                                                                                                                       78                                               78                                               78                                               78
                                                                                                                     19                                               19                                               19                                               19
                                                                                                                       7                                                7                                                7                                                7
                                                                                                                     19 9                                             19 9                                             19 9                                             19 9
                                                                                                                       80                                               80                                               80                                               80
                                                                                                                     19                                               19                                               19                                               19
                                                                                                                       81                                               81                                               81                                               81
                                                                                                                     19                                               19                                               19                                               19
                                                                                                                       82                                               82                                               82                                               82
                                                                                                                     19                                               19                                               19                                               19
                                                                                                                       83                                               83                                               83                                               83
                                                                                                                     19                                               19                                               19                                               19
                                                                                                                       84                                               84                                               84                                               84
                                                                                                                     19                                               19                                               19                                               19
                                                                                                                       8                                                8                                                8                                                8
                                                                                                                     19 5                                             19 5                                             19 5                                             19 5
                                                                                                                       86                                               86                                               86                                               86
                                                                                                                     19                                               19                                               19                                               19




                                                                                                            Year
                                                                                                                                                             Year
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Year
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Year
                                                                                                                       87                                               87                                               87                                               87
                                                                                                                     19                                               19                                               19                                               19
                                                                                                                       88                                               88                                               88                                               88
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            800 - 900 Miles




                                                                                                                     19                                               19                                               19                                               19




                                                                                                                                         1500 - 1600 Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                          1300 - 1400 Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1100 - 1200 Miles
                                                                                                                       89                                               89                                               89                                               89
                                                                                                                     19                                               19                                               19                                               19
                                                                                                                       90                                               90                                               90                                               90
                                                                                                                     19                                               19                                               19                                               19
                                                                                                                       91                                               91                                               91                                               91
                                                                                                                     19                                               19                                               19                                               19
                                                                                                                       9                                                9                                                9                                                9
                                                                                                                     19 2                                             19 2                                             19 2                                             19 2
                                                                                                                       93                                               93                                               93                                               93
                                                                                                                     19                                               19                                               19                                               19
                                                                                                                       94                                               94                                               94                                               94
                                                                                                                     19                                               19                                               19                                               19
                                                                                                                       95                                               95                                               95                                               95




                                                                                                                   Change in Number of                              Change in Number of                              Change in Number of                              Change in Number of
                                                                                                                         Stores                                           Stores                                           Stores                                           Stores




                                                                                                                   -0.15
                                                                                                                   -0.05
                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                    0.05
                                                                                                                     0.1
                                                                                                                    0.15
                                                                                                                     0.2
                                                                                                                    0.25
                                                                                                                     0.3
                                                                                                                                                                    -0.15
                                                                                                                                                                    -0.05
                                                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                                                     0.05
                                                                                                                                                                      0.1
                                                                                                                                                                     0.15
                                                                                                                                                                      0.2
                                                                                                                                                                     0.25
                                                                                                                                                                      0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.3




                                                                                                                    -0.2
                                                                                                                    -0.1
                                                                                                                                                                     -0.2
                                                                                                                                                                     -0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -0.1




                                                                                                                     19                                               19                                               19                                               19
                                                                                                                       78                                               78                                               78                                               78
                                                                                                                     19                                               19                                               19                                               19
                                                                                                                       79                                               79                                               79                                               79




person. The omitted reference categories are 1988 and 900-1000 miles.
                                                                                                                     19                                               19                                               19                                               19
                                                                                                                       80                                               80                                               80                                               80
                                                                                                                     19                                               19                                               19                                               19
                                                                                                                       81                                               81                                               81                                               81
                                                                                                                     19                                               19                                               19                                               19
                                                                                                                       82                                               82                                               82                                               82
                                                                                                                     19                                               19                                               19                                               19
                                                                                                                       83                                               83                                               83                                               83
                                                                                                                     19                                               19                                               19                                               19
                                                                                                                       84                                               84                                               84                                               84
                                                                                                                     19                                               19                                               19                                               19
                                                                                                                       8                                                8                                                8                                                8
                                                                                                                     19 5                                             19 5                                             19 5                                             19 5
                                                                                                                       86                                               86                                               86                                               86
                                                                                                                     19                                               19                                               19                                               19




                                                                                                            Year
                                                                                                                                                             Year
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Year
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Year




                                                                                                                       87                                               87                                               87                                               87
                                                                                                                     19                                               19                                               19                                               19
                                                                                                                       88                                               88                                               88                                               88
                                                                                                                     19                                               19                                               19                                               19




                                                                                                                                         1600 - 1800 Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                          1400 - 1500 Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1200 - 1300 Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1000 - 1100 Miles




                                                                                                                       89                                               89                                               89                                               89
                                                                                                                     19                                               19                                               19                                               19
                                                                                                                       90                                               90                                               90                                               90
                                                                                                                     19                                               19                                               19                                               19
                                                                                                                       91                                               91                                               91                                               91




estimated for the change in the number of stores rather than the changes in the number of stores per
                                                                                                                     19                                               19                                               19                                               19
                                                                                                                       9                                                9                                                9                                                9
                                                                                                                     19 2                                             19 2                                             19 2                                             19 2
                                                                                                                       93                                               93                                               93                                               93
                                                                                                                     19                                               19                                               19                                               19




Panels show estimated coefficients of distance-year interactions from estimates of equation (3), although
                                                                                                                       94                                               94                                               94                                               94
                                                                                                                     19                                               19                                               19                                               19
                                                                                                                       95                                               95                                               95                                               95
                                           Figure 5: Locations of Wal-Mart Openings


                                    Percentage of Wal-Mart Openings in Urban Locations,
                                                        1977-1995
                           100.0%

                           90.0%

                           80.0%
  Percentage of Openings




                           70.0%

                           60.0%

                           50.0%

                           40.0%

                           30.0%

                           20.0%

                           10.0%

                            0.0%
                                 77

                                 78

                                 79

                                 80

                                 81

                                 82

                                 83

                                 84

                                 85

                                 86

                                 87

                                 88

                                 89

                                 90

                                 91

                                 92

                                 93

                                 94

                                 95
                               19

                               19

                               19

                               19

                               19

                               19

                               19

                               19

                               19

                               19

                               19

                               19

                               19

                               19

                               19

                               19

                               19

                               19

                               19
                                                                  Year


Classification is based on location of store in MSA.
Table 1: County-Level Summary Statistics, Population, Employment, and Payroll,
1977-1995
                                                        Means              Medians
                                                           (1)                (2)
 Population                                             78,223             22,644
                                                       (256,595)
 Number of counties/share of total                       3,032                 ...
                                                          0.98
 Aggregate retail employment (N=57,964)                  5,659              1,105
                                                       (19,758)
 Retail payrolls ($1,000’s) (N=57,964)                  92,208             14,990
                                                      (364,022)
 General merchandising employment                         966                195
 (B sample, N=37,999)                                   (2,691)
 General merchandising payrolls ($1,000’s)              14,170              2,477
 (B sample, N=37,999)                                  (43,099)
Figures are for full (A) sample except for general merchandising. In column (1)
standard deviations are reported in parentheses. Payrolls are in thousands of 1999
constant dollars.


    Table 2: County-Level Summary Statistics, Wal-Mart Stores, 1995
     Average number of stores, for counties with stores                   1.43
     Share with one or more stores open, all counties                   0.505
     Share with given number of stores, for counties with stores
        1 store                                                         0.783
        2 stores                                                        0.128
        3 stores                                                        0.042
        4 stores                                                        0.017
        5 stores                                                        0.013
        6 stores                                                        0.006
        7 stores                                                        0.004
        8 stores                                                        0.003
        9 stores                                                        0.002
      10 stores                                                         0.001
      11 stores                                                         0.001
      12 stores                                                        <0.001
      13 stores                                                        <0.001
      14 stores                                                        <0.001
      15 stores                                                        <0.001
      16 stores                                                        <0.001
      17 stores                                                        <0.001
     Number of counties                                                 3,064
    Numbers are for full (A) sample of observations with aggregate retail
    employment data in 1995.
Table 3: Estimated Relationships Between Store Openings and Prior Retail
Employment Growth
                                                                      1993-1995,
                               1983-       1988-         1993-      Excluding CA
            Openings in:       1985        1990          1995          and WA
                                (1)         (2)           (3)             (4)
Annualized Rate of
Growth of Retail             0.439***      0.191         0.122           0.407
Employment in                 (0.143)     (0.177)       (0.515)         (0.613)
Previous Five-Year
Period
N                               854         615           363             299
Estimates are from linear probability models, with standard errors robust to
heteroscedasticity. The states covered in each sample period are shown in Figure
3. The previous five-year periods corresponding to the three columns are: 1977-
1982, 1982-1987, and 1987-1992. County population in the ending year of these
five-year periods, and state dummy variables, are included as controls. Growth
rates are computed relative to the average at the beginning and end of each
period, because there are a handful of observations with retail employment of
zero. Growth rates are measured on an annualized basis. Thus, for example, the
estimate in column (1) implies that a 1 percent higher annual growth rate boosts
the probability of a store opening by 0.0044; this is a 2.7 percent increase in the
probability of a store opening.
Table 4: Estimated Effects of Wal-Mart Stores on Retail Employment
                                             County-Specific Time Trends Excluded                     County-Specific Time Trends Included
                                                          (Equation (1))                                          (Equation (1’))
                                         Agg. Retail        Agg. Retail       Gen. Merch.        Agg. Retail        Agg. Retail      Gen. Merch.
                                               (1)               (2)                (3)                (4)               (5)               (6)
                                          A Sample           B Sample          B Sample           A Sample           B Sample          B Sample
 OLS
    Wal-Mart stores                          44.52***         42.33***           54.74***           40.01***          42.75***           53.81***
                                             (6.29)            (9.11)             (3.94)             (6.02)            (9.61)            (3.99)
    Total payrolls per person                0.001***          0.001***          0.0001***           0.001***           0.001***         0.0001***
                                           (0.0002)          (0.0003)          (0.00003)           (0.0003)          (0.0003)          (0.00003)
    Adjusted R2                              0.084             0.109              0.081              0.068             0.089             0.038
 IV for Wal-Mart stores
    Wal-Mart stores                        -166.98***        -134.48**            29.36**          -146.35***          -105.80*          17.92
                                            (48.83)           (54.26)            (11.80)            (47.77)           (56.69)           (14.20)
    Total payrolls per person                0.001***          0.001***          0.0001**            0.001***           0.001***        0.0001***
                                           (0.0002)          (0.0004)          (0.00003)           (0.0003)          (0.0003)          (0.00003)
    F-statistics                              12.8               6.8                6.8                4.2               3.9               3.9
    Reject null of no endogeneity             Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes              Yes
    bias at 5% level
    N                                       54,554            32,668             32,668             54,554            32,668            32,668
The Wal-Mart variable is the change in the number of stores per person, and the dependent variable is the change in employment per
person. The coefficients measure the effect of one Wal-Mart store opening on county-level retail employment. The instrumental
variables are interactions between dummy variables for years and dummy variables for counties with centroids with a radius of 100
miles from Benton County, Arkansas, 101-200 miles, 201-300 miles, etc., out to 1800 miles. All of the radii except the last cover a 100
mile range; the last covers 1601-1800 miles, because there is only one county beyond the 1700 mile radius. All specifications include
year fixed effects, and the specifications in columns (4)-(6) also include the county dummy variables (in both the first and second stages).
Standard errors (shown in parentheses below the estimates) and F-statistics are calculated clustering on state and year, and hence allow
arbitrary contemporaneous correlations across counties in a state. The sample period covers 1977-1995. See notes to Table 1 for
additional details. ‘*’, ‘**’, and ‘***’ indicate the estimate is statistically significant at the 10-, 5-, or 1-percent level, respectively. The
results for the test of the null hypothesis of no endogeneity bias are based on bias-corrected bootstrapped empirical distributions for the
difference between the OLS and IV estimates, with the bootstrapping based on states and years rather than individual observations (the
level of clustering used in the standard error calculations); this is preferable to the conventional Hausman test [17] because OLS is
inefficient if there is either heteroscedasticity across counties or autocorrelation within counties.
Table 5: Estimated Effects of Wal-Mart Stores on Retail Payrolls ($1,000’s)
                                           County-Specific Time Trends Excluded               County-Specific Time Trends Included
                                                         (Equation (1))                                   (Equation (1’))
                                       Agg. Retail         Agg. Retail     Gen. Merch.    Agg. Retail       Agg. Retail      Gen. Merch.
                                             (1)                (2)               (3)          (4)              (5)                (6)
                                        A Sample            B Sample         B Sample      A Sample          B Sample          B Sample
 OLS
   Wal-Mart stores                         270.2***           166.4            458.9***     233.1***           172.5             427.6***
                                           (90.0)            (145.1)            (38.9)       (89.7)           (154.1)            (39.3)
   Total payrolls per person               0.024***           0.020***          0.001***     0.023***          0.020***          0.002***
                                          (0.005)            (0.005)          (0.0003)      (0.005)           (0.006)          (0.0003)
   Adjusted R2                             0.110              0.151             0.067        0.094             0.123             0.039
 IV for Wal-Mart stores
   Wal-Mart stores                      -1,711.4**          -1,669.8*           684.3***  -1,149.8          -1,547.6*            525.4***
                                           (778.1)           (912.6)           (132.2)      (735.8)           (894.4)           (149.2)
   Total payrolls per person               0.023***           0.020***          0.001***     0.023***          0.020***           0.002***
                                          (0.005)            (0.005)          (0.0003)      (0.005)           (0.006)          (0.0003)
   Reject null of no endogeneity            Yes                Yes               Yes          Yes               Yes                No
   bias at 5% level
   N                                      54,554             32,668            32,668       54,554            32,668            32,668
The notes from Table 4 apply. The only difference is that the dependent variable is the change in retail payrolls per person, so the
coefficients now measure the effect of one Wal-Mart store opening on county-level retail payrolls (measured in units of thousands of
1999 constant dollars). The F-statistics for the first stage are as reported in Table 4.
Table 6: Assessments of Identification
                                                                          County-Specific            County-Specific Time
                                                                       Time Trends Excluded            Trends Included
                                                                           (Equation (1))               (Equation (1’))
                                                                        Retail Employment             Retail Employment
                                                                                (1)                           (2)
 1. Table 4 estimates, retail employment                                    -166.98***                     -146.35***
                                                                              (48.83)                       (47.77)
 Falsification test, manufacturing employment
 2. IV [first-stage F-statistic]                                              160.74**                       -60.45
                                                                               (80.67)                       (73.05)
                                                                                [12.8]                        [4.2]
 Restricted IV’s isolating Wal-Mart entry
 3. Instrument with year-distance interactions for pairs satisfying         -190.47***                       -97.15*
     (i) 1982 or earlier and within 500 miles of Benton County,               (59.74)                        (54.45)
     and (ii) 1992 or later and 1,000 miles or more from Benton                [7.7]                           [7.8]
     County [first-stage F-statistic], retail employment
 Exclude counties near Benton County
 4. Exclude counties within 100 miles of Benton County                      -179.27***                      -159.34***
     (N=53,716)                                                               (52.59)                        (50.86)
 5. Exclude counties within 200 miles of Benton County                      -197.59***                      -177.03***
     (N=51,539)                                                               (58.22)                        (56.80)
 6. Exclude counties within 300 miles of Benton County                      -207.38***                      -185.66***
     (N=47,321)                                                               (64.84)                        (64.31)
Table reports IV estimates of coefficient on change in number of Wal-Mart stores per person. See notes to Tables 1 and 4.
All estimates are for A sample. Sample sizes are the same as in Table 4. Estimated coefficients of total payroll per person
variable, where included, are not shown.
Table 7: Robustness Analyses
                                                                             County-Specific            County-Specific Time
                                                                          Time Trends Excluded            Trends Included
                                                                              (Equation (1))               (Equation (1’))
                                                                           Retail Employment             Retail Employment
                                                                                     (1)                          (2)
 1. Table 4 estimates                                                          -166.98***                     -146.35***
                                                                                  (48.83)                      (47.77)
 2. Cluster on state only                                                       -166.98***                    -146.35***
                                                                                  (55.94)                      (49.28)
 3. Subtract retail payroll out of total payroll per person control             -174.07***                    -153.74***
                                                                                  (45.07)                      (49.57)
 4. Omit total payroll per person control                                       -181.58***                    -162.07***
                                                                                  (46.12)                      (51.23)
 5. Drop counties that never have a store (N=30,957)                            -94.40***                    -103.10***
                                                                                  (30.63)                      (34.95)
 6. Drop counties with closed stores                                            -166.68***                    -144.08***
     (N=53,746)                                                                   (43.15)                      (47.19)
 7. Through 2002                                                               -184.84***                     -215.29***
     (N=75,482)                                                                   (41.27)                      (59.53)
 8. Drop counties with Sam’s Clubs                                             -150.47***                     -130.88***
     (N=49,031)                                                                   (43.63)                      (47.31)
 9. Combine Wal-Mart stores with Sam’s Clubs                                   -161.44***                     -175.96***
                                                                                  (42.72)                      (47.81)
 10. Weighted by store size                                                    -216.12***                     -223.48***
                                                                                  (59.53)                      (62.41)
 11. Counties with above median population (21,000) in 1977                        -81.13                    -105.00**
       (N=27,290)                                                                 (57.58)                      (48.90)
 12. Counties with below median population (21,000) in 1977                      -103.28*                        -90.03
       (N=27,264)                                                                 (53.48)                      (59.70)
 13. Two-year differences                                                        -196.48***                   -209.61***
      (N=51,429)                                                                  (34.73)                      (48.49)
 14. Three-year differences                                                      -206.03***                   -224.35***
      (N=48,362)                                                                  (35.81)                      (45.24)
Table reports IV estimates of coefficient on change in number of Wal-Mart stores per person. See notes to Tables 1 and 4.
All estimates are for A sample. Sample sizes are the same as in Table 4 unless otherwise noted. Estimated coefficients of
total payroll per person variable, where included, are not shown. For the estimates labeled “weighted by store size,” stores are
weighted by their square footage (at the end of the sample period) divided by the average square footage for the sample, to
maintain comparability with the baseline estimates. The specifications using two- and three-year differences use dummy
variables for the distinct two- or three-year periods over which the differences are computed, rather than dummy variables for
single years. That way, the same dummy variables appear in the first-differenced and levels regressions.
