                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               PATERNALISM AND PSYCHOLOGY

                                            Edward L. Glaeser

                                          Working Paper 11789
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w11789


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2005




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2005 by Edward L. Glaeser. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Divergence of Human Capital Levels Across Cities
Edward L. Glaeser
NBER Working Paper No. 11789
November 2005
JEL No. H1

                                           ABSTRACT
Does bounded rationality make paternalism more attractive? This Essay argues that errors will be
larger when suppliers have stronger incentives or lower costs of persuasion and when consumers
have weaker incentives to learn the truth. These comparative statics suggest that bounded rationality
will often increase the costs of government decisionmaking relative to private decisionmaking,
because consumers have better incentives to overcome errors than government decisionmakers,
consumers have stronger incentives to choose well when they are purchasing than when they are
voting and it is more costly to change the beliefs of millions of consumers than a handful of
bureaucrats. As such, recognizing the limits of human cognition may strengthen the case for limited
government.

Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics
315A Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu
                          Paternalism and Psychology
                                      Edward L. Glaeser†


                                         INTRODUCTION
      An increasingly large body of evidence documenting bounded ration-
ality and non-standard preferences has led many scholars to question eco-
                                                      1
nomics’ traditional hostility towards paternalism. After all, if individuals
have so many cognitive difficulties then it is surely possible that govern-
ment intervention can improve welfare. As Christine Jolls, Cass Sunstein,
and Richard Thaler write: “bounded rationality pushes toward a sort of anti-
antipaternalism—a skepticism about antipaternalism, but not an affirmative
                           2
defense of paternalism.” Even if these authors stop short of endorsing tra-
ditional hard paternalism, such as sin taxes and prohibitions, Sunstein and
Thaler are enthusiastic about soft or libertarian paternalism, where the gov-
ernment engages in “debiasing,” changing default rules and other policies
                                                    3
that will change behavior without limiting choice.
      In this Essay, I argue that the flaws in human cognition should make us
more, not less, wary about trusting government decisionmaking. The debate
over paternalism must weigh private and public errors. If errors are thought
to be exogenous then there is little reason to believe that these errors will be
greater among public or private decisionmakers, but if psychological errors
are understood to be endogenous, then there are good reasons why we
might think that public decisionmaking is likely to be more flawed than
private decisionmaking. In Part I of this Essay, I review the evidence sup-
porting the view that psychological errors are the endogenous market phe-
nomena that respond to both “demand” and “supply.” On the supply side,
purveyors of influence have the capacity to change popular opinion. On the



     † Fred and Eleanor Glimp Professor of Economics, and the Director of the Taubman Center for
State and Local Government and the Rappaport Institute for Greater Boston. Daniel Benjamin, Jeffrey
Miron, Richard Posner, Cass Sunstein, Cornelius A. C. Vermeule IV provided extremely helpful com-
ments.
     1   Following the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy’s definition, I take paternalism to mean
“the interference of a state or an individual with another person, against their will, and justified by a
claim that the person interfered with will be better off or protected from harm.” Stanford Encyclopedia
of Philosophy, online at http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/paternalism.
     2   Christine Jolls, Cass R. Sunstein, and Richard Thaler, A Behavioral Approach to Law and
Economics, 50 Stan L Rev 1471, 1541 (1998).
     3   Richard H. Thaler and Cass R. Sunstein, Libertarian Paternalism, 93 Am Econ Rev 175, 175
(2003).

                                                   1
                         Paternalism and Psychology                         2



demand side, human beings have some capacity to limit errors, especially
with the time and incentives to acquire advice and information.
      In Part II, I present three simple models that show how endogenous
cognitive errors increase the advantage of private decisionmaking over pub-
lic decisionmaking, which suggest that recognizing the limits of human
cognition push us away, not towards, paternalism. In these models, as the
bounds to human rationality increase, the quality of government decision-
making decreases even faster than the quality of private decisionmaking.
      The first model hinges on the fact that consumers face stronger incen-
tives to get things right than government decisionmakers do when making
decisions about unrelated individuals. In the second model, the supply of
error comes from a private firm that is trying to increase demand. If the cost
of persuading one government bureaucrat is less than the cost of persuading
millions of consumers, then government bureaucrats will be more prone to
error than private consumers.
      The final model looks at the electoral process and again relies on the
fact that individuals have stronger incentives when making consumption
decisions than when taking part in an election to choose a leader who will
make consumption decisions for them. In this model, there is an advantage
from public decisionmaking. When information isn’t highly correlated, and
a majority is better informed than a minority, then the tyranny of the major-
ity can have benefits (these would disappear with enough consumer hetero-
geneity). However, as people become more and more prone to error, the
tyranny of the majority induces everyone to make the wrong decision.
      These examples are far from definitive. In some cases the governments
may make better decisions. Still, once errors are seen to be endogenous, the
lack of incentives in politics and among politicians and the small numbers
of public decisionmakers suggest that government decisionmaking is likely
to be particularly erroneous. While there are surely some empirical cases of
paternalism that have been successful, across a wide range of settings, the
models’ basic implication of faulty government decisionmaking cannot be
rejected. Over and over again, paternalism has been abused by governments
responding to special interests or to seek to aggrandize their own authority.
      In Part III of the Essay, I turn to soft paternalism. While I generally
share Sunstein and Thaler’s view that soft paternalism is less damaging than
hard paternalism and that in many cases some form of paternalism is inevi-
table, I respectfully disagree with their view that this type of paternalism
                                                               4
“should be acceptable to even the most ardent libertarian.” Soft paternal-
ism is neither innocuous nor obviously benign.
      If abused by a less than perfect government, soft paternalism can make
decisions worse just like hard paternalism. As George Loewenstein and Ted

   4   Id at 175.
                                 Paternalism and Psychology                                         3



O’Donoghue argue, soft paternalism towards an activity essentially creates
a psychic tax on that activity that provides no revenues, which can be much
                               5
worse than hard paternalism. Hard paternalism in the form of tax rates or
bans is easy to monitor and control; soft paternalism is not. Soft paternalism
often relies on stigmatizing behavior like smoking, drinking or homosexual-
ity, and this can and has led to dislike or hatred of those individuals who
continue to engage in the disapproved activities. Moreover, soft paternalism
will surely increase support for hard paternalism, as it seems to have done
in the case of cigarettes.
      Finally, persuasion lies at the heart of much of soft paternalism and it
is not obvious that we want governments to become more adept at persuad-
ing voters or for governments to invest in infrastructure that will support
persuasion. Governments have a strong incentive to abuse any persuasion-
related infrastructure and use it for their own interests, mostly keeping
themselves in power.
      In Part V of this Essay, I consider some simple rules for guiding the
implementation of paternalism and for limiting governmental errors related
to cognitive limitations. If experience reduces errors then there is a case for
policy conservatism. The possibility for wild errors in democratic elections
suggests the value of institutions that provide for “cooling-off.” The ability
of entrepreneurs to persuade suggests an examination of political (and gov-
ernmental) advertising. Finally, since cognition has more problems with
complex decisions, there is a case for more single-issue debates or even
elections.

                             I. THE ENDOGENEITY OF ERROR
      The new case for paternalism is based on two different psychological
phenomena: bounded rationality and self-control problems. The literature
on self-control and hyperbolic discounting argues that people would want to
                                                 6
refrain from certain actions if they only could. The bounded rationality
literature argues that people face severe cognitive limitations and often
                     7
make bad decisions.
      This Essay focuses on paternalism and bounded rationality, because
bounded rationality is quite common and provides a clearer case for real

     5   George Loewenstein and Ted O’Donoghue, “We can do this the easy way or the hard way”:
Negative Emotions, self-regulation and the law, (unpublished paper 2005), online at
http://www.people.cornell.edu/pages/edo1/LoewOD.pdf.
     6   See, for example, David Laibson, Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting, 112 Q J Econ
443, 445–46 (1997) (noting that hyperbolic discount functions place constraints on consumers because
current preferences may change, and thus consumers may make poor decisions); H.M. Shefrin and
Richard Thaler, An Economic Theory of Self-Control (NBER Working Paper 208, July 1977), online at
http://nber.org/papers/w0208.
     7   See, for example, Gilles Saint-Paul, Cognitive Ability and Paternalism, (IZA Discussion Paper
No 609, 2002), online at http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=343883.
                                  Paternalism and Psychology                                            4


                                                            8
paternalism than self-control problems do. Limits to knowledge and rea-
soning are quite common. Thaler describes a striking number of examples,
like the Winner’s Curse, that illustrate the human tendency towards forms
                      9
of biases and errors. Opinion polls suggest striking examples of erroneous
beliefs. For example, according to the World Values Survey, 71 percent of
                                                              10
Americans and 17 percent of the French believe in the devil. One of these
groups is wrong.
                                                        11
      Following Bruno Frey and Reiner Eichenberger, I now argue that
cognitive errors endogenously reflect the actions of suppliers of beliefs and
the cognitive effort of individuals.

A.     The Supply of Error
     In the laboratory, there is an enormously rich tradition of showing that
individuals are extremely subject to social influence, and errors easily result
for external stimuli. Solomon Asch is a pioneer in this area who shows that
individuals will report that a shorter line is longer when planted confeder-
                                                        12
ates declare that they think the shorter line is longer. Asch’s basic result
                                                                  13
has been reproduced hundreds of times throughout the globe, and with
many different types of questions. Opinions can be manipulated by peers.
     Opinions can also be manipulated in other ways. For example, Linda
Babcock, George Loewenstein and Samuel Issacharoff show that debiasing
                                                                             14
techniques can be used to eliminate self-serving biases in negotiations.
Gregory Pogarsky and Linda Babcock illustrate anchoring effects in an
                          15
experiment on judgment. Edward McCaffery, Daniel Kahneman and Mat-


     8    Self-control problems offer a more limited scope for intervention for two reasons. First, if
paternalism is motivated by self-control, these paternalistic interventions always involve trading off the
welfare of people at one point in time with people at some other point in time, and this requires tricky
social welfare decisions. Second, the first-best response to self-control problems is always to increase
the availability of technologies or contracts that facilitate private self-control, which cannot really be
called paternalism because these policies increase, rather than decrease, the choice set.
     9    See generally Richard H. Thaler, The Winner’s Curse: Paradoxes and Anomalies in Economic
Life (Princeton 1994).
     10 Edward L. Glaeser, Psychology and the Market, 94 Am Econ Rev 408, 408 (2004).
     11 See generally Bruno S. Frey and Reiner Eichenberger, Economic incentives transform psycho-

logical anomalies, 23 J Econ Behav & Org 215 (1994).
     12 Solomon E. Asch, Social Psychology 451–73 (Prentice-Hall 1952). There is some debate as to

whether this result reflects people changing their mind or just saying that they change their mind. Com-
pelling recent evidence suggests that people really do change their mind as a result of this social influ-
ence. See Gregory S. Berns, et al, Neurobiological Correlates of Social Conformity and Independence
During Mental Rotation, Biological Psych (forthcoming 2005).
     13 See generally Rod Bond and Peter B. Smith, Culture and Conformity: A Meta-Analysis of
Studies using Asch’s (1952b, 1956) Line Judgment Task, 119 Psych Bull 111 (1996).
     14 Linda Babcock, George Loewenstein, and Samuel Issacharoff, Creating Convergence: Debias-

ing Biased Litigants, 22 L and Soc Inquiry 913, 922 (1997).
     15 Greg Pogarsky and Linda Babcock, Damage Caps, Motivated Anchoring, and Bargaining

Impasse, 30 J Legal Stud 143, 148–50 (2001).
                                 Paternalism and Psychology                                          5



thew Spitzer illustrate the power of framing in an experiment meant to rep-
                      16
licate jury decisions. More generally, there is widespread agreement in the
experimental literature that even modest changes in framing can create
wildly different results.
      Outside of the laboratory, there is also substantial evidence suggesting
that suppliers are able to manipulate beliefs. In the legal sphere, competent
attorneys are paid well to change the beliefs of juries. Firms spend large
amounts of money on advertising and other forms of belief manipulation.
While some of this manipulation can be seen as correcting errors (that is,
informing the consumer), not all advertising is strictly informative. In the
pre-modern era, false advertising was common (touting the miraculous ad-
vantages of patent medicine for example), and presumably firms would not
have spent on this unless it was having an effect.
      Is there strong evidence that attempts at belief manipulation are suc-
cessful on a large scale outside of the laboratory? Unfortunately, there have
been few compelling natural experiments, although anecdotes with some
evidence showing the power of indoctrination are common. For example,
Bruce Sacerdote and I examine the connection between education and re-
                            17
ligiosity across countries. In the former Warsaw Pact countries, where
attacking religious beliefs was a stated curricular aim, the levels of religious
belief are extremely low and the negative connection between education
                                            18
and religious beliefs is remarkably high. Schools seem to have been able
to convince students that Christianity is false.
      Matthew Gentzkow and Jesse Shapiro examine the role of the media in
                                       19
forming beliefs in the Middle East. There is a remarkable difference of
opinion across the Islamic world in beliefs about facts surrounding Septem-
ber 11, 2001. According to the Pew Research Institute, only 7 percent of
Americans do not believe that Arab terrorists destroyed the World Trade
Center. Eighty-nine percent of Kuwaitis believe that Arab terrorists did not
                                  20
destroy the World Trade Center. Gentzkow and Shapiro show that, in the
Middle East, exposure to CNN increases the tendency to think that Arabs
destroyed the World Trade Center whereas exposure to Al-Jazeera decreases
                                                            21
the tendency to think that Arabs destroyed the building. Education has a
weakly positive impact on the belief that Arabs destroyed the building, but

     16 Edward J. McCaffery, Daniel J. Kahneman, and Matthew L. Spitzer, Framing the Jury: Cogni-

tive Perspective on Pain and Suffering Awards, 81 Va L Rev 1341, 1359 (1995).
     17 Edward Glaeser and Bruce Sacerdote, Education and Religion (NBER Working Paper No
8080, Jan 2001), online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w8080.
     18 Id at 28–29.
     19 Matthew A. Gentzkow and Jesse M. Shapiro, Media, Education and Anti-Americanism in the

Muslim World, 18 J Econ Persp 117, 121–28 (2004).
     20 Id at 120.
     21 Id at 125 (“Most strikingly, those who watched only Al Jazeera are significantly less likely to
believe these reports than those who watched neither network.”) (emphasis in original).
                               Paternalism and Psychology                                    6



this effect is reversed if education is primarily Arabic. This evidence sup-
ports the idea that individuals believe, at least in part, what they hear.
      Alberto Alesina and I report that 60 percent of Americans believe that
                                                                           22
the poor are lazy, but only 26 percent of Europeans share that view. By
contrast, 60 percent of Europeans think that the poor are trapped in poverty,
                                                         23
but only 29 percent of Americans share that opinion. In reality, the Ameri-
can poor generally work harder than their European counterparts and have a
                                              24
lower probability of exiting from poverty. While these differences in be-
liefs do not reflect differences in reality, they do reflect the impact of 100
years of relatively leftist indoctrination in European schools and relatively
rightist indoctrination in American schools. Alesina and I provide documen-
tation of the substantive differences in what European children and Ameri-
can children are taught about the nature of poverty.
      If one major source of cognitive errors is the supply of beliefs, then er-
rors will not be random, but they will in part reflect the costs and incentives
faced by belief suppliers. While the suppliers of beliefs may not be per-
fectly rational, they certainly increase advertising when returns rise and
decrease it when costs rise. There is abundant evidence on the importance
of returns in driving advertising expenditures. For example, advertisers
disproportionately spend to reach high-spending segments of the market.
The role of costs and benefits for suppliers suggests that we should expect
more errors when belief suppliers face high returns from moving opinion
and less error when the costs of manipulating beliefs are high.

B.    Self-Correction of Errors
      As Frey and Eichenberger emphasize, a second source of endogenous
                                                              25
error is the effort that consumers can take to correct errors. Human beings
are not irrational automata and with motivation, they should be able to re-
duce cognitive errors. Vernon Smith and James Walker present a simple
model where costly effort can reduce error and summarize the experimental
                                              26
literature on incentives and decisionmaking. They conclude, “[s]ome stud-
ies report observations that fail to support the predictions of rational mod-
els, but as reward level is increased the data shift toward these predic-
        27
tions.”



     22 Alberto Alesina and Edward Glaeser, Fighting Poverty in the U.S. and Europe: A World of
Difference (Oxford 2004).
     23 Id at 184.
     24 Id at 60-68.
     25 Frey and Eichenberger, 23 J Econ Behav & Org at 223–27 (cited in note 11).
     26 Vernon L. Smith and James M. Walker, Monetary Rewards and Decision Cost in Experimental

Economics, 31 Econ Inquiry 245, 246–50, 251–59 (1993).
     27 Id at 259.
                                  Paternalism and Psychology                                          7



      Amos Tversky and Ward Edwards, for example, show that paying sub-
                                                                            28
jects five cents for right answers increases the accuracy of predictions. In
a variation of the Asch conformity experiment, Robert Baron, Joseph Van-
dello, and Bethany Brunsman show that increasing the stakes decreases
                                                      29
conformism by 50 percent when the task is easy. Confirming another pre-
diction of the hypothesis that incentives improve accuracy, Smith and
Walker also show that the variance of outcomes across people declines as
                 30
stakes increase.
      The Smith and Walker survey omits many more nuanced elements of
the relationship between incentives and anomalies; Colin Camerer and
Robin Hogarth present a more balanced survey that argues “the extreme
positions, that incentives make no difference at all, or always eliminate per-
                                    31
sistent irrationalities, are false.” Still, they conclude that “the presence and
amount of incentive does seem to affect average performance in many
                                       32
tasks, particularly judgment tasks.” Perhaps the right view is that there is a
modest body of experimental evidence suggesting that in many cases errors
decline as incentives grow stronger.
      But there are many reasons to think that incentive effects will be much
stronger in the real world than in the laboratory. In experiments, individuals
have few tools with which to improve their reasoning, and their only real
method of responding to incentives is to think harder. Outside of the lab,
people have access to advisers, books, the internet and more time. Their
willingness to spend time and money to use these resources will surely de-
pend on the stakes involved in the decision.
      Just as the large expenditure on advertising is our best evidence that
beliefs can be supplied, the existence of substantial industries specializing
in advice and information suggests that in many contexts people are really
interested in knowing the truth. For example, 6.8 million people subscribe
                          33
to Consumer Reports, one potential source of information that can undo
supplier-created biases in consumer spending. There is a large, thriving
industry of management consultants that provide information to firms and

     28 Amos Tversky and Ward Edwards, Information Versus Reward in Binary Choices, 71 J Exp

Psych 680, 683 (1966).
     29 Robert S. Baron, Joseph A. Vandello, and Bethany Brunsman, The Forgotten Variable in Con-
formity Research: Impact of Task Importance on Social Influence, 71 J Personality & Soc Psych 915,
921 (1996). They find the opposite result in cases where the task is hard. Id at 921. One potential
explanation for this finding is that when the task is easy, a little mental energy can create much more
accurate decisionmaking. When the task is hard, it may be that imitating the crowd is the best strategy
available.
     30 Smith and Walker, 31 Econ Inquiry at 258 (cited in note 26).
     31 Colin F. Camerer and Robin M. Hogarth, The Effects of Financial Incentives in Experiments: A

Review and Capital-Labor-Production Framework, 19 J of Risk and Uncertainty 7, 8 (1999).
     32 Id at 8.
     33 See        2005         Consumers        Union         Annual        Report,      online      at
http://www.consumerreports.org/cro/aboutus/annualreport.htm.
                                  Paternalism and Psychology                                           8



self-help books. No one would claim that these resources eliminate all er-
rors, but they do provide tools with which a motivated consumer can reduce
error.
      A particularly important way in which consumers are able to reduce
error is through experience. John List investigates the endowment effect in
a trading card Prof: I’m not sure this is correct. If costs are falling, then
                                                                        34
wouldn’t revenues be rising and therefore implicate the same result? An-
other example is that in at least one opinion poll a majority of respondents
in the United States thought that Saddam Hussein was personally behind
                                  35
the World Trade Center attacks. Even more strikingly, in a Pew Poll in
1998, 63 percent of respondents thought that the United States spends more
                                                                             36
on foreign aid than on Medicare (only 27 percent gave the right answer).
My claim is not that all voting decisions are wildly erroneous, but rather
that theory predicts that errors will be more likely in voting than in private
decisions, and that there is some evidence that supports this prediction.

            II. ANTIPATERNALISM AND THE ENDOGENEITY OF ERROR
      Jolls, Sunstein and Thaler argue that “bounded rationality pushes to-
                                                                            37
ward a sort of anti-antipaternalism—a skepticism about antipaternalism,”
and that “issues of paternalism are to a significant degree empirical ques-
                                                          38
tions, not questions to be answered on an a priori basis.” On one level this
claim is unobjectionable. What public policy debate is not ultimately em-
pirical?
      After all there have always existed plenty of grounds, like market fail-
ures and externalities, for government intervention in the economy. Bans on
alcohol or drugs can be justified on the basis of externalities alone; the at-
tractiveness of these policies has always depended on empirical evaluation
of the magnitude of these externalities. Many examples of soft paternalism,
such as the Surgeon General’s warning on cigarette packages, can be seen
as information dissemination and there is always a public-good aspect to
information. Almost all policies have some justification even without any
modern insights from psychology, and as soon as any such justification
exists, then the policy debate is always an “empirical matter.”


     34 Gentzkow and Shapiro, 18 J Econ Persp at 117 (cited in note 19) (“[Seventy-eight] percent of

respondents in seven Muslim countries said that they do not believe that a group of Arabs carried out the
September 11, 2001, attacks on the World Trade Center.).
     35 Id at 117 (citing a Washington Post opinion poll in which 69 percent of Americans responded

that they believed that Saddam Hussein was either “somewhat” or “very” involved in the September 11,
2001, terrorist attacks).
     36 How Americans View Government: Deconstructing Distrust, (Pew Research Center for the

People & the Press Mar 10, 1998), online at http://people-press.org/reports/print.php3?ReportID=95.
     37 Jolls, Sunstein, and Thaler, 50 Stan L Rev at 1541 (cited in note 2).
     38 Id at 1545.
                                    Paternalism and Psychology                                               9



      As such, I cannot dispute Jolls, Sunstein, and Thaler’s view that pater-
nalistic policies are an empirical matter. I do however dispute the view that
a richer model of psychology should increase our enthusiasm for govern-
ment intervention. With boundedly rational voters and politicians, democ-
racy is no guarantee against political catastrophe. Moreover, as the three
models in this Part emphasize, when cognitive errors are in some sense
endogenous, then economic theory pushes us to think that private decisions
will often be more accurate than public decisions.
      In these models, I consider a paradigmatic example of paternalism: re-
placing private decisionmaking with decisionmaking by a public decision-
maker. I do not consider any form of mixed decisionmaking, and I ignore
many subtle ways in which the government can influence private decisions.
In all three cases, I assume that individuals make mistakes because of erro-
neous beliefs not unusual preferences. I assume standard preference, be-
cause standard preferences provide us with a clear answer about what an
                                        39
individual would like to maximize. The point of these models is to ask
whether private or public decisionmakers are more likely to get things right
when there are endogenous errors. To the extent that the government makes
bad decisions, this will compromise all forms of paternalism, even those
                                     40
that are libertarian or asymmetric.
      The key decision in the model is a binary choice over an activity—
smoking perhaps—that yields benefits B and which carries long run per-
sonal costs, perhaps to health. To allow some scope for paternalism, the true
cost of this activity is C + ε , which is greater than B. Individuals only
know this true cost with probability P. With probability 1 – P, the individ-
ual believes that the cost is only C, where B > C. In all cases, I assume that
individuals maximize expected utility based on occasionally erroneous be-
liefs. Expected social welfare based on the true costs, which I will treat as
the welfare criterion, is (1 − P )( B − C − ε ) .
      A paternalistic policy takes the form of allowing a governmental deci-
sionmaker to decide whether everyone undertakes the activity or not. Since
I assume that everyone faces the same costs and benefits, there are none of
the usual losses from imposing uniform choices on heterogeneous individu-
als. These losses will generally increase the advantages of private deci-
sionmaking.
      With probability π the government agent knows the true cost of the
activity and with probability 1 − π , the government believes that the cost is

    39 In the case of hyperbolic discounting, government actions that restrict behavior at some future

date might appeal to the individual at the initial time period, and might appeal to the individual at the
end of his life, but any such restrictions will at the very least disadvantage the person at the point that his
decisionmaking is being restricted.
    40 See, for example, Colin Camerer, et al, Regulation for Conservatives: Behavioral Economics
and the Case for “Asymmetric Paternalism”, 151 U Pa L Rev 1211 (2003).
                          Paternalism and Psychology                           10



C. Governmental decisionmaking increases welfare if and only if π > P ,
and indeed without further information, it would be impossible to know on
theoretical grounds whether private or public decisionmaking is better. But
when the probability of error is endogenous, theoretical predictions lose
their neutrality and theory begins to suggest that private decisionmaking
will be less erroneous than public decisionmaking.
      Model # 1: Consumers face stronger incentives to correct errors that
directly impact their well-being than do government bureaucrats.
      This first argument assumes that P and π are the result of information
acquisition or other actions meant to reduce error. Both the private individ-
ual and the governmental decisionmaker have access to a technology which
determines the probability with which the individual knows the true cost of
the action. The private individual can pay a cost K(P) and the public deci-
sionmaker can pay a cost K (π ) to increase the probability that they know
the truth. The cost of information is increasing and convex and the problem
has an interior solution. I assume that before investing in the information
acquisition, both private and public individuals believe that the true cost of
the action is C + ε with probability one-half and C − ε with probability
one-half. The real cost continues to be C + ε . Given these assumptions, the
private       decisionmaker      will    invest    to   the    point        where
 K ′( P ) = .5(C + ε − B ) .
      In the case of a governmental decisionmaker, the problem is symmet-
ric except that the government decisionmaker does not care as much about
the individual’s well-being as the individual himself does. The government
decisionmaker invests in knowledge to maximize β times individual wel-
fare minus the costs of cognition, where β < 1 . While government bureau-
crats may be strongly altruistic, few advocates of paternalism would really
argue that a government decisionmaker would be willing to pay the same
personal costs to make a citizen’s life better as that citizen himself would.
With this assumption the government will set K ′(π ) = .5β (C + ε − B ) ,
and the government will be less likely to learn the truth than the private
decisionmaker.
      One natural measure of the degree of limited cognition is the size of
ε , which captures the degree to which people’s beliefs about costs differ
from the true beliefs about costs. As ε increases, the accuracy of private
decisionmaking relative to public decisionmaking, or P − π , will increase
as long as K ′′(π ) > β K ′′( P ) , which will always hold if K ′′′(.) isn’t over-
whelmingly positive or if the distance between P and π isn’t too great. The
private response to an increasing possibility of extreme error will be greater
than the public response to that error because the private individual’s wel-
fare is more directly tied to the magnitude of mistakes.
      Obviously, this model is a simplification; there are many factors that
could reverse the results. The government might have access to better learn-
ing technologies and there might be returns to scale in learning. If govern-
                                Paternalism and Psychology                                     11



mental information acquisition was spread over enough consumers, this
would represent a real advantage, albeit one coming from the well-accepted
public-good aspect of information, not from paternalism per se. Still, the
existence of better incentives at the private level does suggest one advan-
tage of private decisionmaking in the face of endogenous error and that the
magnitude of this advantage may increase as the degree of error rises.
      Model # 2: If error comes from the influence of firms or other inter-
ested parties, and if it is cheaper to persuade a small number of bureaucrats
than a vast number of consumers, then government decisionmaking will be
particularly flawed.
      Now, I assume that the size of errors is not a function of individual ef-
fort but rather of the effort of firms to spread error. I assume that there is a
firm that receives benefit J for each individual who undertakes the activity
and there are N individuals in the market whose decisions are either private
or made by a bureaucrat. To model the endogeneity of error, I assume that
the firm can pay to increase the amount of error, that is, 1 – P or 1 − π . The
critical assumption is that the cost of persuasion is also increasing in the
number of people who are to be persuaded.
      The assumption that it is cheaper to sway a limited number of gov-
ernmental decisionmakers than it is to move the beliefs of millions is sup-
ported by the much greater magnitude of spending on consumer advertising
relative to political spending. For example, the Federal Election Commis-
sion reports that total funds raised during the 2004 election for both houses
                                                                         41
of Congress and the presidency came to slightly under $2 billion. The
Center for Responsive Politics reports that total lobbyist spending in 2000
                   42
was $1.03 billion.
      As large as these numbers may be, they are dwarfed by consumer
spending. Indeed, Advertising Age reports thirty companies alone spent
more than $1.555 billion on consumer advertising in 2004, and ten compa-
nies had advertising budgets bigger than all spending on the 2004 cam-
       43
paign. The health sector as a whole spent $209 million on lobbying in
2000, but Pfizer spent $2.96 billion on advertising last year and Johnson
                                   44
and Johnson spent $2.17 billion. These numbers reflect only spending, not
the marginal cost of changing opinions, but the much greater spending on


     41 FEC Press Release, 2004 Presidential Campaign Financial Activity Summarized (Feb 3, 2005),

online at http://www.fec.gov/press/press2005/20050203pressum/20050203pressum.html; FEC Press
Release, Congressional Campaigns Spend $912 Million Through Late November (Jan 3, 2005), online at
http://www.fec.gov/press/press2004/20050103canstat/20050103canstat.html.
     42 Center       for     Responsive      Politics,  Lobbyists      Database,     online     at
http://www.opensecrets.org/lobbyists/index.asp.
     43 50th Annual 100 Leading National Advertisers, 76 Advertising Age June 27, 2005 & Supp),
online at http://www.adage.com/images/random/lna2005.pdf.
     44 Id at 6.
                          Paternalism and Psychology                           12



consumer advertising supports the idea that it is more expensive to move
millions of consumers than a small number of politicians.
      I model this assumption by assuming that cost of persuading N people
equals g ( N ) h(1 − P ) and the cost of persuading one bureaucrat equals
 g (1)h(1 − π ) . Both functions g(.) and h(.) are increasing, and the function
h(.) is, again, convex. In the case of private decisionmaking, the firm sets
 NJ = g ( N )h ′(1 − P ) . As long as g ( N ) / N > g ′( N ) (which would be
true if g ( N ) = gN α with α < 1 for example) then the amount of persua-
sion increases with the size of the market. In the case of public decision-
making the firm sets NJ = g (1) h ′(1 − π ) . Convexity ensures that P > π .
The higher costs involved in persuading large numbers of consumers im-
plies that the amount of error will be lower.
      As ε rises, the gains from private decisionmaking increase because
private decisionmakers are less likely to err, and this accuracy is worth
more if ε increases. If g ( N ) = gN α then decreases in g represent greater
bounds on consumer rationality, because as g falls, it is easier to persuade
people of falsehoods. The relative accuracy of private decisionmaking will
increase as g falls as long as N α h ′′(1 − P ) > h ′′(1 − π ) , which will always
hold if P and π are close or if h ′′′(.) ≤ 0 . As g falls, the difference in error
between the government decisionmaker and the private decisionmaker will
increase, which suggests that the relative costs of governmental decision-
making increase as the limits to rationality increase.
      One caveat to this argument is that in a divided system of government,
imposing paternalistic policies requires the approval of a number of differ-
ent decisionmakers (the courts, the legislature, the executive). Divided gov-
ernment will tend to increase the costs of influence and reduce the errors
from government decisionmaking, and the fans of divided government well
understand this advantage.
      Model # 3: Consumers have more incentives when making private de-
cisions than they do when voting.
      I now compare private decisionmaking and information acquisition to
voting in an election. Private decisionmaking is the same as in Model # 1.
Public decisionmaking is determined by an election, where there are two
candidates who do not engage in information acquisition, but rather just run
for office. One candidate thinks that costs are greater than B and the other
of whom thinks that costs are less than B. The elected candidate will im-
plement the policy (allow the activity or don’t) that corresponds with these
beliefs.
      There are a large number of individuals, again initially believing that
the true cost of the activity is either C − ε or C + ε , each with probability
one-half. In a paternalistic society where the government will make the
decision, an individual will only improve his decisionmaking to the extent
that he believes that his vote will influence the election. I let q denote any
individual’s belief that his vote will decide the election. While the model
                         Paternalism and Psychology                         13



certainly allows for the possibility that people overestimate the probability
that their vote will decide the election, I will assume that q is a small num-
ber that is closer to zero than to one.
      The expected return from investing in information is zero if the indi-
vidual isn’t the median voter, and the benefits are the same as they would
be if the individual is making his own private decision if that person is the
median voter. Therefore, the individual will invest in information up to the
point where K ′( P ) = .5q (C + ε − B ) . This first-order condition can be
compared with K ′( P ) = .5(C + ε − B ) , which is the first-order condition
in the case of private decisionmaking. Even if an individual thinks that he
or she has a 5 percent chance of influencing the election, which would rep-
resent a wild amount of error in most elections, the incentive to invest in the
electoral setting is one-twentieth the incentive to invest in the private set-
ting. As such, the quality of decisionmaking should be much lower when
people are casting ballots than when they are buying commodities.
      The degree of error depends on the correlation of information signals
across people. If information signals are perfectly correlated so that if eve-
ryone invests the same amount in knowledge, then either everyone learns
the truth or no one learns the truth, and private decisionmaking is always
worse than election-based decisionmaking. If information signals are inde-
pendent, then there is at least one potential advantage from electoral deci-
sionmaking: the tyranny of a well-informed majority. If information is in-
dependent—P > 0.5—then enforcing uniformity will have positive effect,
because the median voter will vote for the right policy and this will ensure
that everyone follows this policy. Naturally, this discussion omits the costs
of enforcing uniformity on a population with heterogeneous preferences,
which would generate more costs from paternalism.
      Of course, with independent information, when P is less than one-half,
enforcing uniformity will ensure that everyone does the wrong thing. As q
goes to zero, this will ensure the wrong decision for everyone all of the
time. Again, as the limits to rationality rise, the disadvantages of govern-
ment decisionmaking increase. As above, reducing incentives for undoing
biases is more costly when these biases are bigger. The one advantage of
government decisionmaking—enforcing the wise majority’s views on the
foolish minority—disappears as psychological errors grow and the majority
itself is likely to be misinformed.
      Further Observations: The preceding three arguments gave three set-
tings where it is clear that errors should be greater when the state makes
decisions than when private individuals make decisions. This tendency ap-
pears to increase when psychological problems increase. There are other
factors that support this view. Because elections are complex events that
combine a host of different issues, individuals should be expected to have
more problems eliminating psychological errors. It should also be cheaper
to influence an election than to change the minds of consumers, because the
                               Paternalism and Psychology                                   14



complexities of an election probably make it easier to confuse voters. Elec-
tions do not always deliver candidates that are bad for voters, but there is
certainly every reason to believe that errors in a complicated electoral situa-
tion without incentives will be worse than decisionmaking in a setting
where incentives are much stronger.
      The previous arguments suggest that there are sound theoretical rea-
sons for believing that paternalistic governmental decisionmaking will gen-
erally lead to bad outcomes. Is this implication wildly at odds with the evi-
dence? Have paternalistic innovations generally been great successes? Pa-
ternalism does seem to have had successes. For example, the 50 percent
reduction in cigarette smoking per capita since the Surgeon General’s warn-
ing in 1965 can be seen as a successful paternalistic intervention (especially
of the softer kind).
      But the fight against cigarettes must be put in the context of the other
significant paternalistic crusades both in the United States and elsewhere.
Paternalism has been used to justify government actions and rhetoric to-
wards alcohol, drugs, homosexuality, religion-related activity, slavery and
even loyalty to the government itself. The nineteenth century crusade
against alcohol brought prohibition, which appears to have had only a mod-
est impact on alcohol abuse while supporting a large, violent underground
                          45
alcohol-based economy. The fight against other drugs is more defensible,
but the advocates of marijuana legalization argue that the costs of this gov-
ernment policy far exceed the benefits. Governments have attacked homo-
sexuality for centuries and often used paternalistic rhetoric for doing so.
      The track record of American pro-religion paternalism is generally free
of the religious genocide that has shown elsewhere, but it is still disturb-
ingly full of odd restrictions on behavior, intolerance between religious
groups and even violent outbursts. Slavery itself was frequently defended
by Southern apologists as a paternalistic institution needed to protect Afri-
can-Americans from the harsh realities of the market place: “southerners
from social theorists to divines to politicians to ordinary slaveholders and
yeomen, insisted fiercely that emancipation would cast blacks into a mar-
ketplace in which they could not compete and would condemn them to the
                               46
fate of the Indians or worse.”
      Most disturbingly, governments are often persuaded that service to
themselves is indeed the highest of callings, and as a result for paternalistic
reasons people should be induced to serve and be loyal to the government.
In the United States, this form of paternalism has been pretty benign at least
by world standards (pledges of allegiance, jailing critics of World War I).

     45 Jeffrey A. Miron and Jeffrey Zwiebel, Alcohol Consumption During Prohibition, 81 Am Econ

Rev 242, 242 (1991).
     46 Eugene D. Genovese, The Slaveholders’ Dilemma: Freedom and Progress in Southern Conser-
vative Thought 1820–1860 61 (South Carolina 1992).
                               Paternalism and Psychology                                    15



Places with fewer checks and balances, like Nazi Germany or Soviet Rus-
sia, turned to paternalistically justified pro-state policies with awful results.
Some paternalistic policies have had positive benefits, but much of the
time, paternalism has been pretty harmful. Social welfare may be well-
served by a general bias against paternalistic interventions.

                          III. AGAINST SOFT PATERNALISM
      In the previous Part, I questioned the view that psychology should
make us more confident about paternalistic governments. In this Part, I spe-
cifically question the use of “soft paternalism,” which I will take to mean
government policies that change behavior without actually changing the
choice sets of consumers. Typical examples of soft or libertarian paternal-
ism include “debiasing” campaigns, default rules and other interventions
which change beliefs and attitude without impacting formal prices faced by
consumers. While there are many differences across these forms of inter-
vention, I do not have the space to treat them separately, and I will focus on
the forms of soft paternalism that change beliefs.
      In this Part, I review seven arguments against soft paternalism. I do
not mean these arguments to suggest that soft paternalism is worse than
hard paternalism, although this is certainly possible. I also do not mean
these arguments to suggest that soft paternalism is always wrong. I certainly
accept that view that in many cases some form of paternalism will be inevi-
table. Because soft paternalism is both unstoppable and occasionally use-
ful, the relevant policy question is whether soft paternalism should be gen-
erally encouraged or generally discouraged, not whether soft paternalism
should be banned altogether. The point of the following arguments is that
there are many reasons to suspect that soft paternalism can be quite harm-
ful, and that academics should not blindly rush to endorse soft paternalism
as a tool.
      Argument # 1: Soft paternalism is an emotional tax on behavior which
yields no government revenues.
      Many examples of soft paternalism make people think that a particular
behavior is particularly harmful. As Loewenstein and O’Donoghue empha-
                                                                     47
size, creating an impression of danger is quite similar to a tax. It will
hopefully lower the amount of the activity, and decrease the enjoyment of
those who continue the activity. Government “education” programs about
cigarettes or safe sex have the result of convincing people that smoking or
unsafe sex are dangerous, which presumably lowers the enjoyment of those



     47 Loewenstein and O’Donoghue, "We can do this the easy way or the hard way": Negative Emo-
tions, self-regulation and the law at 15 (cited in note 5).
                                 Paternalism and Psychology                                       16


                                                                   48
who continue to smoke or engage in unsafe sex. The Surgeon General’s
warning has acted to stigmatize smoking, and as Loewenstein and
O’Donoghue argue, similar campaigns against obesity have the effect of
                                                                 49
turning eating into an exercise that produces shame and guilt.
       These forms of soft paternalism can be seen as non-revenue increasing
taxes. They make behavior seem unattractive and reduce the utility levels of
those who continue to use the product. While sin taxes produce revenues
for the government, among those whose behavior is unchanged, soft pater-
nalism creates pure utility losses with no offsetting transfer to the govern-
ment. For this reason, Loewenstein and O’Donoghue are surely correct that
even if government chooses its soft paternalism policies perfectly, they will
still involve deadweight losses that can easily be larger than the losses from
standard hard paternalism.
       Argument # 2: Soft paternalism can cause bad decisions just as easily
as hard paternalism.
       The first argument against soft paternalism is that if soft paternalism
can impact behavior (and I have no doubt that it can) then this has just as
much possibility of creating social losses as traditional hard paternalism.
After all, government education programs will change behavior, just like
taxes. These education programs seem to have just as much possibility of
being erroneously calibrated, and therefore causing inappropriate decisions,
as sin taxes. Libertarian paternalism is attractive to people who value free-
dom as an object in and of itself, but it should not be particularly attractive
to people who think that the big problem with hard paternalism is govern-
ment error. There are many reasons to think that government decisionmak-
ing involves considerable error and standard economic analysis tells us that
these errors will be just as costly to social welfare with soft paternalism as
they would be with hard paternalism.
       Argument # 3: Public monitoring of soft paternalism is much more dif-
ficult than public monitoring of hard paternalism.
       Hard paternalism generally involves measurable instruments. The pub-
lic can all observe the size of sin taxes and voters can tell that certain activi-
ties have been outlawed. Rules can be set in advance about how far gov-
ernments can go in pursuing their policies of hard paternalism. Effective
soft paternalism must be situation specific and creative in the language of
its message. This fact makes soft paternalism intrinsically difficult to con-
trol and means that it is, at least on these grounds, more subject to abuse

     48 These campaigns seem to have been effective, but their success was not the result of merely

informing people about the truth. There was little new scientific evidence in the Surgeon General’s
warning, and opinion polls on cigarettes suggest that most people overestimate the risks from smoking.
W. Kip Viscusi, Do Smokers Underestimate Risks?, 98 J Polit Econ 1253, 1259 (1990).
     49 Loewenstein and O’Donoghue, "We can do this the easy way or the hard way": Negative Emo-
tions, self-regulation and the law at 4 (cited in note 5).
                                  Paternalism and Psychology                                          17



than hard paternalism. It is hard to limit soft paternalism because it is so
difficult to determine whether a politician or public statement violated lin-
guistic boundaries.
      One recent example of this phenomenon is the debate over gay mar-
riage and the “sanctity” of traditional marriage. According to recent polls,
53 percent of Americans believe that homosexuality is wrong and less than
50 percent believe that homosexuality is an acceptable alternative life-
      50
style. Given that emotions about homosexuality appear to be stronger than
emotions about 401(k) plans, homosexuality is one of the most popular
targets for soft paternalism. The debate about same-sex marriage may be
partially about policies with real effects towards homosexual unions, but it
is at least as much an example of soft paternalism. Opponents of same-sex
marriage want to deprive gays and lesbians of the word “marriage,” which
is seen as giving societal sanction to homosexual unions. By contrast, the
supporters of gay marriage want to end the long standing soft paternalism
that stigmatizes homosexuality.
      Surrounding this debate over gay marriage is a steady barrage of lan-
guage against homosexuality that is itself a form of soft paternalism. It is
difficult to set rules that would control this language and it is even a matter
of debate whether some political speeches are actually hostile to gays. It
would be much easier to discuss the appropriate size of a tax on homosex-
ual marriage than to determine the rules that should restrict political lan-
guage on traditional marriages.
      Argument # 4: While hard paternalism will be limited by public oppo-
sition, soft paternalism is particularly attractive because it builds public
support.
      A natural check on hard paternalism is the opposition of those who
regularly engage in a taxed or regulated behavior. Cigarette smokers gener-
ally oppose politicians who favor tobacco regulations and drinkers were
eager to get rid of prohibition. Any politician who favors hard paternalism
must weigh the perceived benefits of these policies against the cost of
alienating this potentially large group of voters.
      By contrast, soft paternalism—if effective—will build support for the
politician who opposes the targeted activity. Even soft paternalism that cre-
ates too much fear against an activity will increase the popularity of a
leader if that leader is strongly identified with the fight against this particu-
              51
lar behavior. As a result, we should expect more abuse of soft paternalism
than hard paternalism.

    50 Pew Research Center Press Release, Republicans Unified, Democrats Split on Gay Marriage:

Religious Beliefs Underpin Opposition to Homosexuality (Nov 18, 2003), online at http://people-
press.org/reports/pdf/197.pdf.
    51 Of course, if soft paternalism takes the form of demonization of those who engage in this
behavior, then this certainly has the possibility of creating a backlash. However, since political leaders
                                    Paternalism and Psychology                                            18



      Argument # 5: Soft paternalism can build dislike or even hatred of
subgroups of the population.
      The previous arguments focused on the reasons why soft paternalism
is likely to be abused. This argument focuses on an unfortunate side effect
of soft paternalism: building dislike and even hatred within the population.
Much of the most effective soft paternalism involves broadcasting the mes-
sage that a given behavior is bad or reflects self-destructive weakness. Indi-
viduals who don’t engage in this behavior and who are exposed to these
messages will come to think that people who do engage in this behavior are
unattractive human beings. This will create societal divisions and possibly
lead people who engage in this behavior to become increasingly uncomfort-
able in social situations.
      There are many examples of this dynamic. Public campaigns against
smoking have led many people to think that smoking is a self-destructive
habit and that these people are weak and probably insensitive to those
around them. Public campaigns about recycling and environmentalism have
led many people to see the failure to recycle as a moral failing appropriately
treated with moral opprobrium. The costs that smokers and non-recyclers
face are real and potentially quite costly.
      A particularly striking example of this occurs in the welfare context.
For decades, right wing politicians have tried to stigmatize welfare recipi-
ents, particularly with stories about welfare cheats (like Reagan’s welfare
        52
queen). These stories were certainly justifiable as a form of soft paternal-
ism, inducing people to want to work by stigmatizing government handouts.
Is it obvious that making the more fortunate members of society think that
the destitute are morally deficient is good policy?
      Argument # 6: Soft paternalism leads to hard paternalism.
      By its nature, soft paternalism builds support for hard paternalism.
Successful soft paternalism will tend to create social dislike for the activity
in question, and reduce the number of people who engage in the activity.
Both of these factors will mean that hard paternalism becomes an increas-
ingly attractive option to the electorate (or to courts). In any reasonable
political economy model, changing beliefs in a way that convinces voters
that a behavior is socially harmful will eventually lead to public support for
more regulation.
      The modern history of cigarette regulation shows this dynamic in ac-
tion. The first major government policy towards cigarettes was a classic
example of soft paternalism. The Surgeon General’s Report in 1964 simply
warned, “cigarette smoking is a health hazard of sufficient importance in

will have the ability to control the content of soft paternalism, they will be able to design it in a way that
will enhance their electoral chances.
     52 See Sherrilyn A. Ifill, Weaving a Safety Net: Poor Women, Welfare, and Work in the Chicken
and Catfish Industries 1 Margins 23, 25–26 (2001).
                               Paternalism and Psychology                                    19


                                                                          53
the United States to warrant appropriate remedial action.” At this point in
time, remedial action meant soft paternalism and in both 1965 and 1969,
Congress passed laws which required health warnings on cigarette packages
                54
in advertising.
      The Surgeon General’s warning was associated with a remarkable
turnaround in cigarette consumption which had been rising steadily over the
twentieth century. In 1963, Americans on average smoked 2,772 cigarettes,
or 7.6 cigarettes per day. In 2004, annual average cigarette consumption had
                                             55
fallen to 1,326 or 3.6 cigarettes per day. While it would be foolish to at-
tribute this entire decline to soft paternalism, it is also true that beliefs about
                                                               56
the harmfulness of cigarettes have changed over time and that across
countries there is a negative correlation between beliefs about smoking and
                       57
smoking prevalence.
      During the initial period of declining cigarette consumption following
the Surgeon General’s warning there was little change in the taxation of
tobacco and certainly the most natural interpretation of the reversal of the
trend in cigarette consumption is that soft paternalism worked. However,
the change in beliefs about smoking was also accompanied by an increased
                                        58
desire to regulate and tax cigarettes. Over time, in response to these popu-
lar beliefs, the courts and legislatures have increasingly taxed, fined and
regulated cigarette consumption. This pattern is not unique to cigarettes.
The road to prohibition of alcohol also began with advocates of soft pater-
nalism who tried to change societal norms rather than banning alcohol by
law.
      Argument # 7: Soft paternalism complements other government per-
suasion.
      Soft paternalism requires a government bureaucracy that is skilled in
manipulating beliefs. A persuasive government bureaucracy is inherently
dangerous because that apparatus can be used in contexts far away from the
initial paternalistic domain. Political leaders have a number of goals, only
some of which relate to improving individual well-being. Investing in the
tools of persuasion enables the government to change perceptions of many
things, not only the behavior in question. There is great potential for abuse.

     53 Tobacco Use—United States, 1900–1999, 282 J of the Am Medical Association 23 (Am Medi-
cal Association Dec 15, 1999), online at http://jama.ama-assn.org/cgi/content/full/282/23/2202.
     54 Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act of 1965, Pub L 89-92, 79 Stat 282 (1965),
codified at 15 USC §§ 1331–1341 (2000); Public Heath Cigarette Smoking Act of 1969, Pub L 91-222,
84 Stat 87, codified at 15 USC §§ 1331-1341 (2000).
Data are available at http://www.ers.usda.gov/Briefing/Tobacco/
     56 George Gallup, Smoking Level Declines as More Perceive Health Hazard, The Gallup Poll 412

(Aug 31, 1981).
     57 David Cutler and Edward Glaeser, What Explains Differences in Smoking, Drinking and Other

Health-Related Behaviors? (Harvard Discussion Paper No 2060, Feb 2005), online at
http://post.economics.harvard.edu/hier/2005papers/2005list.html.
     58 Gallup, The Gallup Poll at 415 (cited in note 56).
                               Paternalism and Psychology                                    20



      As a hypothetical example, consider Daniel Benjamin and David Laib-
                                                                            59
son’s recommendation that soft paternalism be used to increase savings.
Assume that soft paternalism involved a public education campaign to in-
duce people to think more about the future and make people aware that
their own rosy scenarios will not necessarily occur. As Benjamin and Laib-
son suggest, from the point of view of fighting self-control problems, such a
                                                 60
campaign might indeed have beneficial results.
      But this public education campaign also offers many degrees of free-
dom that can be used in other, less benign ways. Perhaps the soft paternal-
ism campaign would warn of inflation, and might suggest that other, less
careful political leaders (that is, the opposition party) might print money
and devalue nominal dollars. Perhaps the soft paternalism campaign might
suggest that the stock market might fall, especially if non-business friendly
leaders were elected. Perhaps the government might suggest that investing
abroad is particularly perilous, given the unreliability of other countries
(especially, say, France). All of these messages might be justifiable, but
would also be pernicious.
      While this example may seem extreme, recent public relations spend-
ing by the Department of Education for the No Child Left Behind Act
ended up paying a columnist, Armstrong Williams, who regularly promoted
both the devotion of both the President and the Secretary of Education Rod
Paige to improving the quality of education for America’s children. The
commotion surrounding this expenditure should remind us that the ability
of incumbents to ensure victory through the powers of office, which include
the bully pulpit, is a constant risk in democracy. Advocating soft paternal-
ism is akin to advocating an increased role of the incumbent government as
an agent of persuasion. Given how attractive it is to use persuasion for po-
litical advantage, an increased investment in soft paternalism seems to carry
great risks.

                                       CONCLUSION
      I will end this Essay by acknowledging that paternalism is here to stay
and suggesting a few rules motivated by psychology for guiding paternal-
ism and perhaps paternalism more generally. First, restricting paternalistic
activities to areas, like particularly dangerous drugs or suicide, where there
is strong evidence of self-harm, will minimize welfare-reducing policies.
Second, given the value of experience in checking cognitive errors, sticking


     59 Daniel J. Benjamin and David I. Laibson, Good Policies for Bad Governments: Behavioral

Political Economy at 14-16 (Boston Fed Reserve Conference Paper, May 2003), online at
http://www.bos.frb.org/economic/conf/conf48/papers/benjamin_laibson.pdf.
     60 Id at 14 (describing the “Save More Tomorrow” campaign which enabled employees that opted
into plans to increase their saving rate from 3.5 percent to 11.6 percent).
                         Paternalism and Psychology                         21



close to existing policies (conservatism) seems likely to reduce errors. Vot-
ers should be better at evaluating a new policy if it closely resembles poli-
cies that have been tried in the past. The same argument suggests that small
scale experimentation is helpful, and federalism continues to have value in
allowing for laboratories of democracy.
      Another principle derived from psychology is that since beliefs, par-
ticularly political beliefs, are so prone to error, limits on direct democracy
may increase social welfare. Institutions, like the Supreme Court and the
Senate, which create cooling-off periods that allow for debate that is not
tied to a general election may reduce errors of policy. Separation of powers,
which require the suppliers of influence to convince a number of different
governmental actors, may decrease the amount of public error. Simple de-
bates, such as those surrounding single issue referenda, may also reduce
errors.
      Given that errors are greatly exacerbated by the suppliers of bias,
situations with strongly interested parties who are likely to skew beliefs, are
particularly dangerous. Free entry in the battle of ideas is a helpful check on
this, but if one side has much more capacity of ability than the others, free
entry may not be enough. Rules that prevent interventions (soft or hard) in
areas where there are potential providers of bias that have extremely strong
incentives, may reduce supplier-created bias.
